1948-49

Contents
Jan 01, 1948
REPORT OF MIN. E.A
& COMMONWEALTH
RELATIONS
1948-49
MINISTRY OF
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS AND
COMMONWEALTH RELATIONS
REPORT
OF THE
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS
AND COMMONWEALTH RELATIONS
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS AND COMMONWEALTH
RELATIONS
This report falls into five parts
Part I describes the general set up of our diplomatic representation
abroad.
Part II deals with points of special interest in those countries where
India is represented.
Part III with India's part in international conferences; and
Part IV, with External Publicity.
2. The present designation of the Ministry of External Affairs and
Commonwealth Relations is a relic of past dualism when External affairs
and Commonwealth Relations were dealt with in two separate Departments of the Government of India. It is now proposed to call it the
Ministry of External Affairs.
INDIA

Jan 01, 1948

Part I
Jan 01, 1948
PART I
India's present diplomatic representation (including representation in
countries of the Commonwealth) is shown below by categories in alphabetical order:
A. Legations and Embassies:
(1)
(2)

Afghanistan
Belgium

(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)

Brazil
Burma
China
Czechoslovakia
Egypt

(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)

France
Iran
Italy
Nepal
Siam
Sweden
Switzerland

(15)
(16)
(17)
(18)
(19)

Turkey
U.S.A.
U.S.S.R.
Germany
Japan

Embassy.
Embassy (In charge of a Charge d'Affaires who
is also accredited to Luxemburg.)
Embassy.
Embassy.
Embassy.
Embassy.
Embassy (Ambassador is also accredited to
Transjordan and Lebanon).
Embassy (In charge of a Charge d'Affaires
Embassy.
Embassy (In charge of a Charge d'Affaires).
Embassy (In charge of a Charge d'Affaires).
Legation.
Legation.
Legation (Minister is also being accredited to
the Holy See).
Embassy.
Embassy.
Embassy.
Military Mission.
Liaison Mission.
<pg1>
<pg2>

In addition it has been decided to send representatives at a convenient
time to the countries mentioned below:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.

Argentine.
Chile.
Denmark.
Ethiopia.
Hungary.
Ireland.
Iraq.
Netherlands.
Norway.
Portugal.
Rumania.
Yugoslavia.

B. Consulates:
Consular establishments have been opened at the following places:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.

New York.
San Francisco.
Shanghai.
Batavia.
Kashgar (China).
Pondicherry.
Saigon.
Songkhla (Siam)
Nova Goa.
Zahidan (Iran).
Medan (Sumatra).
Jedda (Saudi Arabia).

C. (i) High Commissioner etc.:
Australia.
Canada.
Ceylon.
Pakistan.
South Africa (In charge of a Secretary).
United Kingdom.
(ii) Commissioners:
British East Africa (consisting of Kenya, Tanganyika, Uganda and
Zanzibar).
Mauritius.
Fiji.
British West Indies (including British Guiana).
(iii) Representatives in Malaya with headquarters at Singapore.
There are two Deputy High Commissioners, one at Lahore and the other
at Dacca. Under the general supervision of the High Commissioner in
Karachi, the two Deputy High Commissioner deal with problems of
<pg3>
inter-provincial importance which have arisen between East and West
Punjab and West and East Bengal following the partition of the old
Provinces of Punjab and Bengal.
There are two offices of Agents one at Kandy in Ceylon and the other
at Kuala Lumpur in the Federation of Malaya. The Agents are under the
administrative control of the High Commissioner in Ceylon and the
Representative in Malaya respectively.
Of the Missions mentioned above those in the British East Africa,
Mauritius, Fiji and the British West Indies were opened during the year
and mark the successful conclusion of twelve years' negotiations with the
Government of the U.K.
The Indian Foreign Service.-The main administrative problem created
by the expansion of India's diplomatic relations is one of finding personnel.
Selection for Headships of Missions is made from men in public life and,
to some extent, from the Services. For lower posts to which persons
above the age of 25-the normal age for first appointment to Government
service-have to be appointed. Selections have been made with the

assistance of the F. P. S. C. and a special Selection Board. A total of 88
has been selected and, after some preliminary training in the Ministry,
selected candidates have been sent to posts abroad. Owing to the urgency
of completing the staff of each new Mission, such preliminary training has
not always been as full as the Ministry would have liked., but since each
appointment is made on probation of one year in the first instance, power
exists to dispense with candidates who do not prove their fitness for the
service. Normal recruitment is made through the F. P. S. C. by means of
and open competitive examination.
The securing of accommodation for Missions, bot for office and residential purposes, presents another problem. Other countries have found it
more economical in the end to house their Missions in properties which they
own. Consequently with our financial resources India has tried to pursue
a similar policy but, the majority of our Missions are accommodated in
rented buildings as the capital outlay involved in acquiring property is, at
the moment, beyond our resources.
INDIA
AFGHANISTAN BELGIUM BRAZIL BURMA CHINA NORWAY SLOVAKIA EGYPT JORDAN
LEBANON FRANCE IRAN ITALY NEPAL SWEDEN SWITZERLAND TURKEY USA GERMANY
JAPAN CHILE DENMARK ETHIOPIA HUNGARY IRELAND IRAQ PORTUGAL YUGOSLAVIA
INDONESIA SAUDI ARABIA AUSTRALIA CANADA PAKISTAN SOUTH AFRICA KENYA
UGANDA MAURITIUS FIJI REPUBLIC OF SINGAPORE MALAYSIA UNITED KINGDOM
Jan 01, 1948

Part II

PART II
A. Middle East
India is represented in the Middle East by her Embassies at Cairo,
Teheran, Kabul and Ankara. Our Ambassador at Cairo is concurrently
accredited to Transjordan and Lebanon. Strategically, economically and
culturally, India has a vital interest in maintaining friendly relations with
<pg4>
these countries. With the establishment of our missions in the Middle
East, anti-Indian propaganda is being effectively countered. Possibilities
of expanding India's trade are being energetically explored. Indian's
resident there, for the most part for purposes of trade or as in the Persian
Gulf, as workers, are the object of special solicitude of our representatives.
Muslims of Indian nationality visit their sacred shrines in large numbers
every year in the Hedjaz, and in smaller numbers, in Iraq and Iran.
Their case also receives special attention.
Egypt.-The pre-eminent position of Egypt in the Arab World makes
our relations with that country of particular importance. Our Embassy

in Egypt was established in March, 1948. Our Ambassador has established contacts not only with the Government to which he is accredited
but also with the influential Arab League which has its headquarters in
Cairo. In June 1948 the Government of India sent a Trade Mission to
Egypt to negotiate for the purchase of cotton. For various reasons this
Mission was not able to effect an agreement. Recent indications from
Egypt, however, are more favourable and it is expected that negotiations
will be resumed in Delhi.
Iraq.-For commercial as well as political reasons, the Government
of India have considered it necessary to open a Legation in this country
and it is hoped to send a Minister to Baghdad in the near future.
Persian Gulf.-In the Persian Gulf where there are large numbers
of Indian employees of oil companies and with which India has been
doing considerable trade for centuries, there is no Indian representative
yet. An arrangement has however recently been reached to post a Trade
Agent at Bahrein, a Consul at Muscat and to authorise the Indian Consul
at Basra, when appointed, to look after the interests of Indians in
Kuwait.
Iran.-In Iran, our Ambassador has been engaged on negotiations
with the Iranian Government to redress the grievances of a large colony
of Indian traders settled in that country for a good many years. It has
been decided to open a Consulate in Khorramshahr to watch the interests
of Indian employees of the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company at Abadan, and
a Consulate General at Meshed, which is an important place for Shia
pilgrimage from India. The Embassy in Iran has also been engaged on
negotiations with the Iranian Government for a bilateral air agreement,
a draft postal treaty, a draft treaty for direct wireless telegraphic communication and a proposal to conclude in anti-locust convention between
India and Iran.
<pg5>
Afghanistan.-A Trade Delegation from India visited Afghanistan
and Iran in October/November last year; and a Trade Delegation from
Afghanistan is now in India to negotiate an Indo-Afghan Trade Agreement. A Trade Delegation from Iraq also recently visited India. A
small mission was sent to the Persian Gulf last December to felicitate
the Sheikhs of Bahrein and Kuwait, and to consider ways and means
of strengthening the traditional commercial and financial links between
India and the Gulf. The Mission was also asked to report on the conditions of Indian skilled and unskilled labour working in the oil companies
in these places, and the Government of India are now considering the
Delegations's recommendations. The Government of India have under
consideration steps for the revision of the standard contract form to
provide better means of redress and ensure good living and working
conditions for Indian employees of the oil companies.
Ethiopia.-A Goodwill Mission headed by S. Sant Singh visited
Ethiopia last year and established close contacts with the Government as
well as non-official organizations. The visit was also instrumental in
obtaining information regarding the condition of nearly 500 Indians living
there as well as prospects of commercial and cultural relations between
the two countries. The Ethiopian Government have nominated their
Minister to India who is shortly expected to arrive. We have as yet
taken no decision regarding the appointment of our Minister to Ethiopia.
B. South East Asia and Far East

Burma.-Of five to six thousand Indians resident in areas which
have been the scene of conflict between Karens and Government forces,
4,000 were evacuated to Rangoon through the good offices of the Embassy
which is also giving them such relief as is possible with the assistance
of officials of the Burma Government and other non-official bodies. Funds
have been placed at the disposal of the Ambassador for relief and also
for the repatriation of those Indians who as are not likely to be reabsorbed in the economy of Burma in the near future. Shipping accommodation for Indians wishing to return to India because of disturbed
conditions in Burma has also been arranged.
(2) LAND NATIONALISATION ACT, 1948
Certain measures of agrarian reform introduced by the Government
of Burma during December 1947 and in the beginning of 1948, indicated
a policy of complete nationalisation of agricultural lands. On the May 26,
1948
the Hon'ble Thakin Nu, Premier of Burma, announced a
fifteen point programme which inter alia included abolition of private
<pg6>
ownership of agricultural lands and their resumption by Government for
distribution amongst agriculturists. After consulting representatives of
Indian interests in Burma, representations were made by the Government of India to the Government of Burma regarding the inadequacy of
the compensation proposed by the Burma Government. Adequate
representation of Indians on the Land Commission and on land committees
which were to be responsible for the distribution of the resumed lands
was also urged. The Bill, however, was passed last October with substantial modification. It was then decided to sent a delegation to Burma
under the leadership of the Indian National Congress. Owing to the
preoccupation of the Government of Burma with Karen rising, the visit
of the deputation has been postponed at their request.
(3) TERMINATION OF SERVICES OF INDIANS ON GROUNDS OF NATIONALITY
Soon after the inauguration of the Burmese Republic on the 4th
January 1948, the Government of Burma commenced serving notices of
discharge on Indian employees who were either not eligible to become
Burma citizens or unwilling to elect Burmese nationality. The Government of India have felt a special responsibility towards such employees
of the Government of Burma as were in that Government's service while
Burma was still a part of India and have sought (a) to secure adequate
benefits for discharged personnel in the shape of leave salary, pensions
and (b) find alternative employment for them in India. The possibilities
of (b) have been inevitably circumscribed by the obligations of relief
towards refugees who have come to this country as a result of the partition of India.
Indonesia.-India's sympathy with the people of Indonesia in their
struggle for freedom has been actively and persistently demonstrated ever
since India first brought up the dispute between the Dutch Government
and the Government of the Indonesian Republic before the Security
Council in 1947. The last move in the endeavour to bring about a
solution of this problem was the conference of 19 countries which took
place in New Delhi from the 20th to 24th January. The Conference unanimously passed a Resolution which demanded among other things

the withdrawal of Dutch troops, restoration of the Republican Government, release of Republican leaders and the lifting of the economic
blockade. It also recommended that an Interim Government be formed
by the 15th March 1949, that elections for a Constituent Assembly be
held by the 1st October, 1949, and that transfer of sovereignty should
be completed by the 1st January, 1950. The Security Council Resolution of the 28th January incorporated some of these recommendations
<pg7>
but was silent on the question of withdrawal of Dutch forces. The
Dutch Government have taken no action so far on the resolution of the
Security Council. The Government of India are in close touch, both with
the Governments which participated in the New Delhi conference and
the Indonesian representatives in New Delhi and are closely watching
developments.
Siam.-We are represented by a Minister at Bangkok and maintain a
Consulate at Songkhla. There are about 30,000 Indians in Siam. Siam
has many cultural affinities with us and is also of great importance to
us as a supplier of rice. Negotiations are under way for a Treaty of
Friendship, Commerce and Navigation between the two countries. At the
instance of the Indian Minister in Bangkok the Government of Siam permitted last year a large number of refugee Indians who had entered
Siam as temporary visitors, to reside in Siam permanently.
Indo China.-We have Consulate at Saigon. There are approximately
a thousand Indians in Indo-China mostly engaged in business or domestic
service. In 1948 as a result of representations made by the Consul, the
French Administration was induced to abolish a discriminatory tax
known as "IMPOT GRADUE". The numerous exchange Control restrictions which existed after the end of the War were a source of great
hardship to the Indian business community in Indo-China, who found
themselves unable to make any remittances to their dependents in India.
Remittance facilities on a limited scale, have now been allowed as a
result of negotiations between the Government of India and the French
Government.
The Philippines.-Proposals for a Treaty are being considered by both
Governments. There are approximately 1,300 Indians in the Republic
most of them carry on business on a small scale.
Japan.-Japan's future is of special interest to India and India
maintains a Liaison Mission there, partly to keep in touch with the
political development of Japan as a democratic pawn and partly for the
furtherance of India's economic interest. The Mission is particularly
useful in securing facilities for India businessmen visiting Japan and in
securing Japanese equipment and technicians for the development of Indian
industries.
China.-We have an Embassy in Nanking and Consulates General
in Shanghai and Kashgar. This Embassy has done a great deal to
promote the age-old friendship between India and China.
<pg8>
Arrangements have been made in co-operation with other diplomatic
representatives, to protect Indians in different cities during the current
hostilities. At the end of the World War we were faced with a major
problem in China; Indians in the employment of the Shanghai Municipal

Council as guards and menials were thrown out of employment when the
Municipal Council was taken over by the Chinese. Most of them were
destitute. At our instance a large number of them were repatriated to India.
Their claims on the Shanghai Municipal Council have not yet been met but
efforts to reach an early settlement continue. A Sino-Indian Treaty of
Friendship, Commerce and Navigation is under consideration. Pending
conclusion of a Sino-Indian Air Agreement temporary authorisation has
been given for a Chinese Service to India for a limited period.
Sinkiang (China).-On the 21st of December, 1948, an Indian ConsulateGeneral was, for the first time, established at Kashgar. It is our main
window into Central Asia. Moreover there are colonies of Indian residents in all the oases of Southern Sinkiang. Some time ago lands belonging to the Indian merchants were unjustly confiscated by the Chinese
authorities in Sinkiang. We have asked for the restoration of these
confiscated lands, or for the payment of compensation.
Nepal.-In Nepal we are represented by an Ambassador. Soon after
the attainment of independence negotiations were successfully carried out
with the Government of Nepal for the continued employment of Gurkha
troops in the Indian Army. During the past year necessary facilities
have been obtained from the Nepalese Government for work connected
with the Kosi dam which will be of immense benefit both to Nepal and
to Bihar. Proposals are now under consideration in the Ministry for a
new Treaty of Commerce and Friendship between the two countries.
Assam Tribal Areas.-The problems connected with these areas
impinge on India's foreign relations with the neighbouring countries China,
Burma. They are therefore administered by this Ministry through the
Governor of Assam. He is assisted by an Adviser chosen from the Civil
Service.
To improve the general condition of the tribal peoples and to stabilise
our administration in the tribal areas, a Five Year Development Plan has
been prepared. The Plan contains schemes for the construction of roads
and hospitals, buildings for administrative purposes, development of education, agriculture and forests and for the gradual extension of regular
administration to the tribal areas, and is being implemented by stages. A
recent proposal of the Standing Committee of the Ministry that welfare
<pg9>
work in these areas should be conducted with the aid of trained anthropoiogists who have a sympathetic understanding of the ways of the tribes
is being carefully examined.
Additional responsibilities devolved on the Assam as a result of
the partition of the India and the strength of this Force was increased by 13
additional platoons in 1947, and by another 20 additional platoons in
1948.
Tibet.-Our relations with Tibet are conducted through the Political
Officer is Sikkim and the Indian Mission in Lhasa. There is also a Trade
Agent in Gyantse.
Tribetan Trade Mission.-In December 1947 a Trade Mission from
Tibet visited India on their way to China, the U.S.A. and the U.K. in
order to explore the possibility of expanding Tibetan trade with these
countries. As a token of friendship India provided foreign exchange for
the expenses of the Mission. The Mission were asked to secure redress

for the grievances of Indian traders doing business in W. Tibet and to
allow access to Indian trader to one of their important wool marts.
With the assistance of the Political Officer in Sikkim a Syndicate has
been formed in Kalimpong composed of Indian merchants to handle
India's textiles trade with Tibet.
Sikkim and Bhutan.-Our relations with Sikkim and Bhutan are
conducted through the Political Officer in Sikkim who resides at Gangtok.
In view of the good relations that have always prevailed between India
and Bhutan the subsidy that we used to pay to the Maharaja has been
continued together with an additional subsidy that was originally granted
only for the duration of the War. We have also made arrangements to
meet some of the essential requirements of Bhutan, e.g. petrol for the
transport of its timber. The revision of the Treaty with Bhutan is under
active consideration.
C. Europe
France.-An Embassy was opened in Paris in January 1948. Negotiations have been in progress regarding the future of French settlements
in India. In June 1948 the French Government issued a declaration
which conceded the right of the people of these territories to determine
their future through a referendum. Negotiations for an early holding of
the referendum under safeguards which will ensure the free expression of
the wishes of the people are in progress.
Economically France has made rapid recovery.
<pg10>
A French Trade Delegation is shortly expected in India and preliminary talks have already been held. Among the commodities which
France can supply are steel, machinery, capital goods and chemicals.
The Governments of India and of France have signed an Air Agreement, and a Debt Settlement Agreement which concerns French assets
frozen in India during the War and Indian assets in metropolitan France
as well as in French colonial territories.
Belgium.-A Belgian Trade Delegation visited
of December and after a survey of the commercial
has returned to Belgium. It is hoped that in the
Agreement, providing for technical and financial
the two countries, will be concluded.

India during the month
and industrial fields
rear future a Trade
collaboration, between

Switzerland.-Our Legation in Berne was opened in March 1948.
The Government of India entered into a "Treaty of Friendship and
Establishment' with Switzerland on August 14, 1948. This Treaty is now
awaiting ratification. The question of entering into a Trade Agreement
with Switzerland is under active consideration. Our Legation has made
wide contacts with Swiss industrialists; and proposals for starting factories
for the manufacture of machine tools, electrical goods and heavy machinery
in India with Swiss co-operation are under consideration.
A draft air-agreement is under consideration.
Germany.-An Indian Military Mission was first set up in Berlin in

August 1946 under a British Military Officer. In 1947 an Indian civilian
officer with the honorary rank of Brigadier and now Major General, was
appointed the Head of the Mission. The Military Mission has so far
repatriated approximately sixty Indians, many of whom were political
exiles from India. In many cases prolonged searches had to be undertaken before they could be found. Last year an Indian Trade Delegation
visited Germany and a Trade Agreement has been entered into between
India and the Western Zones of Germany. Negotiations for concluding
a similar Agreement with the Soviet Zone are under way. Our Mission
has also been instrumental in recruiting approximately fifty German
technicians and scientists for employment in various industrial projects in
India. Government have under consideration the exchange of students
between India and Germany.
Sweden.-Our Legation in Stockholm was opened in January 1949.
Industrially Sweden is capable of supplying us with fine machinery
particularly for Hydro-electric purposes, ball-bearings, machine tools etc.
It is also an important source for the supply of timber and wood pulp
for paper manufacture. India entered into an Air Agreement with
Sweden last year.
<pg11>
Italy.-Our embassy in Italy was opened in January 1949. An Italian
Economic Mission consisting of about thirty members is expected to
arrive in New Delhi this month to consider the possibility of entering
into a Trade Agreement with India. Italy is in a position to supply us
with heavy chemicals and capital goods. Being the sixth largest ship
building country in the world she may also be able to render assistance
in that field.
A draft Air Agreement is under consideration.
The Vatican.-In May 1948, our Minister in Berne was accredited to
the Holy See but he has not as yet been able to present his credentials.
The Holy See, however, established an Internunciature (i.e. Legation)
here last year.
Discussions and negotiations on ecclesiastical matters such as the
anomalous position whereby the Archbishop of Goa appoints Bishops to
certain Indian Dioceses are being conducted through the Internuncio.
Government their desire to review the matter.
Czechoslovakia-Our Embassy in Moscow was established in July
1947 and has been developing cultural as well as political relations with
the Soviet Union. There have also been a few commercial transactions.
Last year Russia gave us 50,000 tons of wheat in exchange for 5,000 tons
of tea, and according to an Agreement recently entered into, we shall be
supplied with 81,000 tons of wheat in return for tea, jute and castor-oil.
The possibilities of entering into a formal trade agreement with the Soviet
Union are also under consideration.
Yugoslavia.-A decision to exchange diplomatic representatives with
Yugoslavia was announced in December 1948, but neither country has yet
rent a representative to the other. A Trade Delegation from Yugoslavia
arrived in India last December and a Trade Agreement was signed.

Netherlands.-The Netherlands Government opened their Embassy in
Delhi as far back as August 1947. The Government of India have not
however been able so far to establish their mission at the Hague.
A Debt Settlement Agreement with the Netherlands covering assets
belonging to the two countries affected during the War is under consideration. This will also cover Dutch colonial territories.
<pg12>
Portugal.-The Portuguese Legation was opened in Delhi with the
arrival of the Portuguese Minister in January 1949. The opening of our
Legation in Lisbon will, it is hoped, not be delayed long.
The question of the future of the Portuguese possessions in India requires early settlement in a friendly manner and, for this purpose, the
completion of the exchange of Diplomatic representatives between India
and Portugal is a matter of urgency.
D. America
U.S.A.-Our Diplomatic Mission in Washington has been in existence
for several years. The Trade Commissioner's Office in New York was
converted to a Consulate-General in May, 1948; another Consulate
General was opened in San Francisco a few months ago. Our Ambassador in Washington has done a great del to maintain friendly relations
with the Government of the United States. Negotiations have been going
on for some time regarding a Treaty of Friendship and Commerce between
India and the U.S.A. It is expected that the conclusion of such a Treaty
will result in the removal of certain disabilities which Indian nationals
now suffer from in the United States and will lead to the greater benefit
of the two countries.
South
continent.
lities and
country is

America.-We are under-represented in this large and important
The Latin American countries have great economic potentiaare all represented in the United Nations. One Latin Aemircan
also a Member of the Security Council.

Brazil.-The opening of an Indian Embassy in Brazil has created wide
interest in India among all sections of the people of Brazil and has also
enabled us to build up contacts with other South American Republics
where we have no representation. Our Amabassador is shortly visiting
Chile and Peru in response to invitations from those countries.
A commercial Secretary was recently appointed to the Embassy to
watch India's trade interests not only in Brazil but also in Peru, Equador,
Columbia and Venezula, French and Dutch Guineas.
Argentine.-The Governments of India and Argentine have recently
agreed to exchange diplomatic missions at Embassy level. We have
maintained a Trade Commissioner in Argentine for 6 years and he has
generally looked after our trade interests in South America. The post was
not long ago reclassified as a Consulate General. It is proposed to open
our Embassy there shortly. Argentine has been an important source of
supply of food grains, and an agreement has recently been entered into
by the Government of India and Argentine for the supply of 3,85,000
tons of wheat in exchange for raw jute.

<pg13>
Chile.-At the instance of the Chilean Government, it has been decided
to establish diplomatic relations with Chile. The Chilean Minister is
shortly expected to arrive in New Delhi, but the Government of India
have stated that due to shortage of personnel they will be unable to open
an Indian Legation in Santiago for some time in the he near future. Chile
is rich in minerals particularly saltpetre, and is one of the more important
Latin American Republics.
E. The Commonwealth
The United Kingdmo.-Consequent upon the attainment of independence by India the High Commissioner in London became responsible for
the handling of our political relations with the U.K. and for certain agency
functions which were formerly performed by the old Indian Office. The
question of reorganising the staff of India House to meet the new responsibilities of the High Commissioner is under consideration.
Australia.-British Indian subjects holding Australian passports were,
until recently, required to return to Australia within a specified time
limit which was endorsed on their passports each time they left the
country. These restrictions proved irksome, and a more satisfactory
arrangement has been negotiated under which re-entry will be permitted
subject to a simple identy test.
Canada.-The Indian High Commissioner in Canada was able during
the year to secure municipal franchise for Indians domioiled in British
Columbia. The federal franchise was secure some time ago. The High
Commissioner was also able to obtain permission for the admission to
Canada of young Indians seeking to enter Canada for the immediate purpose of marrying girls of Indian origin, legally resident in that country,
and of relatives of persons of Indian origin, legally resident in Canada,
who have reached an advanced age and require assistance not otherwise
available in the management of their properties in that country.
Pakistan.-The partition of the Indian sub-continent into two States
India and Pakistan, has given rise to a number of problems. These were
handled by different Ministries in the Government of India, depending
on their nature; the Ministry of External Affairs & Commonwealth Relations has served mainly as a co-ordinating agency. In order to achieve
the necessary co-ordination, a Secretaries Committee has been set up with
the Additional Secretary of the Ministry as Convenor.
Ceylon.-The most important problem, which continue to receive
attention during the year, is that of the citizenship for Indians resident
in Ceylon. Prolonged negotiations on a Draft Bill which the Ceylon
<pg14>
Government proposed to introduce in their Parliament yield no agreement.
The Bill which passed the Ceylon Lower House is now before the Senate.
Objections were taken -- the Indian community in Ceylon to the
Ceylon Exchange Control Regulations which restrict remittances to India.
These objections were brought to the notice of the Ceylon Government
and some relief was obtained.

South Africa.-There has been no change in relations between India
and South Africa. A new Government which came to power in South
Africa on a declared programme of apartheid segregation of non-Europeans
has already taken certain measures to enforce its policy. In addition,
Part II of the Asiatic Land Tenure and Indian Representation Act, which
sought to give parliamentary representation to Indians through European
members elected by Indians has been repealed.
In January, 1949 there was a sudden outbreak of racial riots at Durban
between the Indians and the Africans. These involved serious casualties
on both sides and considerable loss of property belonging to Indians. The
Government of India have done what they could to give succour to the
persons affected by these riots irrespective of any racial consideration.
British East Africa.-The revised Immigration Restriction Bills were
passed into law by the East African Legislatures despite the objections
of the Government of India and the local Indian community. The Government of India made it clear that they could not acquiesce in legislation
which would adversely affect the rights and interests of their nationals
abroad. The Government of the United Kingdom assured the Government of India that the legislation was not directed against Indians. The
administration of the new law will now be watched and the matter considered afresh in the light of subsequent developments.
Mainly as a reflection of the political situation in India, a demand for
separate electorates for Muslims and non-Muslims gained ground in
Kenya since 1946. Various attempts at compromise failed. Thereupon
the Government of Kenya sought to introduce separate electorates for
Muslims and non-Muslims. As soon as this came to the notice of the
Government of India, they made vigorous representations to the U. K.
Government. Eventually it was decided by the Government of Kenya
to retain the electorates as they were but to reserve two of the five Indian
sets for Muslims in two double member constituencies, each voter
having one vote only. The ordinance giving effect to this decision is
restricted to the life of the present Legislative Council.
<pg15>
Early in 1948, riots took place in the Gold Coast Colony and several
shops belonging to Indians were burnt and looted. Representations were
made to the Government of the U. K. for payment of compensation and
other relief to the victims of these riots. The matter is still under the
consideration of the U. K. Government.
Mauritius.-The Government of India appointed a Commissioner in
Mauritius during the year.
As a result of the constitutional changes in Mauritius, Indians have
secured 11 seats out of 17 in the Legislative Council.
Fiji.-A Commissioner for India was appointed in Fiji during the
year. A residential tax of 62 per head per annum on persons who do not
pay income-tax has hit the Indian community which is composed mainly
of farmers or petty traders hard. Representations were made to H. M. G.
in March 1948 urging the introduction of a more equitable system of
taxation, and grant of relief to the persons affected by reduction in the
rate of residential tax. The matter is still under consideration.

A committee consisting of six non-official members of the Fiji Legislative Council (including two Indians) has been appointed to consider and
report on the desirability of granting to the peoples of the Colony a greater
measure of control in their own affairs and to recommend necessary
amendments in the constitution of Fiji. The Committee has not yet
submitted its report.
Though many Indians in Fiji are anxious to return to India, owing to
the acute shipping position, only about 300 have been registered for repatriation by the next available boat.
British West Indies.-The Government of India are examining the
proposal of the Secretary of State for the Colonies for constitutional
reforms in Trinidad. The question of assisted repatriation of Indians to
their homes also received attention.
In June 1948 Indian workers on sugar estates in British Guiana resorted to a strike owing o dissatisfaction with wages and conditions of
work. The U. K. Government have appointed a Royal Commission of
Enquiry to investigate the whole problem of the sugar industry in
British Guiana. The Commission have recently arrived in the Colony.
304 Indian repatriates from British Guiana are on their way to India
in spite of the Government of India's desire that no persons should return
at present in view of the difficult conditions in the country. The Indian
Commissioner has been instructed to dissuade the remaining Indians from
returning.
<pg16>
Malaya.-Internal Disturbances in Malaya and Indian Labour.-In
the early months of the year, strikes became almost chronic in certain parts
of
Malaya. As the labour population on the rubber estates was mainly
India, these strikes necessarily involved Indians. Subsequently strikes
were followed by outbreaks of violence on a large scale by the Chinese
communist. The great majority of Indian labour has held aloof from
communist activities. Through their Representative, the Government of
Indian have sought to protect innocent Indians, from the operation of the
various emergency measures which the Malayan authorities have imposed
to deal with lawlessness. They have also urged on H. M. G. in the U. K.
the importance of improving the standards of living of labour on plantations as the only effective antidote to communist propaganda.
F. Haji.
During the year the Government of India abandoned the centralised booking system which had been introduced during the war,
for passages direct with the shipping companies engaged in the pilgrim
traffic. Government, however continued to use their good offices with
Shipping Companies in securing adequate shipping for the Haji traffic.
An agreement was also reached with Pakistan whereby 50 per cent of
the available shipping was allotted to pilgrims from Pakistan. In spite
of the partition of the country the number of Indian pilgrims who performed Haji was 14,110 as against 20,423 from undivided India in the
previous year. To advise Government on matters connected with Haji,
a Standing Advisory Committee called the Central Haji Committee was

appointed. This Committee has advisory functions and includes three
members of the Constituent Assembly amongst its members.
EGYPT
INDIA AFGHANISTAN TURKEY JORDAN LEBANON USA IRAN IRAQ OMAN KUWAIT
ETHIOPIA BURMA INDONESIA CHINA PHILIPPINES CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC
JAPAN NEPAL UNITED KINGDOM BHUTAN FRANCE BELGIUM SWITZERLAND RUSSIA
GERMANY LATVIA SWEDEN ITALY NORWAY SLOVAKIA YUGOSLAVIA THE NETHERLANDS
PORTUGAL BRAZIL CHILE PERU GUINEA AUSTRALIA CANADA PAKISTAN SOUTH
AFRICA KENYA MAURITIUS FIJI
May 26, 1948

part III
PART III
India and International Conferences.
As a member of the U. N. and its many specialised agencies, India
part in a number of International Conferences. Of these, apart from
discussions in the Security Council on the Indonesian, Kashmir and
Hyderabad issues-the last two concerned India directly-in which the
Government representatives participated, the session of the U. N. Assembly which met in Paris from September-December, 1948, was politically
the most important.
The Indonesian problem has been dealt with in another part of this
Report; Kashmir and Hyderabad have been the subject of special statements by the Prime Minister and the Deputy Prime Minister. The
Kashmir problem is being dealt with in consultation with the U. N.
Commission which has now returned to the Indian sub-continent.
<pg17>
The complaint made by the Laik Ali Ministry to the Security Council
regarding Hyderabad has been withdrawn and, so far as the Government
of India are concerned, the matter is closed.
The third ordinary session of the General Assembly was held in Paris
from the Sep 21, 1948 to the 12th December 1948. As many as
75 items comprised the Agenda for this session. Some of the more important items involved complex political problems such as Palestine,
Greece, Korea, the control of Atomic Energy, Disarmament, the Great
Power Veto, promotion of international co-operation in the political field,
treatment of Indians in South Africa and disposal of the former Italian
colonies. The last two items could not be taken up for want of time and
will be discussed in the second part of this session which will commence
in New York on the 5th April 1949.
On each important issue that was discussed in Paris, India's stand

was in line with her general foreign policy, viz., a consideration of the
matter in debate on its intrinsic merits and without favour to the policy
of any group or groups of nations. Such independence, though it may
not evoke universal popularity, does evoke respect if exercised with firmness and judgment. It is best calculated to serve India's national interest
and, on the long view, to promote the chances of international peace.
On Palestine, the Indian Delegation adhered to its advocacy of a
federal solution and its opposition to a solution imposed by force. For
Korea, while accepting the result of the elections held in the South under
the auspices of the U. N. Commission, the Delegation earnestly urged
persistence by the new Commission in endeavour to restore unity between
the North and the South.
The Economic Commission for Asia and the Far East.-Is one of the
Regional Commission of the United Nations and deals with the question
of economic development of the Asia and the Far East. It held its third
session at Ooty (India) from 1st to 12the June 1948. The fourth was held
at Lapstone (Australia) from the 28th November to 11th December 1948.
Sir B. N. Rau was elected by a very large majority of votes to the International Law Commission at the Paris session of the U. N. General
Assembly. This Commission is charged with the codification of International Law.
Of the 11 members of the Security Council, only two are from Asia
and, of the two, one, China, is permanent member. Of the remaining
9 seats, two are held by North and two are by South American countries

<pg18>
and the rest by Europe. This distribution is wholly disproportionate to
Asia's growing importance, and it was originally intended that India
should move for a more equitable regional representation on the Council.
Owing to the crowded nature of the Assembly's agenda and, in particular, the atmosphere of controversy which marked the debates on all
major issues, it was decided not to proceed with the idea. In the interests
of harmony among Asian nations, India also did not seek election to the
seat on the Council vacated by Syria. Egypt succeeded Syria. Of elections to other bodies which function as part or under the auspices of the
U. N., India sought and secured election to:
Transport and Communications Commission,
Economic and Employment Commission,
Statistical Commission,
Women's Rights Commission,
Human Rights Commission.
In all these bodies, representatives of India played a notable parts.
A competitive examination for the recruitment of probably 8 more
Indians to the U. N. Secretariat is to be held shortly with the help of

the F. P. S. C. The Government of India continue to press for the
appointment of more and more Indians to the U. N. Secretariat, both in
the higher and lower grades.
The part played by the Indian Delegation in the discussions relating
to Trusteeship in the United Nations General Assembly and its Constituent Committees was in keeping with India's policy of doing whatever
is possible to advance the condition of peoples still under foreign tutelage
and deserves special mention. Questions which received particular
attention were:
(i) Submission of a Trusteeship Agreement in respect of SouthWest Africa by the Government of the Union of South Africa.
(ii) Supply of information by Administrative Powers in regard to nonself-governing territories,
(iii) Constitution of a Special Committee to examine the summaries
of information transmitted to the Nations. Organisation on economic, social and educational conditions in nonself-governing territories, and
(iv)

Consideration of the report of the Trusteeship Council on the
administration of Trust Territories.

<pg19>
As regards (i), the Indian representatives brought out prominently South
Africa's intention to incorporate this territory in the Union and, although
they did not succeed in persuading the majority of the Assembly to forbid
such a step, their firm attitude helped in the adoption by the Assembly
of joint resolution which was moved by Denmark, Norway and some other
European countries. Resolutions relating to (ii) and (iv) were moved by
the Indian members, the former singly and the latter jointly with representative of Cuba, the Philippines and Venezuela. The resolution passed
by the General Assembly in regard to the advancement of education in
Trust Territories was also vigorously supported by India.
INDIA
INDONESIA USA FRANCE GREECE KOREA SOUTH AFRICA
SYRIA DENMARK NORWAY CUBA PHILIPPINES VENEZUELA
Sep 21, 1948

Part IV

PART IV
External Publicity

AUSTRALIA

CHINA

EGYPT

In order to secure more effective co-ordination with foreign policy,
external publicity was transferred to this Ministry from the Ministry of
Information and Broadcasting in June 1948. During the last seven months
a number of new measures have been adopted. The number of Information Posts has been increased; from 13 to 24. Publicity organisations now
exist in London, Batavia, Washington, Tokyo, Saigon, Singapore, Bang
kok, Colombo, Rangoon, Dacca, Lahore, Karachi, Kabul, Tehran, Cairo,
Paris, Ankara Nairobi, Nanking, Jedda, Rome, Prague, Ottawa and
Canberra. Publicity directives have been made more comprehensive and
more regular.
Publicity Policy.-Special attention is paid to regional requirements,
e.g. of the Middle East; S. E. Asia and Far East; the Commonwealth etc.
News services to foreign posts which were formerly cabled and were
limited to 800 words were inadequate as background information and expensive. With effect from Jul 01, 1948, E. A. & C. R. multiple-address
broadcasts have been started to foreign posts through the Overseas Communications Service of the All India Radio twice daily. These carry about
2,500 words per day. At present 17 posts are being served and arrangements are being made for others to receive these broadcasts. Copies of
our wireless News Bulletins are sent every day by air to those centres which
are not yet picking up our transmissions.
Monthly newsreals consisting of items considered suitable for foreign
publicity are being sent abroad. Special films considered suitable for
foreign publicity are being produced. Information Centres are being
supplied with projectors.
<pg20>
Magazines.-Three magazines are produced for external publicity at
present. These are:
(1) "New India"-in English;
(2) "March of India"-in English;
(3) "Al-Nafir"-in Arabic.
It is proposed to issue a Persian version of "Al-Nafir". The future of
publicity through magazines is under discussion.
Libraries.-It has been decided to establish at 27 Missions abroad small
libraries containing books on Indian Philosophy, history and culture from
which books can be lent to local residents interested in India.

JAPAN
REPUBLIC OF SINGAPORE UNITED KINGDOM AFGHANISTAN EGYPT IRAN PAKISTAN SRI
LANKA CANADA CZECH REPUBLIC FRANCE ITALY KENYA TURKEY AUSTRALIA CENTRAL
AFRICAN REPUBLIC INDIA USA

Jul 01, 1948

