Annual Report
2009-2010

Ministry of External Affairs
New Delhi

Published by:
Policy Planning and Research Division, Ministry of External Affairs, New Delhi
This Annual Report can also be accessed at website:
www.mea.gov.in
Front Cover:
Illustration of Central Secretariat buildings from water colour painting by Shri Kashi Nath Das
Designed and printed by:
Cyberart Informations Pvt. Ltd.
1517 Hemkunt Chambers, 89 Nehru Place, New Delhi 110 019
E mail: director@cyberartinformations.com
Website: www.cyberart.co.in
Telefax: 0120-4231676

Contents
Introduction and Synopsis

i-xix

1

India’s Neighbours

1

2

South East Asia and the Pacific

19

3

East Asia

28

4

Eurasia

35

5

The Gulf, West Asia and North Africa

42

6

Africa (South of Sahara)

52

7

Europe

70

8

The Americas

92

9

United Nations and International Organizations

109

10

Disarmament and International Security Affairs

127

11

Multilateral Economic Relation

132

12

SAARC Division

138

13

Technical & Economic Cooperation and Development Partnership

140

14

Investment and Technology Promotion

143

15

Energy Security

145

16

Policy Planning and Research

146

17

Protocol

149

18

Consular, Passport and Visa Services

157

19

Administration and Establishment

160

20

Coordination

164

21

External Publicity

165

22

Public Diplomacy

168

23

Foreign Service Institute

171

24

Implementation of Official Language Policy and Propagation of Hindi Abroad

173

25

Indian Council for Cultural Relations

176

26

Indian Council of World Affairs

180

27

Research and Information System for Developing Countries

183

28

Library

188

Appendices

Appendix I: Cadre strength at Headquarters and Missions abroad during 2009-10
(including Posts budgeted by Ministry of Commerce and those ex-cadred etc.)

193

Appendix II: Data on recruitment through direct recruitment, departmental promotion
and Ltd Departmental Examination made in the Ministry along with the reserved
vacancies for April 2009 to November 2009

194

Appendix III: Number of IFS Officers with Proficiency in various languages

195

Appendix IV: Statement showing the number of passport applications received and
passports issued, miscellaneous applications received and services rendered,
No. of Passports issued as well as Revenue under Tatkaal Scheme and
total Expenditure of Passport Offices from 1 January - 30 November 2009.

196

Appendix V: Finances of the Ministry of External Affairs in 2009-2010

197

Appendix VI: The Major Sectoral Allocations in the 2009-2010 Budget
(Revised Estimate) (Revenue & Capital)

198

Appendix VII: Principal Destinations of India’s Aid & Loan Programmes

199

Appendix VIII: Extracts from C&AG's Report on Ministry of External Affairs

200

Appendix IX: Status of Action Taken Note (Financial Year 2003-2009)

201

Appendix X: Treaties/Conventions/Agreements Concluded or Renewed by India
with other countries 2009

202

Appendix XI: Instruments of Full Powers Issued during the period 1 January 2009
to December 2009

209

Appendix XII: Instruments of Ratification/Accession issued during the period 1 January
2009 to December 2009

210

Appendix XIII: Conference/ Seminars/ Study projects organized/ undertaken by
Institutions/ NGOs, which were funded, partially or wholly, by Policy Planning &
Research Division during the period

211

Appendix XIV: List of ITEC partner countries

212

Appendix XV: List of ITEC Training Institutes in India

214

Appendix XVI: Seminars/Conferences/Lectures/Meetings: April 2009 - March 2010

215

Appendix XVII: Seminars Organized by RIS

218

Abbreviations

219

Introduction and Synopsis

I

ndia’s foreign policy is closely integrated with the
country’s fundamental security and developmental
priorities. We seek a global order in which India’s interests
are assured; the autonomy of India’s decision-making is
safeguarded; and which is conducive to achievement of
the overriding goal of rapid, sustained and inclusive
socio-economic development of the country. To this end,
Indian foreign policy has combined firm commitment to
our core national values with dynamic adaptation to
change in the international environment.

democracy in Bangladesh has had a positive impact in
many areas of cooperation with Bangladesh. Bilateral
relations were greatly strengthened with Prime Minister
Sheikh Hasina’s visit to India in January 2010. India’s
pledge of a line of credit of US$ 1 billion for infrastructure
development in Bangaldesh and Prime Minister Hasina’s
assurance that anti-India activity would not be allowed
from the soil of Bangladesh were some of the significant
landmark outcomes from this historic visit. During
2009-2010, India’s support and contribution to the
reconstruction of Afghanistan was further consolidated.
Relations with Sri Lanka saw further development with
India and Sri Lanka maintaining high-level interaction
and with India’s offer of assistance of Rs. 500 crores for
the relief, rehabilitation and resettlement of internally
displaced persons belonging to the Tamil minority and
long-term reconstruction of the war-ravaged regions of
the country.

Central to our policy objectives is ensuring a peaceful and
secure neighbourhood, cordial and balanced relations with
the major powers and mutually beneficial partnerships
with developing countries. Indian foreign policy also has
a strong multilateral aspect. Many of the key challenges
of our times – issues such as peace and security including
fight against international terrorism, reform of
international financial architecture and international
organizations, food and energy security and climate
change – have global dimensions and require cooperative
global action to be addressed effectively.

Apart from maintaining close ties with the immediate
neighbours, India continues to work with other SAARC
member countries to transform SAARC into an effective
vehicle for regional integration.

The year 2009-10 was witness to challenges in the foreign
policy domain in the aftermath of the Mumbai terrorist
attacks of November 2008 and the global financial crisis.
Even as these challenges were effectively countered, there
were also significant achievements in other areas.

India attaches high importance to its bilateral relations
with China. Notwithstanding the complex nature of this
relationship, both countries continued their high-level
political interaction. Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh
met the Chinese President Hu Jintao in Yekaterinburg
(June 2009) and Premier Wen Jiabao in Hua Hin
(October 2009). The institutionalized dialogue
mechanisms between the two countries covering a host
of issues have steadily progressed during the period. With
a convergence of interests on issues such as Doha Round
of WTO negotiations, climate change, global financial
crisis etc., both countries have continued to interact
constructively on global issues.

India’s commitment to close and good neighbourly
relations with all our subcontinential neighbours is based
on the fundamental principles of equality and mutual
respect. India is committed to supporting Bhutan in the
consolidation of its newly established democracy. The visit
of His Majesty Jigme Khesar Namgyel Wangchuck, the
fifth King of Bhutan to India in December 2009 further
deepened and consolidated bilateral relations. India
continued its strong support to Nepal’s transition to a
stable, peaceful and prosperous democratic state. Prime
Minister Madhav Kumar Nepal’s visit to India in August
2009 and the visit of President Ram Baran Yadav in
February 2010 strengthened the close ties of friendly
cooperation and the unique and multifaceted relationship
we share with Nepal. The restoration of multi-party

India’s relations with the USA and Russia have not only
been strengthened but also transformed qualitatively with
new areas of strategic cooperation added. India’s
engagement with the US broadened in a number of areas
of mutual interest at the bilateral, regional and global level.
Both new Governments in India and the US reiterated
i

Annual Report 2009 - 2010

(December 2009), Malaysian Prime Minister
Mr. Dato’ Sri Mohd Najib Tun Abdul Razak
(January 2010) and the President of the Republic of Korea,
Mr. Lee Myung-bak (January 2010) to India. Relations
with countries in the West Asia and Gulf region were
strengthened further in several areas. India’s annual
contribution to the United Nations Relief Agency for
Palestinian Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) was
enhanced from US$ 20,000 to US$ 1 million. India has
vital interests in the Gulf region where almost 4.5 million
Indians live and work. While increasing our imports of
oil and gas, India is taking active steps to strengthen
relationship with the individual Gulf countries.

their strong commitment to strengthen the existing
political and economic partnership, and take it to a higher
level for mutual benefit. During the visit of US Secretary
of State Ms. Hillary Clinton in July 2009, both countries
jointly announced a new agenda for Indo-US relations.
The Indo-USA strategic partnership, was further
consolidated with Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh’s
visit to the US in November 2009. During the visit, Prime
Minister Dr. Singh and President Obama decided to
embark on a new phase in the global strategic partnership
between India and the US. During the period, the
US remained India’s one of India’s largest trading partners.
The total volume of Indo-US bilateral trade in goods and
services stood at US$ 59.8 billion during the period
January-October 2009.

India is strengthening its relations with Central Asian
countries on the basis of historical and cultural linkages.
Relations have not only been diversified but nurtured at
the highest level. President Smt. Pratibha Devisingh Patil
paid a State visit to Tajikistan in September 2009 and
External Affairs Minister Shri S. M. Krishna visited
Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan during the year.

Indo-Russian relations continued to be strengthened with
the State visit of President Smt. Pratibha Devisingh Patil
to Russia in September 2009, Prime Minister
Dr. Manmohan Singh’s visit to Russia in June 2009 for
Brazil-Russia-India-China (BRIC) and Shanghai
Cooperative Organisation (SCO) Summits, and again in
December 2009 for the annual bilateral Summit. The
adoption of a Joint Declaration on further deepening the
strategic partnership, initialing of an agreement on
peaceful use of atomic energy, and agreements on defencerelated cooperation during PM’s December visit reflect
the consolidation of strategic relations between the two
countries.

India continued to consolidate bilateral relations with
African countries. 47 out of 53 African Union countries
have joined the Pan-African e-Network Project of the
Government of India and have started availing of the teleeducation and tele-medicine facilities. The momentum
of our relationship with African countries is also
maintained through high-level visits. President of Namibia
paid a State visit to India (30 August-3 September 2009).
Shri Mohammad Hamid Ansari, Vice President of
India visited Zambia, Malawi and Botswana from
5-11 January, 2010.

During 2009-10, India-EU strategic partnership was
provided with a new impetus. India’s multi-faceted
interaction with the EU intensified in diverse fields ranging
from defence and security to culture and education. The
10 th India-EU Summit was held in New Delhi on
6 November, 2009. The Summit reviewed India-EU
relations and identified concrete areas of cooperation.

India’s engagement with Latin American and Caribbean
countries continued during the year through active multisectoral dialogue with the region. Prime Minister
Dr. Manmohan Singh visited Trinidad and Tobago for the
CHOGM Summit in November 2009. President of
Argentina Dr. Cristina de Fernandez Kirchner paid a State
visit to India in October 2009. India’s trade and economic
interaction with the Latin American and Caribbean region
has increased during the period.

Relations with countries in Europe were characterized by
high-level visits, parliamentary exchanges, civil society
dialogues etc. President of India Smt. Pratibha Devisingh
Patil visited Spain in April and UK in October 2009. Prime
Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh visited Italy for the
G-8/G-5 Summit and France for the Bastille Day
celebrations in July 2009.

During 2009-10, India’s multilateral economic
engagement further widened and deepened. This is
evident from Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh’s
participation in G-8 Outreach and G-5 Summits
(8-10 July, 2009), the first formal Summit of BRIC
(Brazil, Russia, India & China) (15-17 June, 2009),
G-20, Pittsburgh (September 2009), India-ASEAN
Summit and East Asia Summit (24-25 October, 2009).
India continues to play an important role in such regional

During the past year, India continued to expand its
political and economic relations with the countries in East
Asia, West Asia, Central Asia, Africa and Latin America.
Relations with the countries in the East Asia and the
Pacific are an important dimension of India’s “Look East”
policy. Our relations with East Asia were strengthened by
the visit of Japanese Prime Minister Mr. Yukio Hatoyama
ii

Introduction and Synopsis

groupings as Asia-Europe Meeting (ASEM), Bay of Bengal
Initiative for Multi-sectoral Technical and Economic
Cooperation (BIMSTEC), Mekong Ganga Cooperation,
Indian Ocean Rim-Association for Regional Cooperation
(IOR-ARC) and G15. The signing of India-ASEAN FTA
in Goods which has been operationalized from
1 January, 2010 is an important milestone in India’s
economic engagement with the outside world.

Kabul immediately after the attack and met President
Karzai, Foreign Minister Spanta and other leaders. A
terrorist attack in Kabul on 26 February, 2010 killed,
among others, seven Indians and seriously injured several
others. While deeply condoning the loss of life,
Government stressed that India will continue to pursue
its development partnership with Afghanistan, undeterred
by such cowardly attacks of terrorism.

Despite the global economic downturn resulting from the
financial and economic crisis, India has fared better than
most other countries, and remains one of the fastest
growing among the major economies, with a growth rate
that is expected to reach 7% plus in 2009-10. India is an
active member of G-20 and attaches importance to the
implementation of the G-20 Summit decisions including
that of the Pittsburgh Summit in September 2009 to arrest
recession, expedite recovery and revive the world
economy. In the process, India has sought to ensure that
international decision making on global economic issues
is democratized to reflect present realities.

India has been at the forefront of the efforts to assist the
government and people of Afghanistan in building a
stable, democratic, and pluralistic society. Close political
consultations with the Government of Afghanistan and
regular high contacts with its leadership were maintained.
India welcomed the successful holding of the Presidential
and Provincial Council elections in Afghanistan on
20 August, 2009. The swearing-in ceremony of newly
re- elected President Karzai which took place on
19 November, 2009 was attended by External Affairs
Minister Shri S. M. Krishna. The then Afghan Foreign
Minister Dr. Dadfar Rangin Spanta visited India from
26-27 July, 2009 to hold bilateral discussions. He met
Minister of External Affairs Shri S. M. Krishna and the
then National Security Advisor Shri M. K. Narayanan
and called on Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh. India
remains actively engaged in the task of reconstruction
and development of Afghanistan. India’s bilateral
assistance to Afghanistan has crossed US$ 1.3 billion
(as against a pledge of US$ 1.2 billion).

An intense focus of India’s foreign policy during the period
has been the subject of climate change. India’s approach
on the issue has always been guided by the imperative to
preserve India’s development space and enhance energy
security. Although a legally-binding agreement on climate
change could not be reached at the Copenhagen Summit
in December 2009, India was in the forefront with China,
Brazil and South Africa (BASIC Group) together with
the US, in putting in place the Copenhagen Accord. India
views this Accord as a political document to facilitate
negotiations in the post-Copenhagen process under the
UNFCCC.

Bangladesh: Following the restoration of multi-party
democracy in Bangladesh, India and Bangladesh have
engaged actively to enhance cooperation in a range of
areas. Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina’s visit to India in
January 2010 opened a new chapter in India- Bangladesh
relations. The Joint Communiqué issued during the visit
outlines a range of areas for bilateral cooperation. Both
sides agreed to enhance security cooperation, particularly
against insurgent groups. India announced a US$ 1 billion
Line of Credit for infrastructural development projects in
Bangladesh, including railway infrastructure, coaches,
locomotives, buses and dredging. Connectivity received
a boost with India providing road and rail transit to
Bangladesh to Nepal and to Bhutan and both sides
designating new ports of call in inland waterways.
Bangladesh also gave access to India to use Chittagong
and Mongla Port. India also agreed to supply Bangladesh
250 MWs of power. Both countries agreed to enhance
cooperation in trade and investment, culture, water
resources and human resource development. Three
security related agreements, an agreement on power
cooperation and a cultural exchange programme were also

India continues to work for strengthening the United
Nations. During the period, it continued its efforts to push
for comprehensive reforms of the UN Security Council
including its expansion in both permanent and
non-permanent categories, and improving its working
methods.

Neighbours
Afghanistan: The steady deterioration in the internal
security situation spurred by increasing violence in
Afghanistan and attacks on our personnel, establishment
and projects in Afghanistan continued to engage India’s
attention during the year. Following the bomb attack
targeting the Indian Embassy in Kabul on 9 October, 2009,
the Government of India expressed deep concern over
the cowardly attack which was aimed against the people
of India and people of Afghanistan and their abiding
friendship. Foreign Secretary Smt. Nirupama Rao visited
iii

Annual Report 2009 - 2010

exchange of views and the leaders agreed to continue and
strengthen efforts to build mutual trust and understanding
in the spirit of the Strategic and Cooperative Partnership
between the two countries. The institutionalised dialogue
mechanisms between India and China covering a wide
range of issues showed steady progress during the year.
With convergence of interest on issues like the Doha
Round of WTO negotiations, climate change and the
global financial crisis, both countries continued to interact
constructively on global issues. China is now India’s largest
trading partner with the total volume of bilateral trade
being US$ 51.8 billion in 2008. The trade volume dipped
slightly in 2009 to US$ 43.27 billion.

signed during the visit. Prior to the visit, Foreign
Minister of Bangladesh Dr. Dipu Moni visited India in
September 2009 and Foreign Secretary Smt. Nirupama Rao
had also visited Bangladesh in November 2009. Both these
visits led to strengthening of cooperation in various fields
and greater understanding between the two countries.
Bhutan: India and Bhutan’s warm and cordial bilateral
relations, characterized by close consultations, trust and
mutual understanding, were further strengthened through
regular high-level exchanges and visits and expanding
cooperation. There were several high-level visits from both
sides including that of the External Affairs Minister
Shri S. M. Krishna (June 2009), Home Minister
Shri P. Chidambaram (August 2009), Minister
of Parliamentary Affairs & Water Resources
Shri Pawan Kumar Bansal (October 2009), Chief
Information Commissioner Shri Wajahat Habibullah
(May 2009), the Special Envoy of the Prime Minister
Shri Shyam Saran (July 2009), Foreign Secretary
Smt. Nirupama Rao (September 2009), the Comptroller
& Auditor General Shri Vinod Rai (September 2009),
Chief Election Commissioner Shri Navin Chawla
(October 2009) and the then National Security
Advisor to Prime Minister, Shri M. K. Narayanan
(November, 2009). From the Bhutanese side,
Prime Minister of Bhutan, Mr. Jigmi Y. Thinley
visited India from 28 June -3 July 2009 and
His Majesty Jigme Khesar Namgyel Wangchuck, the
King of Bhutan, paid a State visit to India from
21-26 December, 2009. These visits led to strengthening
of our bilateral economic and political relations. India
continued to be the largest trade and assistance partner
of Bhutan.

Iran: The visit to India by Foreign Minister of Iran,
Mr. Manouchehr Mottaki from 16-17 November, 2009
continued the sequence of exchange of high-level
visits. Foreign Secretary Smt. Nirupama Rao visited
Iran for Foreign Office Consultations (FOC) from
2-3 February, 2010. 2009-10 also saw continued bilateral
exchanges in a number of areas like energy, trade,
commerce and industry, banking, culture, media and
broadcasting, etc as well as consultations on regional and
international issues of mutual interest, thus maintaining
the momentum of bilateral relations. Bilateral trade grew
by 30.04% in 2008-09 in comparison to the previous year,
and touched US$ 13.146 billion.
Maldives: Bilateral relations between India and
the Maldives continued to be strengthened by several
high-level exchanges. President Mohammed Nasheed of
the Maldives visited India in October 2009 and again in
January 2010. Special Envoy of the President Ibrahim Zaki
and the Foreign Minister of the Maldives
Dr. Ahmed Shaheed also visited in August 2009
and July 2009 respectively. Vice President of the
Maldives Mohamed Waheed visited India from
18-24 February, 2010 at the invitation of the Vice
President of India. Defence Minister Shri A. K. Antony
visited Maldives in August 2009, wherein both countries
identified various areas of cooperation in the security and
defence sectors and agreed to enhance cooperation in the
area of coastal security and maritime surveillance.
National Security Adviser Shri M. K. Narayanan visited
Maldives in June 2009 and Foreign Secretary in
January 2010. The India-Maldives Joint Coast Guard
Exercises ‘DOSTI X’ were held of Male in December 2009
and the ‘EKUVERIN’ exercises in October 2009.

China: The year saw continuing high-level engagement
with China, including meetings on the sidelines of major
international and regional events. Prime Minister
Dr. Manmohan Singh met Chinese President Hu Jintao
in Yekaterinburg on 15 June, 2009 on the sidelines of the
SCO/BRIC Summit. PM and the Chinese Premier
Wen Jiabao had a meeting in Hua Hin, Thailand on the
margins of the East Asia/ASEAN Summit in
October 2009. PM also met Premier Wen Jiabao on
18 December, 2009 at Copenhagen during COP 15. The
External Affairs Minister Shri S. M. Krishna met the
Chinese Foreign Minister Mr. Yang Jiechi at Phuket
(Thailand) on 22 July, 2009 on the margins of the East
Asia Summit Ministerial Meeting, and thereafter in
Bangalore on 27 October, 2009 on the sidelines of the
Russia-India-China (RIC) Trilateral Foreign Ministers
Meeting. During these meetings, there was fruitful

Myanmar: Relations between India and Myanmar
continued to develop their multi-dimensional character.
The momentum of high-level visits was maintained.
External Affairs Minister Shri S. M. Krishna visited
iv

Introduction and Synopsis

Myanmar for the BIMSTEC Ministerial Meeting in
December 2009 and met PM of Myanmar General
Thein Sein. Foreign Secretary is scheduled to visit
Myanmar for Foreign Office Consultations between
28 February-2 March 2010 where a range of areas of
cooperation are likely to be discussed. Chairman,
Combined Officers Staff Committee (CoSC) and Chief
of Army Staff (CoAS), General Deepak Kapoor visited
Myanmar in October 2009. Vice Admiral Soe Thane,
Myanmar’s Minister for Industries (No. 2) visited India
in December 2009. The Tamu-Keygone-Kalemyo stretch
of road, built with Indian assistance, was handed over to
the Government of Myanmar in October 2009. Work on
the Kaladan Multi Modal Transit Transport Project and
the India-Myanmar Industrial Trading Centre continued
apace. Both countries continued to enhance cooperation
in the areas of energy, oil and natural gas, power, IT,
infrastructure development, telecommunication and
agriculture.

developmental activities in Nepal. At present, there are
over 350 small and large projects being undertaken under
the aegis of India-Nepal Economic Cooperation
Programme.
Pakistan: In the wake of the terrorist attack on Mumbai,
there has been a pause in the Composite Dialogue process.
Government’s expectation that Pakistan acts with purpose
against the perpetrators of the Mumbai attack as also
unearths the wider conspiracy behind the attack has been
conveyed on several occasions, including at the highest
level. India’s concerns were suitably conveyed on
occasions, including in the meeting of Prime Minister
Dr. Manmohan Singh with President of Pakistan
Mr. Asif Ali Zardari on the sidelines of the SCO-BRIC
Summit in Yekaterinburg on 16 June, 2009 and in Prime
Minister’s meeting with the Prime Minister of Pakistan at
Sharm-el-Sheikh on 16 July, 2009 on the sidelines of NAM
Summit. Similar views were also conveyed by External
Affairs Minister in his meetings with the Foreign Minister
of Pakistan on the sidelines of G-8 Outreach meeting on
26 June, 2009 in Trieste (Italy), and later on the sidelines
of UNGA in September 2009 in New York.

Nepal: India continued close consultations with the
Government of Nepal and the major political parties with
a view to support Nepal’s transition to a democratic,
stable, peaceful and prosperous State. As a result of the
extensive interactions and high-level visits, the
bilateral relationship strengthened. At the invitation
of the Prime Minister of India, Prime Minister,
Mr. Madhav Kumar Nepal paid an official visit to India
from 18-22 August, 2009. Earlier, Foreign Minister
Ms. Sujata Koirala visited India from 10-14 August, 2009
and the Defence Minister of Nepal Ms. Bidya Bhandari,
visited in July 2009. Home Minister of Nepal
Mr. Bhim Bahadur Rawal visited India from
18-22 January, 2010. The President of Nepal,
Dr. Ram Baran Yadav, visited India from
15-18 February, 2010 during which four agreements/
MoUs were signed and a concessional line of credit of
US$ 250 million and supply of some food items was
announced. Commerce and Industry Minister of India
(CIM), Shri Anand Sharma visited Nepal from
27-28, October 2009 during which the revised Treaty of
Trade and Agreement of Cooperation to Control
Unauthorized Trade was signed. External Affairs Minister
Shri S. M. Krishna visited Nepal from 15-17 January, 2010
during which he met the senior leadership of Nepal
and signed four MoUs. Former Foreign Secretary
Shri S. Menon visited Nepal from 20-21 June, 2009.
Foreign Secretary Smt. Nirupama Rao visited from
14-15 September, 2009 to exchange views on issues of
mutual interest and implementation of the agenda agreed
during the visit of Prime Minister of Nepal to India in
August 2009. India continued its support to

At India’s invitation, Foreign Secretary level talks
between the two countries were held in New Delhi on
25 February, 2010. This was in the context of
Government’s desire to ensure communication between
the two countries, to address the core concerns relating
to terrorism directed against India, and pending
humanitarian issues.
Despite the terrorist attack on Mumbai and
ongoing investigations into the involvement of
David Coleman Headley and Tahawwur Hussain Rana in
various terrorist acts, including the Mumbai terrorist
attack and continuing cross-border infiltration from
Pakistan and ceasefire violations by Pakistan across the
Line of Control and International Border, people-topeople contacts were allowed to continue. A number of
Pakistani cultural, academic and trade delegations visited
India. Government also facilitated visits to places of
pilgrimage under the Protocol on Visits to Religious
Shrines (1974). India’s bilateral trade with Pakistan in
2008-09 was US$ 1.78 billion. Quantitative studies
estimate that potential for two way trade between India
and Pakistan can exceed its rather unsatisfactory current
level by ten times.
On 1 January, 2010, India and Pakistan exchanged
through diplomatic channels, simultaneously at
New Delhi and Islamabad, the lists of nuclear installations
and facilities covered under the Agreement on the
v

Annual Report 2009 - 2010

the region also continued to develop further. A ‘Festival
of India’ was launched in Indonesia in October 2009, and
a new Indian Cultural Centre was inaugurated in Bangkok
in September 2009.

Prohibition of Attack against Nuclear Installations and
Facilities between India and Pakistan.
Sri Lanka: Relations between India and Sri Lanka
continued to progress in all spheres of bilateral relations.
The momentum of high level interaction was
maintained. President Mahinda Rajapaksa paid a private
visit to India on 31 October, 2009. Prime Minister
Mr. Ratnasiri Wickremanayake visited India in
October 2009 to inaugurate the Pilgrims Rest in Sanchi.
Senior Adviser to President Mahinda Rajapaksa led a
delegation to India in June and later in December 2009.
Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh met the Sri Lankan
Prime Minister on the sidelines of the CHOGM in 2009.
External Affairs Minister Shri S. M. Krishna also met
Foreign Minister Bogollagama on two occasions
in multilateral fora. National Security Adviser
Shri M. K. Narayanan visited Sri Lanka in April 2009
and, subsequently, a 10-member delegation of Members
of Parliament from Tamil Nadu also visited Sri Lanka,
especially the Northern and upcountry areas.

The period witnessed many high level visits. Prominent
incoming visits include that by Vice President of
Vietnam (September-October 2009); Prime Minister of
Australia (November 2009); Prime Minister of Malaysia
(January 2010); Deputy Prime Ministers of Australia
(August 2009), Thailand (October 2009), and Vietnam
(December 2009); & Foreign Ministers of
Australia (October 2009, March 2010) and Thailand
(December 2009). In addition, the King of Tonga
(September 2009), Thai Princess Mahachakri Sirindhorn
(August 2009), Minister Mentor Lee Kuan Yew
(December 2009) and Senior Minister Goh Chok Tong
(March 2010) from Singapore and Secretary of Foreign
Affairs of Phillippines Ramulo (March 2010) also visited
India. From the Indian side, Prime Minister
Dr. Manmohan Singh visited Thailand for the ASEANIndia and EAS Summits in October 2009. External
Affairs Minister Shri S. M. Krishna visited Australia
(August 2009), Thailand (July 2009) and Singapore
(March 2010) for the ASEAN-India & ARF Ministerial
Conferences.

With the end of hostilities there, India has offered all
possible assistance to help in relief, rehabilitation, early
resettlement and longer-term reconstruction of Sri Lanka.
Prime Minister announced an amount of Rs. 500 crores
for relief and rehabilitation. An Indian field hospital
functioned for six months from March-September 2009,
and treated more than 50,000 patients. Indian assistance
also included seven de-mining teams, 5,200 tonnes of
shelter material, 70,000 agricultural packs and taking up
of civil infrastructure like railways etc through Lines of
Credit. India has continued to emphasize that the way
forward lies in a peacefully negotiated political settlement
within the framework of a united Sri Lanka, acceptable
to all the communities in Sri Lanka including the Tamils.

While pursuing efforts of strengthening its relationship
with the region, the Government of India also took serious
note of attacks on Indian community in Australia over
the past few months especially since May 2009. This issue
has been taken up including at the highest levels during
visits of high level dignitaries. Government of Australia
has been formally requested for complete statistics
regarding number of attacks and conviction of perpetrators
at the earliest. The Government of India is closely
following the situation and has issued its latest advisory
on 5 January, 2010 to Indian students studying in Australia
as well as those planning to study there to take certain
basic precautions.

South East Asia and the Pacific
In pursuance of our “Look East” policy, India continued
to improve and consolidate its relations with countries in
the South East Asia and the Pacific. Multi-faceted
relationships continued to develop with the countries in
the region, both in the bilateral and multilateral context.
India’s trade with most of the countries in the region
showed significant improvement during the year despite
the global financial crisis. Operationalization of the IndiaASEAN FTA in Goods on 1 January, 2010 is going to
further boost our economic relations. India attended the
21 Post-Forum Dialogue (PFD) Partners Meeting in
Cairns, Australia (7 August, 2009) after the 40th Pacific
Islands Forum (PIF) Summit meeting there. Defence and
cultural cooperation between India and the countries in

India continued to provide assistance to Cambodia, Laos,
Vietnam and Pacific Island countries in their
development efforts. External Affairs Minister
Shri S. M. Krishna announced an increase in our annual
Grant-in-aid for each of the 14 PIF Countries from
US$ 100,000 to US$ 125,000. India is cooperating
extensively under ITEC partnership programme and has
increased number of scholarship slots for countries of the
region to about 350. Another area of cooperation has been
disaster relief to the countries in the region. India extended
humanitarian assistance to the Philippines in the
aftermath of natural disaster. India’s growing profile has
vi

Introduction and Synopsis

attracted countries in the South East Asia and Pacific
region to bolster closer engagement at the regional and
multilateral for a such as ASEAN, BIMSTEC, EAS, MGC
and ARF.

framework at the Subcabinet/Senior Official level 2+2
dialogue, which was endorsed in the Action Plan.
Bilateral economic relations have vast potential for
growth. During former Prime Minister Abe’s visit in
August 2007, it was agreed to work towards a trade target
of US$ 20 billion by the year 2010. The pace of
investments has picked up in recent years. As many as
627 Japanese companies are operating in India, against
some 300 in 2005. Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) went
up 10-fold last year compared to 2006. Japanese
investment in India stood at US$ 5.22 billion surpassing
its investment in China which was US$ 3.65 billion in
2008, and Japan stands as the sixth largest investor in
India. For the sixth consecutive year India is the single
largest recipient of Japanese Official Development
Assistance (ODA). Cumulative commitment of Japanese
ODA to India up to October 2009 is about Yen 2.9 trillion
(approx. Rs. 113209.77 crores). For FY 2008-09, total
ODA was Yen 236 billion (approx. US$ 2.5 billion or
Rs. 11713 crores) which is an increase of 4.8% over the
previous year and is 30% of Japan’s global ODA.

East Asia
In keeping with India’s “Look East Policy”, strengthening
of bilateral ties with the East Asian countries has been a
foreign policy priority for India. During the year, efforts
were made to sustain the momentum in carrying forward
the steady and qualitative transformation of India’s
relationship with these countries through renewed high
level contacts and exchanges. The highlight was two
Presidential State Visits to India from the region
(Presidents of Mongolia and Republic of Korea visited in
September 2009 and January 2010 respectively), during
which a number of bilateral agreements were concluded
to expand functional cooperation in diverse spheres. A
significant development has been the understanding
reached with major players in the region to transcend
relations beyond the bilateral in developing a coordinated
approach to regional and multilateral issues of common
concern. India is increasingly being looked upon as an
integral part of the emerging architecture in East and
South East Asia.

Republic of Korea (ROK): Indian partnership with ROK
has become perceptibly more intense and diversified in
recent years. A number of high level visits, signing of the
Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement
(CEPA) (August 2009), increasing economic and
commercial interactions and expanding exchanges in the
field of art and culture have been the high points of IndiaROK bilateral ties during the period. India and ROK
exchanged a number of high-level visits during the year.
The ROK Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade,
Mr. Yu Myung-hwan, visited New Delhi on 23 June, 2009,
and held wide-ranging discussions with External Affairs
Minister Shri S. M. Krishna. India-ROK cooperation in
the field of defence and security continued apace. Bilateral
trade between India and ROK showed a 39% growth in
2008, touching US$ 15.56 billion, thus surpassing
the target of US$ 10 billion set by the two countries
to be achieved by the year 2010. ROK President
Lee Myung-bak paid a State visit to India from
24-27 January, 2010. He was Chief Guest at our Republic
Day celebrations this year. While our economic interaction
provides the underpinning for India – ROK relations, our
partnership has also spread to other fields such as science
and technology and space cooperation. Therefore,
India – Republic of Korea relations have been elevated to
a “Strategic Partnership”.

Japan: The momentum of high-level exchanges continued
in 2009. The sharp increase in high-level exchanges has
been accompanied by more broad-based exchanges of
business delegations, parliamentary delegations, and
interactions between provincial and local governments
of both countries. Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh
met with the then Prime Minister of Japan, Mr. Taro Aso,
on 2 April, 2009 on the margins of the G-20 Summit in
London and on 10 July, 2009 on the sidelines of
the G-8 Summit in L’Aquila (Italy). Soon after taking over
as Japan’s Prime Minister following elections on
30 August, 2009, Mr. Yukio Hatoyama met Prime Minister
Dr. Singh in Pittsburgh on 25 September, 2009 on the
sidelines of the G-20 Summit. The two Prime Ministers
had another meeting on the sidelines of the East Asia
Summit in Hua Hin (Thailand) on 24 October, 2009.
External Affairs Minister Shri S. M. Krishna visited Japan
for the third round of Strategic Dialogue on 3 July, 2009.
The Japanese PM Mr. Yukio Hatoyama’s year-end visit to
India provided further impetus to India’s comprehensive
engagement as well as imparted more depth to our
Strategic & Global Partnership. Both Prime Ministers have
committed to enhancing the security cooperation between
India and Japan according to the Action Plan, and to
deepen their discussion through the newly-established

Mongolia: India’s centuries-old friendly and cordial
relationship with Mongolia continued to develop and
diversify further during the year. Bilateral cooperation now
vii

Annual Report 2009 - 2010

covers the fields of defence and security, economy,
education and culture. The two sides exchanged a number
of high level visits during the year. Smt. Preneet Kaur,
Minister of State for External Affairs, visited Mongolia
from 17-19 June, 2009 to represent Government of India
at the swearing-in ceremony of the new Mongolian
President Mr. Ts. Elbegdorj. The newly elected President
of Mongolia paid a State Visit to India from
13-16 September, 2009. During the visit, the two sides
agreed to upgrade the level of bilateral relations to that
of “Comprehensive Partnership”. During the year there
was significant progress in India-Mongolia cooperation
in the field of defence. The fifth India-Mongolia Joint
Military Exercise was held in Mongolia from
14-27 September, 2009. The second India-Mongolia Joint
Cooperation Committee meeting was held at New Delhi
on 11 January, 2010.
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea (DPRK):
Relations between India and Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea (DPRK) continued to be cordial with
a focus on humanitarian and human resource
development assistance. Exchanges in the area of culture,
sports and education continued to make progress during
the year. DPRK; Vice Foreign Minister, Kim Young II
visiting India in August 2009 for the sixth Round of
Foreign Office Consultations.

Eurasia
Significant advances were made in the development of
India’s bilateral relations with Russia, Ukraine, Belarus,
Central Asian and Caucasian countries through landmark
high level visits, conclusion of bilateral agreements,
multilateral and bilateral engagements, development
projects and cultural events. Some of the significant events
during the year were Prime Minister’s visit to the Russian
Federation for the annual Summit (December 2009) and
SCO and BRIC Summits (June 2009), the State visit of
the President of India to the Russian Federation and
Tajikistan (September 2009), the Trilateral Meeting of
Foreign Ministers of India, Russia and China in Bengaluru
(October 2009), and External Affairs Minister’s visits to
Belarus and Turkmenistan (September 2009) and the
Russian Federation and Uzbekistan (October 2009).
India and Russia continued to further strengthen their
multi-faceted strategic partnership. Cooperation in key
areas such as defence, space research, science and
technology, and energy security (including hydrocarbons
and nuclear energy) has intensified. President
Smt. Pratibha Devisingh Patil’s State Visit to Russia from
2-6 September, 2009 was a significant event. During the

visit of Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh to Moscow
from 6-8 December, 2009 for the Annual Summit,
six important agreements were signed apart from the
adoption of a joint declaration on ‘further deepening the
strategic partnership’ that reflects the shared vision of the
two countries on many global issues. The agreements
signed during the visit include (i) Agreement on the
Programme for Military and Technical Cooperation
(MTC) during the period 2011-2020; (ii) Agreement on
After Sales Support for the Russian Arms and Military
Equipment supplied to the Republic of India; (iii) Protocol
to the Agreement on Cooperation in Development and
Production of Multi-Role Transport Aircraft on
12 November, 2007; (iv) Agreement on Cooperation in
Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy (initialed); (v) Programme
of Cultural Exchanges for the Years 2010-12; and
(vi) Dollar Agreement for extension of a Line of Credit
of US$ 100 million by Exim Bank to Vnesheconombank
for boosting export of Indian goods and technology
products to Russia.
Other important Ministerial visits from India
included that of Commerce & Industry Minister
Shri Anand Sharma (29 September-October 2009),
Minister of Petroleum and Natural Gas Shri Murli Deora
(2-6 September, 2009), Defence Minister
Shri A. K. Antony (14-15 October, 2009), and External
Affairs Minister Shri S. M. Krishna (20-22 October, 2009).
From the Russian side, Deputy Prime Minister and
Co-Chair of the India-Russia Inter-Governmental
Commission on Trade, Economic, Scientific,
Technological
and
Cultural
Cooperation
(IRIGC-TEC) Mr. Sergei S. Sobyanin visited India from
9-12 November, 2009 and Foreign Minister
Mr. Sergei Lavrov visited Bengaluru for the ninth
India-Russia-China Trilateral Foreign Ministers Meeting
from 26-27 October, 2009. Deputy Prime
Minister Mr. Sergei S. Sobyanin visited India from
15-16 February, 2010, called on the Prime Minister and
held talks with Shri S. M. Krishna, Co-Chair of the IRIGCTEC in order to prepare for the scheduled visit of Prime
Minister of the Russian Federation Mr. Vladimir Putin in
March 2010. The Year 2009 was celebrated as the “Year
of India in Russia” with the organisation of more than
150 events showcasing Indian art & culture, paintings
and artifacts, achievements in the field of science &
technology etc. in Russia.
During the year, relations with Central Asian Republics
continued to strengthen and were reinforced by high level
visits to Tajikistan, Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan.
President Smt. Pratibha Devisingh Patil paid a State Visit
viii

Introduction and Synopsis

to Tajikistan from 6-8 September, 2009, marking the firstever visit by an Indian Head of State to the Central Asian
region. External Affairs Minister Shri S. M. Krishna visited
Belarus from 16-17 September, 2009 marking the
first-ever visit by an External Affairs Minister of India to
Belarus. External Affairs Minister Shri S. M. Krishna called
on the President of Belarus, Mr. Aleksander Lukashenko
and reviewed bilateral relations with his Belarusian
counterpart. External Affairs Minister Shri Krishna also
paid an official visit to Turkmenistan from
18-19 September, 2009 during which, he called upon the
Turkmen President Mr. Gurbanguly Berdymuhammadov,
and signed a Programme of Cooperation between the two
foreign offices with his Turkmen counterpart. External
Affairs Minister paid an official visit to Uzbekistan from
22-23 October, 2009 where he called on the President of
Uzbekistan, Mr. Islam Karimov and held talks with his
Uzbek counterpart. The first session of the IndiaAzerbaijan Inter-Governmental Commission on Trade,
Economic, Scientific and Technological Cooperation was
held on 26 November, 2009 in New Delhi, co-Chaired
on the Indian side by the MoS for Commerce & Industry,
Shri Jyotiraditya Scindia and on the Azeri side by
Mr. Huseyngulu Bagirov, Minister of Ecology and Natural
Resources. Smt. Preneet Kaur, Minister of State visited
Ashgabat from 8-9 February, 2010 for co-chairing the
third India Turkmenistan Inter Governmental
Commission with Foreign Minister Mr. Rashid Meredov.
She was accompanied by an official and business
delegation. She called on President Gurbanguly Berdimuhammedov during the visit. A joint Protocol was signed
on conclusion of the IGC meeting.

the year. India has successfully bid for oil blocks in Yemen,
Qatar and Oman. Efforts are going on to set up joint
ventures in downstream petrochemicals, fertilizer and
energy intensive industries. India and Qatar signed an
investment agreement in November 2009 to the tune of
US$ 5 billion realizing the investment potential of the
region. Similar understanding with Oman to the tune of
US$ 100 million has been finalized. Investment and
project partnership is the focal point in the year and
second India-Arab investment project conclave was
organized in February 2010 which witnessed nine
ministerial participation and more than twenty business
delegations from the region and beyond.
Gulf region has emerged as our major trading partner after
USA, with annual two-way trade nearing US$ 100 billion
in 2009. UAE emerged as our largest trading partner. The
region collectively hosts the largest expatriate Indian
community exceeding 5 million with remittances
estimated around US $ 30 billion per annum. Nearly
75% of our crude oil requirement is met from this region
which plays a crucial role in our energy security.
India and Gulf have significantly enhanced high level
exchanges leading to better understanding. From the
Indian side, Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh
paid a highly successful visit to Saudi Arabia from
27 February-1 March 2010 at the invitation of their King
during which 10 agreements/MoUs including Extradition
Treaty, Agreement on Transfer of Sentenced Persons, S&T
Cooperation Agreement, Culture as well as on coperations
in outer space etc were signed. The two leaders signed
the landmark Riyadh Declaration which outlines the
countours of cooperation between the two countries. Vice
President Shri Hamid Ansari and External Affairs Minister
Shri S. M. Krishna visited Kuwait in April 2009 and
February 2010 respectively. Finance Minister visited Saudi
Arabia in October 2009 for the Joint Commission
Meeting. MoS for External Affairs Shri Shashi Tharoor
visited Oman (February 2010), UAE and Bahrain
(October 2009) and Yemen (June 2009) leading Indian
delegation to IOR-ARC Conference. Deputy Chairman,
Planning Commission Shri Montek Singh Ahluwalia led
the Indian delegation for the second India-Oman Joint
Working Group in April 2009. Principal Secretary to PM
visited Qatar in November 2009 for the Indo-Qatar Joint
Monitoring Mechanism. Several important visits from the
region also reinforced the bilateral relationships i.e.
Oman’s Minister of Oil and Gas (May 2009); Saudi Trade
Minister (August 2009); UAE Foreign Minister
(June 2009); Bahrain Foreign Minister (February 2010);
Iraq, UAE & Qatar Ministers of Trade (February 2010).

The Ninth Trilateral Meeting of Foreign Ministers of
India, Russia and China was held in Bengaluru on
27 October, 2009. External Affairs Minister, along with
the Russian Foreign Minister Mr. Sergei Lavrov and the
Chinese Foreign Minister Mr. Yang Jiechi, reviewed
trilateral cooperation in various spheres and exchanged
views on global and regional issues.

The Gulf, West Asia and North Africa
India’s relations with the Gulf region (GCC countries,
Yemen and Iraq) were further expanded and strengthened
in political, economic, strategic and cultural arena, tapping
the opportunities for cooperation in trade, investment,
energy and manpower, building partnership through high
level visits, streamlining trade commercial and manpower
framework, establishing institutional linkages in form of
India-GCC political dialogue, strategic dialogue and
consultation mechanism. New emphasis on energy
diplomacy and investment partnership is the highlight of
ix

Annual Report 2009 - 2010

Africa (April 2009); Commerce and Industry Minister,
Shri Anand Sharma’s visit to South Africa (August 2009);
Minister of State (IC) for Science and Technology,
Parliamentary Affairs, Earth Sciences and Personnel and
Training, Shri Prithviraj Chavan‘s visit to Durban,
(October 2009); Minister of State (IC) for Coal, Statistics
and Programme Implementation, Shri Sriprakash Jaiswal’s
visit to Durban (August 2009).

India’s traditionally strong and diverse relations with
countries in the WANA region were further strengthened
in a variety of ways. Sustained political interaction with
the region was exemplified by meetings between the Prime
Minister and the President of Egypt and with the President
of the Palestinian National Authority. Deputy Chairman,
Rajya Sabha, represented India at the 40th anniversary
celebrations of the Great Al Fatah Revolution of Libya.
Various other high-level visits were also exchanged, among
others, with Egypt, Israel, Jordan, Morocco, Palestine,
Sudan and Syria. During the year, India significantly
increased its annual contribution to the United Nations
Relief Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) from US$ 20,000 to US$ 1 million.

Vice-President also visited Zambia, Malawi and
Botswana from 5-11 January, 2010. MoS for External
Affairs Dr. Shashi Tharoor went on bilateral visit to
Mozambique from 13-14 January, 2010. MoS Dr. Tharoor
represented India as an Observer at the African Union
Summit in Addis Ababa (27-30 January, 2010). Joint
Action Plan for the follow-up of the India Africa Forum
Summit 2008 decisions was also discussed with African
Union.

Africa
India’s engagement with Africa continued at a rapid pace
with several incoming and outgoing visits at Ministerial
level. Interactions with African leaders were also held on
the sidelines of major multilateral events. 47 out of the
53 African Union countries have joined the Pan-African
e-Network Project of the Government of India and started
availing the tele-education and tele-medicine facilities.
Lines of Credit for infrastructure development projects
and grants to meet the immediate needs in thrust sectors
of health, education, capacity-building were made
available. African countries continued to avail the ITEC
scholarship slots and the ICCR-sponsored higher
education scholarships. Pursuant to its policy of
encouraging public-private partnership, Ministry has
encouraged simultaneous presence of business delegations
during Ministerial visits to African countries and also
arranged for interaction of visiting foreign government
dignitaries with Indian businessmen through the
commerce and industry bodies. Confederation of Indian
Industry had organized the India-Africa Business
Partnership Conclave in Lagos from 2-4 August, 2009 and
a Business Mission in Nairobi from 5-7 August, 2009.
FICCI organized the “Namaskar Africa” conference and
exhibition in Lagos from 14-15 January, 2010. Trade with
Africa has gone up from US$ 5.5 billion in 2001-02 to
more than US$ 39 billion in 2008-09.

Minister of State for Health & Family Welfare,
Shri Dinesh Trivedi visited Addis Ababa, Ethiopia
(October) & the Speaker of Lok Sabha, Smt Meira Kumar
visited Arusha (Tanzania) from 28 September-6 October.
Prime Minister Dr Manmohan Singh’s meeting with
Dr. Navin Ramgoolam, Prime Minister of the Republic of
Mauritius in Port of Spain in November 2009, on the
margins of CHOGM 2009 and MoS Dr. Shashi Tharoor’s
visit to Mauritius on the 175 th Anniversary event
commemorating the arrival of Indian indentured
labours to Mauritius (1-3 November) were notable events
in bilateral relations. President of Namibia,
Mr. Hifikepunye Pohamba paid a State visit to India
(30 August-3 September 2009) and Mr. Peter Mizengo
Pinda, Prime Minister of Tanzania visited India in
September 2009. Uganda’s Minister of State for Internal
Affairs Mr. Matia Kasaija and Minister of State for
Agriculture Mr. Rwamirama K. Bright, visited India in
June and October 2009 respectively. India participated
in the annual Harare International Festival for Arts
(HIFA) held in Harare (Zimbabwe) from 1-6 May, 2009.
Prof. W. Ncube, Minister of Commerce & Industry of
Zambia visited India from 3-4 September, 2009 for
participating in the Informal Ministerial Meeting on the
Doha Round of WTO negotiations.

During the year, India opened resident Missions in Bamako
(Mali) and Niamey (Niger).

Europe

Shri Mohammad Hamid Ansari, Vice President of India,
represented India at the inauguration ceremony of
Dr. Jacob Zuma as the President of South Africa in
May 2009. Other important visits from India to South
Africa included: Parliamentary delegation’s visit led by
Shri Karia Munda, Deputy Speaker of Lok Sabha to South

India-EU strategic partnership received fresh
impetus during the year with the successful conclusion of
the 10 th India-EU Summit held in New Delhi on
6 November, 2009 under the Swedish Presidency of the
EU. At the delegation level talks both sides reviewed
bilateral relations in the context of the India-EU Strategic
x

Introduction and Synopsis

Partnership and reviewed multilateral issues of mutual
interest such as international terrorism, climate change,
international financial crisis, etc. A Joint Statement issued
at the end of the Summit, reflects the ongoing close
cooperation between India and EU in diverse areas of
mutual interest including trade & investment, science &
technology, education, civil nuclear energy, renewable
energy, space, culture, security etc. There is also very good
cooperation at the bilateral level in diverse areas with a
number of individual Member States of the EU.

for Human Resource Development and other high level
officials, business delegates and media persons, paid a State
visit to Cyprus from 29-31 October, 2009. An
Indian Parliamentary Delegation led by Speaker of the
Lok Sabha, Smt. Meira Kumar visited Austria from
14-17 September, 2009. External Affairs Minister
Shri S. M. Krishna visited Prague from 28-30 June, 2009
to attend the India-EU Ministerial Troika.
Danish Prime Minister Mr. Lars Lokke Rasmussen paid a
one day Working Visit to India on 11 September, 2009 as
Host of the COP15 and met Prime Minister
Dr. Manmohan Singh. Foreign Minister of Lithuania,
Mr. Vygaudas Usackas, accompanied by Economy
Minister Mr. Dainius Kreivys, visited India from
2-5 December, 2009. Foreign Minister of Hungary,
Dr. Peter Balazs, paid an official visit to India from
17-21 January, 2010 when he had extensive talks with
External Affairs Minister Shri S. M.Krishna. Deputy Prime
Minister and Foreign Minister of Malta, Dr. Tonio Borg,
paid an official visit to India from 6-11 January, 2010 and
held discussions with MoS for External Affairs
Smt. Preneet Kaur and EAM.

The President Smt. Pratibha Devisingh Patil paid a State
Visit to UK at the invitation of the Queen of UK in
October 2009. She also made a first ever State Visit to
Spain in April 2009. Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh
visited France in July 2009 as the Chief Guest at the
French National Day celebrations. The Prime Minister
had interactions with the leaders of UK, France, Germany
and Italy on the sidelines of multilateral events like
G-20 (April & September 2009), G8 (July 2009) and
CHOGM (November 2009). Speaker of the Lok Sabha,
Smt. Meira Kumar participated in the G8/G5 Speakers’
Conference in Rome in September 2009. Former President
Dr. A. P. J. Kalam visited Ireland in June 2009.

President of India Smt. Pratibha Devisingh Patil paid a
State visit to Poland from 23-26 April, 2009 accompanied
by MoS Dr. Ashwani Kumar. President of Iceland,
Dr. Olafur Ragnar Grimsson paid a State visit to India
from 11-17 January, 2010 during which he was also
conferred the Jawaharlal Nehru Award for International
Understanding for 2007. The Turkish President
Mr. Abdullah Gul along with a large business delegation
visited India from 7-11 February, 2010. Swedish Prime
Minister Frederick Reinfeldt accompanied by Foreign
Minister Carl Bildt, Trade Minister Ewa Björling, and a
business delegation visited India from 5-6 November, 2009
for the bilateral and India-EU Summit meetings. Minister
of Commerce and Industry, Shri Anand Sharma,
accompanied by an 18-member high powered official
and business delegation visited Sweden from
15-16 September, 2009. Dr. M. S. Gill, Minister for Youth
Affairs & Sports paid an official visit to Switzerland from
8-17 August, 2009 & a four member delegation led by
the Minister of Textiles, Shri Dayanidhi Maran, visited
Switzerland from 25-28 October. Minister of Commerce
and Industry Shri Anand Sharma visited Ankara from
7-8 September, 2009, to take part in the Ninth session of
Joint Committee for Economic and Technical Cooperation
(JCETC) held on 8 September, 2009. Finance Minister
Shri Pranab Mukherjee attended the Annual Meeting of
IMF in Istanbul from 2-7 October, 2009.

Other Ministerial level visits and senior official level visits
took place during the year and contributed to the bilateral
ties. Parliamentary exchanges and civil society dialogue
between India and EU countries remained vibrant.
Business-to-business level interactions were engaged
fruitfully during the year.
Incoming high-level visits during the year included the
visit of the German President Horst Koehler in February
2010 and the Crown Prince and Princess of Spain in
November 2009.
There is a substantial Indian Diaspora in EU Member
States. In recognition of this fact, a mini Pravasi Bhartiya
Diwas (PBD) was held in The Hague in September 2009.
India’s relations with the Nordic countries and countries
of Central and Eastern Europe have been traditionally
friendly and cordial. Our engagement with these countries
seeks to be built on mutual strengths for the benefit of
our peoples. Thus our interaction with Central and
Eastern Europe countries has achieved good progress in
S&T field. With Nordic countries India has focused in
cooperation in ship building, telecommunications and IT
sector, power sector and environment related
technologies.
Smt. Pratibha Devisingh Patil, President of India,
accompanied by Smt. D. Purandeswari, Minister of State
xi

Annual Report 2009 - 2010

The Americas

Bilateral Investment Promotion Agreement, and a Joint
Study Group to look into the conclusion of a Free Trade
Agreement. Several other proposals were initiated
that would strengthen the economic, political and
people-to-people linkages between the two nations. The
visit of Prime Minister Mr. Stephen Harper to India
(from 15-18 November, 2009) was a milestone in bilateral
relations. During the visit commonalities between the two
countries and shared values and interests were built upon
to expand the bilateral agenda and enhance cooperation
in areas of shared priority. Two MoUs were signed in the
presence of the two Prime Ministers. In April 2009,
Deputy
Chairman,
Planning
Commission,
Dr. M. S. Ahluwalia led an Inter-Ministerial delegation
to participate in the Canada India Energy Forum hosted
in Toronto by the Canada India Foundation from
15-17 April, 2009. Mr. Gerald Keddy, Parliamentary
Secretary to Canadian Minister of International
Trade visited India from 1-5 September, 2009 to
inaugurate Canadian Zonal Trade office in Kolkata &
Mr. Stockwell Day, Canadian Minister of International
Trade, visited Ahmedabad on 25 September, 2009 to
inaugurate Canada’s Trade office in that city.

USA: The warm relationship between India and the USA
was further strengthened and the engagement broadened
and intensified in a number of areas of shared interests at
the bilateral, regional and global level. Although 2009
was a year when newly elected Governments were
installed in both countries - the world’s oldest and largest
democracies, concerted efforts were made by the new
Administration in the USA and the UPA Government in
its second term in India, to ensure that the transition was
marked by continuity and intensification of the bilateral
relationship. Both new Governments reaffirmed their
strong commitment to strengthening the existing
economic and political partnerships and take them to a
higher level of cooperation for mutual benefit. In
July 2009, during the visit of US Secretary of State
Ms. Hillary Clinton to India, both governments
announced their new Strategic Dialogue. At the Summit
meeting in November 2009 in Washington, Prime Minister
Dr. Manmohan Singh and President Barack Obama
decided to embark on a new phase in the global strategic
partnership between India and the United States.
High level contacts between India and the US
continued during the period. External Affairs Minister
Shri S. M. Krishna met the Secretary of State
Ms. Clinton in September 2009 on the sidelines of the
UNGA in New York. Home Minister Shri P. Chidambaram
and National Security Advisor Shri M. K. Narayanan
visited the US in September and October 2009
respectively. Commerce and Industry Minister
Shri Anand Sharma visited Washington in June 2009 to
attend the 34th anniversary of the US-India Business
Council. High level visits from the US side to India
included that of US Under Secretary for Political Affairs
Mr. William Burns (October 2009) and of US Trade
Representative Ambassador Ron Kirk (September 2009).

Latin America and Caribbean: Our engagement with
Latin American and Caribbean countries which constitute
40 countries and dependent territories continued to be
broad based during the year. The multi-sectoral dialogue
with the region was active with a number of summit level
and ministerial level interactions during the year. Prime
Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh visited Trinidad & Tobago
for the CHOGM Summit from 27-29 November, 2009
and held bilateral consultations with several HoS/HoGs.
He met with President Lula of Brazil at the BRIC Summit
on 16 September, 2009 in Moscow and also on the
sidelines of G-20 Summit in Pittsburg from
24-25 September, 2009. External Affairs Minister
Shri S. M. Krishna visited Brazil from
31 August-1 September 2009 for IBSA Ministerial and
for a Bilateral Joint Commission Meeting. President of
Argentina, Dr. Cristina de Fernandez Kirchner paid a state
visit to India from 13-14 October, 2009. The Colombian
Foreign Minister Mr. Jaime Bermudez accompanied
by the Commerce, Trade and Tourism Minister
Mr. Guillermo Plata paid an official visit to India from
10-11 November, 2009.

The Indo-US bilateral trade in goods and services
stood at US$ 69.4 billion in 2008. During the period,
January-October 2009, India-US bilateral trade in goods
stood at US$ 31.5 billion. India exported goods worth
US$ 17.6 billion to the US and imported goods worth
US$ 13.9 billion from USA during January-October 2009.
India exported IT and IT enabled services worth
US$ 28.3 billion in 2009. The US is one of the leading
foreign investors in India. In other areas like nuclear
energy, defence, education and high technology, both
countries have expanded their areas of cooperation with
new thrust areas added.

In all, a total of 14 agreements/MoUs were signed with
the countries in the region during the year. Bilateral trade
touched a record US$ 15.63 billion between India and
LAC region during 2008-09, which accounts for
3.25% of India’s total external trade. The total Indian

With Canada, as well, important initiatives were pursued
through the year such as a Civil Nuclear Agreement, a
xii

Introduction and Synopsis

investments in the region, so far, either invested or
committed to invest, is around US$ 11 billion. Indian
business/industry associations, such as CII and FICCI have
held series of business seminars to promote Indian trade
and investments in the region. As part of our ‘Focus LAC’
initiative the extended Lines of Credit continue to be
available to countries in the region to support
infrastructure projects in the region. IT Centres were set
up in Costa Rica and Ecuador and a total of 416 ITEC
scholarships were announced for the countries in the
region to assist them in their capacity building initiatives.
In the wake of massive earthquake which struck Haiti on
12 January, 2010, Government of India expressed its full
support and cooperation to Haiti for its reconstruction.
India has made a cash contribution of US$ 5 million to
Haiti for emergency relief purposes. Minister of State
Dr. Shashi Tharoor visited Haiti on 26 January, 2010 to
personally convey our sympathies to the people and
Government of Haiti. During the year, we have
also extended humanitarian assistance to the tune of
US$ 1.55 million to Ecuador, El Salvador, St. Lucia and
Guatemala to help them to overcome disasters caused by
natural calamities. As part of our cultural outreach
programme, a series of cultural events, film festivals,
seminars, conferences and food festivals were organized
by the missions in the region either independently or with
the support of Indian Council for Cultural Relations
(ICCR).

United Nations and International
Organizations
India attaches importance to the centrality of the United
Nations in multilateralism. India continued to press for
reform of the UN to make it more representative and
democratic to enhance its credibility and effectiveness.
The efforts for reform focussed on revitalization of the
General Assembly, reform and expansion of the Security
Council, reform of the Economic and Social Council
(ECOSOC), restoring the central role of the UN with
regard to international development issues, and better
management of peacekeeping and post-conflict peace
building processes. In addition, India stressed on
enhancing global cooperation against terrorism through
universal implementation of the UN Global Counter
terrorism strategy and early conclusion of negotiations on
Comprehensive Convention on International Terrorism.
India continued to maintain its position as the third largest
troop contributor to the UN Peacekeeping missions with
around 8,760 military personnel deployed with nine
missions.

External Affairs Minister Shri S. M. Krishna led the official
Indian delegation to the high-level segment of the
64th session of the UN General Assembly (UNGA) in
New York from 20-27 September, 2009. Minister of State
for External Affairs Smt. Preneet Kaur visited New
York from 19-26 October, 2009 to participate in the
64 th UNGA Session. Minister of State for External
AffairsDr. Shashi Tharoor visited New York from
11-20 October, 2009 to attend the UNGA Session.
Non Aligned Movement: As a founder member of the
Non-Aligned Movement, India remains strongly
committed to its ideals and principles. Prime Minister
Dr. Manmohan Singh participated in the fifteenth
Summit of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) in
Sharm-el-Sheikh, Egypt from 15-16 July, 2009. External
Affairs Minister Shri S. M. Krishna attended the NAM
Ministerial meeting held from 13-14 July, 2009 just before
the NAM Summit. Shri E. Ahamed, the then MoS of
State for External Affairs, led the Indian participation in
the Ministerial Meeting of the NAM Coordinating Bureau
held in Havana, Cuba from 29-30 April, 2009 to prepare
for the NAM Summit.
Commonwealth: Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh
led the Indian delegation to the Commonwealth Heads
of Government Meeting (CHOGM) held in Port of Spain,
Trinidad and Tobago, from 27-29 November, 2009.
External Affairs Minister Shri S. M. Krishna took part in
the pre-CHOGM Foreign Ministers meeting held in Port
of Spain from 25-26 November, 2009. During the
CHOGM 2009, Prime Minister announced several new
initiatives by India including additional 250 slots for
training for the Commonwealth countries under India’s
ITEC programme, a Diplomatic Training Module for
Commonwealth countries, contribution to newly
established Commonwealth Small States Joint Office in
Geneva, doubling of India’s contribution to the
Commonwealth Media Development Fund, financial
support for Commonwealth Partnership Platform Portal,
establishment of a post of a Sports Development Adviser
in the Commonwealth Secretariat, support for
Commonwealth Secretary General’s initiative to convene
a network of National Elections Commissions. In addition,
the Government of India released commemorative stamps
and coins to mark 2009 as the 60th anniversary year of
the creation of the Modern Commonwealth.
Social and Economic Issues: The 2009 substantive
session of the Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC)
was held in Geneva from 6-30 July, 2009. Minister of State
for External Affairs Smt. Preneet Kaur, led the Indian
delegation to the Ministerial segment of this session. India
xiii

Annual Report 2009 - 2010

hosted a high-level global conference on “Climate
Change: Technology Development and Transfer” from
22-23 October, 2009 in New Delhi in collaboration with
the United Nations. External Affairs Minister
Shri S. M. Krishna attended a high level Event on Climate
Change, “Summit on Climate Change”, hosted by the UN
Secretary General on the sidelines of the UN General
Assembly in New York on 22 September, 2009. Indian
delegation comprising officials, Parliamentarians, civil
society members and youth attended the 15th meeting of
Conference of Parties (COP-15) on climate change
held at Copenhagen from 7-18 December, 2009. The
high-level segment of the conference, held from
16-18 December, 2009 and participated by Heads of
States/Governments of almost 120 countries, was
attended by Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh.
In addition, India actively participated in a number of
major international forums like Human Rights Council,
Commission on the Status of Women, Global Forum
Migration and Development, United Nations Commission
on International Trade Law and Inter-Parliamentary
Union.

South Asian Association of Regional
Cooperation (SAARC)
The role of SAARC in the promotion of regional
cooperation is poised to expand substantially in the near
future. With the active engagement of the Member States
in strengthening institutions within SAARC and funding
its various activities, the organization is expected to
witness a slew of new and vibrant regional institutions
taking shape – the South Asian University and the
SAARC Museum of Textiles and Handicrafts in
New Delhi, the SAARC Regional Standards Organization
in Dhaka, SAARC Arbitration Council in Pakistan, the
SAARC Development Fund Secretariat in Thimphu, the
SAARC Cultural Centre in Sri Lanka, etc.
This growth in SAARC activity is also going to be
supplemented by regional and sub-regional projects
funded and implemented under the aegis of the SAARC
Development Fund. The process of building new regional
institutions and strengthening existing ones will have a
positive impact on the future of SAARC as an organization
committed to the economic betterment of the people of
the South Asian region.
India’s asymmetric and non-reciprocal approach in
pursuing regional cooperation in SAARC has
strengthened intra-regional cooperation. It has helped
bring development cooperation directly to the grass-roots

transforming SAARC from declaratory phase to
implementation phase.

Disarmament & International Security
Affairs
India continued to reaffirm global non-discriminatory and
verifiable nuclear disarmament as one of the highest
priorities for the international community. India supported
the adoption of a Programme of Work, including
negotiations on a Fissile Material Cut-off Treaty, in the
Conference on Disarmament. At the 64th UN General
Assembly in New York, India reiterated its proposal for a
Nuclear Weapons Convention banning the development,
production, stockpiling and use of nuclear weapons and
providing for their complete elimination within a specified
time frame. During the year, India participated
constructively in multilateral meetings on disarmament
including those related to the Biological Weapons
Convention, the Chemical Weapons Convention and the
Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons. India also
participated actively in the meetings of the ASEAN
Regional Forum and the Conference on Interaction and
Confidence Building Measures in Asia. Regular contacts
were maintained with think tanks and non-governmental
organizations in the field of disarmament to articulate
India’s views

Multilateral Economic Relations
India’s multilateral economic engagement further widened
and deepened during the year as the global economic and
financial crisis, food security and Climate Change
continued to occupy the focus of discussions in
multilateral fora. Highlights of this year’s multilateral
engagements was Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh’s
participation in the G-8 Outreach Summit in Italy
(July 2009), the first formal Summit of the Leaders of
Brazil, Russia, India and China (BRIC) in Russia
(June 2009), India-ASEAN Summit and in the East Asia
Summit (October 2009).
Continuing with our constructive engagement with the
G-8, India participated at Minister or Secretary level
in various Ministerial meetings in the run-up to the
G-8 & G-5 Outreach Summit including the Meeting on
Afghanistan, Meeting of Labour Ministers, Agriculture
Ministers, Environment Ministers, Energy Ministers and
the Conference of G8 and Outreach Ministers on
Destabilizing Factors and Trans-national Threats.
Engagement with key regional groupings such as IndiaASEAN, East Asia Summit, BIMSTEC, IBSA, MGC,
ACD, ASEM, G-15, IOR-ARC and others also
xiv

Introduction and Synopsis

consolidated during the year. Major Ministerial meetings
attended by India include those under the format of IndiaASEAN, East Asia Summit, BRIC, IBSA, BIMSTEC
(Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multi-sectoral Technical and
Economic Cooperation), G-5 (Brazil, China, India,
Mexico and South Africa), ASEM (Asia Europe Meeting),
ACD (Asia Cooperation Dialogue) and IOR-ARC (Indian
Ocean Rim – Association for Regional Cooperation).
India took over as Vice-Chair of IOR-ARC in 2009.

studies, crime records, etc. Defence personnel from Laos,
Lesotho, Seychelles, Zambia, Ethiopia and Mongolia were
also trained in India under this programme.

Investment and Technology Promotion
(ITP)
Economic Diplomacy continued to occupy an important
place in India’s foreign policy, especially in the aftermath
of the global economic crisis. Additional funds to the tune
of Rs. 9.09 crores were allocated to our Missions to enable
them to respond more effectively to the growing demands
of Indian industry and take advantage of trade and
investment opportunities by undertaking market
expansion activities including market surveys, seminars,
workshops, buyer seller meets, industry interactions, etc.

During the year, India continued to engage proactively
and participate regularly in various G-20 meetings. Prime
Minister attended the G-20 London Summit in April 2009
and the G-20 Pittsburgh Summit in September 2009. The
G-20 Summits focused on issues relating to the
international financial and economic crisis. The Pittsburgh
Summit also designated the G-20 as the ‘premier forum’
for international economic cooperation.

Concessional Lines of Credit (LOCs) worth
US$ 1132.22 million were extended to 21 developing
countries during April 2009-February 2010, conveying our
sincere commitment to the economic development and
capacity building of our partner developing countries in
Africa, Latin America and Asia. These LOCs have helped
in supporting projects in the infrastructure sector and
exports of goods and services to untapped markets, thereby
generating tremendous amount of goodwill for the country.
A sum of Rs. 5 crores has been set aside to assist developing
countries, lacking technical expertise, in preparation of
feasibility reports for undertaking projects under LOCs.

In the context of global economic and financial crisis,
apart from G20, India was also actively engaged in the
meetings of BRIC Finance Ministers to coordinate
positions with Brazil, Russia and China on this important
global issue.
India’s hosting, in September 2009, of the WTO
Ministerial Conference to develop a broad-based
consensus to remove the impediments coming in the way
of multilateral discussions and to provide clear directions
to negotiators to re-energize the multilateral process at
the WTO was another important milestone during the
year.

The Ministry worked closely with other Government
Departments on policy matters concerning reforms and
liberalization, and investment and trade. Information on
the Indian economy was widely disseminated through the
Ministry’s website www.indiainbusiness.nic.in.

Technical & Economic Cooperation and
Development Partnership
The Indian Technical and Economic Cooperation (ITEC)
Programme and the Special Commonwealth Assistance
for Africa Programme (SCAAP) have been recognized as
an important component of India’s development
partnership and cooperation with the developing world.
The usefulness and relevance of these cooperative
interactions in different countries was reflected in the
increasing number of participants in the ITEC programme
which has indeed acquired a brand name in the developing
world. Demand-driven and response-oriented, ITEC is
today a major component and dynamic part of India’s
bilateral assistance programme manifesting itself in diverse
areas of cooperation. Around 5000 civilian training slots
were allotted during 2009-10 to 158 developing countries
in areas of interest and advantage to them. Training was
imparted to participants from public and private sectors
in areas such as finance & accounts, audit, banking,
education, planning & administration, parliamentary

Energy Security
The Ministry’s Energy Security unit has been upgraded
into a full-fledged Energy Security Division. During the
period, this new thematic division provided inputs to
articulate India’s position on energy security matters in
various multilateral fora like the UNGA, G-20, NAM,
BRIC, ASEM, etc. The division also facilitated India’s
membership of the International Renewable Energy
Agency and the International Partnership for Energy
Efficiency and Cooperation (IPEEC), and guided the
engagement with the International Energy Agency. As
the nodal point in MEA for energy matters the Division
maintained close coordination with the energy line
ministries and supported their international engagements
on energy issues. The Energy Security Division also
coordinated with country’s various stakeholders including
the private sectors on energy security issues.
xv

Annual Report 2009 - 2010

Protocol
There were 95 visits (73 incoming and 22 outgoing) during
the April 2009-March 2010 period at the level of Head of
State, Vice President, Head of Government and Foreign
Minister. Three countries (Burundi, Gambia and Georgia)
opened resident missions during this period bringing the
total number of resident missions in New Delhi to 140.
Opening of new Consulates General in Mumbai were
approved for Ethiopia and New Zealand in 2009. Five
countries got permission to open trade offices and
nineteen were granted permission to open honorary
consulates in Indian metro cities. Honorary Consul of
Hungary in Mumbai and Honorary Consul of Ireland in
Bengaluru were upgraded to Honorary Consul Generals
in January and February 2010 respectively. 157 new posts
were created by foreign missions and international
organisations in the period April 2009-February 2010. The
keen interest evinced in India as witnessed in the large
numbers of VVIP visits; opening of new missions,
consulates, and trade offices; as well as the creation of
numerous additional posts by diplomatic missions – was
reflective of India’s active and multifaceted engagement
with the world.

Consular, Passports and Visa Services
During the year 2009, our 37 Passport offices issued
50.28 lakh Passports. The total revenue generated
through Passport and Visa services during the period
April 2009-20 January 2010 are Rs.685.5 crores &
Rs. 924.41 crores respectively.
Some of the important steps to make the passport issuance
system simpler and speedier included, decentralisation
through District Passport Cells and Speed Post Centers,
on-line receipt of application, addition of some new
buildings at Bhubaneshwar and Vishakhapatnam,
centralised printing of passports, strengthening of the
public grievance redressal system, Facilitation Counters
and help desks, Passport Adalats to address the grievances
and the careful implementation of RTI.
During the period, 2659 Diplomatic and 22594 official
passport and 7173 visas were issued to foreign diplomatic
and official passport holders. During the year,
3,17,078 personal and educational documents
and 2,27,625 other documents were attested.
1,24,661 documents were apostilled for use abroad by
apostilled member countries.
New projects included issuance of e- passports, Passport
Sewa Project, outsourcing of visa work and the launch of
‘Apostille Convention Project’. Extradition Treaty was

signed with Kazakhastan. A visa-waiver agreement with
Namibia was also signed.

Coordination Division
Coordination Division functioned as nodal point of the
Ministry for all work relating to Parliament interaction
with other Ministries, Departments, State Government
offices, Union Territories and Autonomous bodies.
During the period, the Division issued 2706 political
clearances for visits against 2539 issued in 2008. It also
issued 996 clearances for foreign non-scheduled flights
against 971 issued during 2008. The Division also
processed a large number of requests for participation of
Indian sports teams abroad, grant of Padma Awards to
foreign nationals and also assisted Ministry of Defence
for the forthcoming “DEFEXPO INDIA – 2010” to be
organized by them in February 2010. No objections to
1345 foreign applicants were also granted to pursue various
courses in India.

Administration & Establishment
There are 173 resident Indian missions and posts abroad.
During the period under report, three new missions at
Bamako (Mali), Niamey (Niger) and Guatemala City
(Guatemala) were opened.
To streamline the administrative machinery, efforts were
made to decentralize decision making and simplify and
improve the rules regulations and procedures. This also
included liberalizing certain rules and adding some more
concessions. Recruitments were also made through
method of Direct Recruitment, Departmental Promotions
and Limited Departmental Examination (LDE) including
against reserved vacancies.
As regards propagation of Hindi abroad with the
involvement of missions, Hindi Books, Teaching materials
and software were supplied to about 70 Missions/Posts,
Hindi magazines were supplied to 100 Missions/Posts and
financial support was provided to our Mission/Posts in
Belarus, Sri Lanka, South Africa, Ireland, Suriname
Vietnam and Hungary. Parliament committee on Official
Language visited RPOs in Vishakhapatnam, Chennai,
Pune, Surat and Ghaziabad. Works related to this
inspection were coordinated by Hindi Section of the
Ministry.
Annual review of the foreign allowance under the
indexation scheme was undertaken in coordination with
Ministry of Finance and a new system of “compensatory
allowance” was introduced. New MEA housing complex
with 100 housing units at Chanakyapuri was made
xvi

Introduction and Synopsis

operational and renovation of MEA hostels at K. G. Marg
and Gole Market was partly completed.
During the period, construction work for the Indian
Embassy Complex in Muscat and Tokyo (Embassy
Residence and other Residences) were completed.
Construction on major projects such as Chancery and/or
Residences in Kabul, Kathmandu, Beijing, London,
Islamabad, Singapore and Budapest are making progress.

E-Governance & Information Technology
During the year, computerization of Passport and visa
services at Indian Missions & Posts at Kuwait, Toronto,
Madrid and outsourcing of Visa and Passport services at
Embassy of India, Moscow, and Vancouver were
completed.

RTI
A total of 804 applications under the RTI Act, 2005 have
been received by the Ministry during the period
April-December 2009. Applications covered subjects such
as administration, personal grievances, Haj pilgrimage,
Kailash-Mansarover Yatra, Gulf War compensations,
foreign policy, economic issues etc. Out of these
applications, 238 appeals have been filed by the applicants
to the Appellate Authority of the Ministry during the same
period.

Public Diplomacy
The mandate of this Division includes, inter-alia, outreach
activities in India and abroad and production of
audio-visual and print material that enables our Missions
to project India more effectively. To achieve its objectives,
the Division organizes seminars, conferences and briefings
for and in association with civil society, NGOs,
think-tanks, research and academic institutions and
business and industry on strategic and foreign policy issues.
Other outreach activities for the year under report
included two delegation visits from the UK of ‘Friends of
India’ Group of the Conservative Party and another
of Liberal Democratic Friends of India Group, a
delegation from the Slovenia Parliamentary Group, a visit
by Professor Sudharshan Iyengar, Vice Chancellor Gujarat
Vidhyapeeth to Slovenia, celebration of the International
Day of Non-Violence by Indian Missions abroad and the
ongoing research project on “Indo-GCC relations”
organized by the Gulf Research Centre, Dubai.
The Division also continued to facilitate participation in
film festivals and Indian film weeks and organized cultural
and photo exhibitions. Several documentaries have been

commissioned and are being completed. The Ministry’s
flagship publication ‘India Perspectives’ is being improved
and expanded and the Division has continued to produce
and acquire books for use by our Missions.

Indian Council for Cultural Relations
(ICCR)
ICCR is mandated for establishing, reviving and
strengthening cultural relations and mutual understanding
between India and the outside world. With its
headquarters in Delhi, fourteen regional offices in India
and a number of cultural centers abroad, the activities of
the Council also include administration of scholarship
schemes for oversees students and facilitating their
admissions in Indian universities. During the past year,
the Council offered 2226 new scholarships including
675 scholarships for Afghan students and 526 from
African countries. In addition to maintaining nineteen
long term chairs to teach Indian languages and social
sciences with focus on India, the Council is also
maintaining eleven rotating/short term chairs in various
countries.
ICCR sponsored the visits of foreign performing artistes
to India including troupes from Switzerland, Malaysia,
Mauritius, USA, Pakistan, UK, Uzbekistan, Sri Lanka,
Spain, Egypt, Tanzania, Paraguay, Brazil, Iran, Colombia,
Portugal, Poland, Trinidad & Tobago and Venezuela. The
Council also sponsored visits of Indian artistes / troops to
various countries abroad. The Council collaborated in the
holding of various conferences and seminars, organized
cultural weeks and interactive sessions of famous poets in
various cities and assisted various organizations and
prominent institutes such as IIT, JNU, Delhi University,
Allahabad University, Jamia Milia in organizing
International conferences in India.
Festivals of India organized by the ICCR include “The
Year of India in Russia”, “Festival of India in Argentina”,
and “Festival of India in Indonesia”.

Indian Council of World Affairs (ICWA)
The Indian Council of World Affairs (ICWA) continued
to develop as a think tank, and as an important platform
for debate and discussion on foreign affairs. Throughout
the year, the ICWA was engaged in seminars and
conferences relating to India’s core foreign policy interests,
and in visits and lectures by eminent foreign dignitaries.
Nine foreign dignitaries visited Sapru House and
addressed large gatherings of strategic experts, academics,
ex-diplomats and media representatives on vital foreign
policy issues. These discussions resulted in ICWA

xvii

Annual Report 2009 - 2010

beginning to come out with papers on useful subjects.
Research work on India’s relations with countries in its
immediate neighborhood was given a pre-eminent
emphasis, and ICWA’s new Research team in place since
August 2009 has begun work on important issues. ICWA
also organized and participated in seminars in India and
abroad, and the academic exchanges is resulted in an
enhancement of the profile of the institution as an
‘institute of national importance’. Seven bilateral strategic
dialogues with partners abroad were conducted with
institutions of repute internationally. A major
international conference to revive the spirit of the ‘Asian
Relations Conference’ was conducted in Delhi during
November 2009, and was attended by scholars from all
over the world. ICWA consolidated its participation in
the activities of Council for Security Cooperation in the
Asia Pacific (CSCAP). ICWA also worked to
comprehensively renovate the Sapru House premises – a
heritage building constructed/established under the
encouragement of the country’s first Prime Minister Pt.
Jawahar Lal Nehru over fifty five years ago. Efforts will
continue at re-establishing the ICWA as the country’s
lead think-tank on foreign policy issues.

Research and Information System (RIS)
Research and Information System for Developing
Countries (RIS) is an autonomous think-tank under the
Ministry specialising in international economic relations
and development cooperations. It has the mandate to
function as an advisory body to the government on matters
pertaining to multilateral economic and social issues.
During the period RIS prepared major research studies to
assist NAM Summit, East Asia Summit (EAS), SAARC
Summit, IBSA Summit, BIMSTEC Summit UNCTAD
Ministerial Conferences and WTO Ministerial
Conferences. RIS has been engaged in the Track II process
of several regional initiatives, including the Track-II Study
Group of Comprehensive Economic Partnership in East
Asia (CEPEA). Among the important meetings and
negotiations for which RIS conducted research studies
and provided inputs to policy makers during the reporting
period are the ASEAN-India Free Trade Agreement,
CEPEA, Asian Cooperation Dialogue, SAARC, ChiangMai Initiative and EAS, IOR-ARC, Joint Study Group
for Comprehensive Economic Cooperation with
Indonesia, New Zealand and Australia and the
Heiligendamn Process. RIS has been actively engaged in
the regional network of think-tanks in which the
organization has been nominated as India’s focal point.
These include the Economic Research Institute for
ASEAN and East Asia (ERIA) and the BIMSTEC

Network of think tanks. RIS also organized a number of
Policy Dialogue, Conferences and Symposia. A major
event organized by RIS was the South Asia Economic
Summit, which brought together the leading policy
research institutions in South Asia to deliberate on the
prospects of deepening and widening South Asian regional
integration.

MEA Library
The Ministry’s Library has over 100,000 books, rich
resource materials and a large collection of maps,
microfilms and official documents. A library committee
manages library activities including purchase of books and
subscription of journals. All kind of library operations and
services including documentation and bibliographic
services have been computerized. Books, maps, microfilms,
selected articles from journals are being fed on a regular
basis in the database on foreign affairs. Library regularly
prepares and issues Foreign Affairs Documentation
Bulletin, Recent Additions, Chronicle of Events, Article
Alert, Book Alert and e-mail services.

External Publicity
External Publicity Division continued to articulate the
views/positions of the Government of India on various
national and international issues through interaction with
Indian and international media. Division’s main activities
focused on dissemination of information on India’s
relations with its immediate neighbours as also with key
countries of the world. Following the terrorist attacks on
26/11 at Mumbai, a sustained publicity drive to project
India’s concern on terrorists emanating from across the
border was undertaken.
Press coverage of both incoming and outgoing VVIP visits
was facilitated. The opportunity was also used to highlight
India’s position on bilateral, regional and international
issues. The Division continued to liaise with national and
international media for regular briefings on major issues.
The official spokesperson disseminated information on
day-to-day developments relating to the conduct of India’s
foreign policy, and arranged regular media briefings duly
supplemented by press releases, briefing points and
statements.
The Division also took initiatives on revamping of MEA
website, updating of Hindi Section of Ministry’s website,
making arrangements with ANI to post Urdu translations
of MEA press releases, launching of India-Africa Connect
Website, organizing familiarization visits by foreign
journalists, producing documentaries and films, organizing
training, workshops, conferences and special events and

xviii

Introduction and Synopsis

publishing a compact and colourful handbook on general
elections.

Policy Planning and Research
The main activities of the Policy Planning and Research
Division included processing of research projects and
studies relating to Foreign Policy and global affairs;
preparation/updating of database of think tanks, research
bodies, universities etc. dealing with subjects related to
India’s foreign policy and international affairs; interaction
with the University Grants Commission (UGC) and its
affiliates and the area study centers of different
universities, specializing in research on different regions
of the world. The “Annual Report” for 2008-2009 was
also prepared and circulated.
During the past year, one major activity of the Division
was the organization of Heads of Missions (HoMs)
Conference in August 2009 which was attended by about
120 Ambassadors and High Commissioners. The Policy
Planning Division has also co-coordinated and monitored
the establishment of the Institute of Foreign Policy Studies
in the Calcutta University which has been established
with the financial assistance of the Ministry of External
Affairs.

The Policy Planning and Research Division also supervised
the work of the Situation Room and Boundary Cell.
During the year, the Situation Room established video
conferencing facilities in our missions at Permanent
Mission of India, New York, Embassy of India, Washington
and Embassy of India, Moscow and initiated work for these
facilities at High Commission of India, Male, Permanent
Mission of India, Geneva and Consulate General of India,
Shanghai.

Foreign Service Institute
The Foreign Service Institute conducted training
programmes for the Indian Foreign Service (IFS)
Probationers, officers and staff of the Ministry of External
Affairs, officers from Cabinet Secretariat and other
Ministries/Departments as well as for foreign diplomats.
The first and second mandatory mid-career training
programmes for JS-level officers and email-based
mid-career training programmes for Director-level officers
were carried out during the year. A media training
programme and a one-day Right to Information Course
for officers of the Ministry were also held. Three Special
Courses for diplomats from Maldives, Afghanistan and
ASEAN, and two Professional Courses for Foreign
Diplomats (PCFDs) were also organised.

xix

India’s Neighbours

Afghanistan

1

was told by the Afghan leaders that the attack was carried
out by elements from outside Afghanistan seeking to
damage the excellent relations that exist between India
and Afghanistan. Government of India is in constant
touch with the Government of Afghanistan regarding the
safety and security of Indian nationals in Afghanistan.

I

ndia and Afghanistan continued their close and friendly
relationship in 2009-10. India remained actively
engaged in the task of reconstruction and development
of Afghanistan. Spanning almost the entire gamut of
economic and social developmental activities, our bilateral
assistance to Afghanistan crossed US$ 1.3 billion
(as against a pledge of US$ 1.2 billion). This assistance
has been substantially enhanced by a 35% increase
(to 675) in the number of annual scholarships for Afghan
students attending Indian colleges, and a similar increase
(from 500 to 675) in the training slots for Afghan nationals
in India.

There was a terrorist attack on the morning of
26 February, 2010 in Kabul targeting residential facilities,
used mainly by Indian nationals. Six Indians, including
one officer each of Army Medical Corps and Army
Education Corps (AEC), engaged in medical and
humanitarian work, one employee each of the Indian
Consulates General in Herat and Kandahar, a member of
an ICCR-sponsored visiting cultural troupe and a senior
official of Power Grid Corporation of Indian Limited fell
victim the same day. One more officer of AEC succumbed
to his injuries later (3 March). The injured and mortal
remains of the deceased were airlifted on 27 February by
a special Indian Air Force flight. President of Afghanistan
Hamid Karzai conveyed telephonically his condolence to
Prime Minister on 27 February and promised full
investigation into the attack. PM requested President
Karzai to ensure security for Indian nationals
in Afghanistan. Foreign Minister of Afghanistan
Mr. Zalmay Rassoul called External Affairs Minister on
26 February condemned the terrorist attack and assured
that increased security measures would be taken for the
safety of Indian nationals in Afghanistan. EAM deeply
condoled the loss of lives in the attack and underlined
that Government of India would not be deterred by such
attacks.

Despite daunting logistical and security challenges, the
construction of a 220 KV Transmission Line from
Pul-e-Khumri to Kabul together with substation in
Chimtala was completed, a project of importance for the
provision of electricity to the residents of Kabul.
Construction of Afghanistan’s new Parliament building,
seen as a symbol of the common commitment of both our
countries to pluralism and democracy, is also progressing.
Other Indian projects in a range of areas such as agriculture,
rural development, education, health, vocational training,
capacity building and humanitarian assistance are all
progressing satisfactorily. Our support to the reconstruction
effort in Afghanistan has been widely appreciated by the
people all across Afghanistan, and which is built on the
historical and cultural ties that link the two countries. This
was underlined by a recent Gallup survey of Afghan
attitudes released recently. When asked what role different
groups or countries were playing in resolving the situation
in Afghanistan, a majority of respondents in the survey
mentioned India’s role in reconstruction.

Foreign Minister of Afghanistan Mr. Rangin Dadfar Spanta
visited India from 26-27 July, 2009. He called on the
Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh and met
External Affairs Minister Shri S. M. Krishna and NSA
Shri M. K. Narayanan. It was decided during the visit to
establish an India-Afghanistan Partnership Council
composed of separate groups on political consultation,
capacity development and education, power and water,

There was a terrorist attack targeting the Indian Embassy
in Kabul on 8 October, 2009 which killed at least
seventeen Afghans. Two ITBP personnel suffered shrapnel
injuries. Foreign Secretary Smt. Nirupama Rao visited
Kabul immediately after the blast and met President
Karzai, Foreign Minister Spanta and other leaders. She
1

Annual Report 2009 - 2010

Shri
Pranab
Mukherjee,
Home
Minister
Shri P. Chidambaram, External Affairs Minister
Shri S. M. Krishna and the Leader of Opposition
Shri L. K. Advani called on the visiting Prime Minister.
A Joint Communiqué outlining major areas of cooperation
was issued during the visit. India has agreed to provide a
Line of Credit of US$ 1 billion to support infrastructure
projects in Bangladesh including in the areas of railway
infrastructure, supply of locomotives, coaches, buses and
dredging. Both countries agreed to facilitate the access to
Chittagong and Mongla ports, inclusion of Ashuganj and
Silghat as ports of call under the Inland Water Transit
and Trade Protocol, construction of the Agartala-Akhaura
rail link, operationalize land customs stations at SabroomRamgarh and Demagiri-Thegamukh and establish border
haats including on the Meghalaya border. India agreed to
provide 250 MW of power to Bangladesh to help it address
the energy crisis as well as develop inter grid connectivity.
India also agreed to the electrification of Dahagram and
Angarpota as a humanitarian gesture. The two sides signed
Agreement on Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal
Matters, Agreement on Combating International
Terrorism, Organized Crime and Illicit Drug Trafficking
and Agreement on Transfer of Sentenced Persons. An
MoU on Cooperation in Power Sector and a Cultural
Exchange Programme was also signed during the visit.

culture, trade and industry, health, and agriculture, to
harness greater institutional support for the
implementation of ongoing programmes and enlarge
development cooperation between the two countries.
External Affairs Minister attended President Karzai’s
Inauguration Ceremony in Kabul on 19 November, 2009
for a fresh term in office as President of the Islamic
Republic of Afghanistan. In his inaugural address,
President Karzai mentioned that Afghanistan enjoys a
strategic relationship with India and also referred to our
bilateral assistance and the large number of Afghan
students studying in India. India reiterated its
determination to fulfil its commitments to the Afghan
people and government as they build a peaceful,
democratic and pluralistic Afghanistan.
Following US President Obama’s speech on the review of
his country’s Af-Pak strategy on 1 December, 2009 India
welcomed the emphasis on the strengthening of the
Government of Afghanistan and Afghan security forces.
India also welcomed President Obama’s reiteration of the
need to squarely tackle terrorism, and for Pakistan to ensure
that terrorists do not enjoy safe havens on its territory.
An International Conference on Afghanistan, co-hosted
by the United Nations, the Government of Afghanistan
and the UK Government, was held in London on
28 January, 2010. External Affairs Minister led the Indian
delegation for the Conference. The Communiqué adopted
after the Conference underlined the international
community’s long-term commitment to Afghanistan and
its support for the Government of Afghanistan, and the
security, development and governance of the country. It
was agreed that the London Conference would be followed
by a Conference in Kabul, hosted by the Government of
Afghanistan, later this year.

High level of ministerial and official contacts between the
two governments took place during the year. Foreign
Secretary Shri Shiv Shankar Menon visited Dhaka from
12-13 April, 2009. Minister of State for External Affairs
Smt. Preneet Kaur met Bangladesh Foreign Minister
Dr. Dipu Moni in New York in June 2009. Later
Bangladesh Foreign Minister and Adviser to Bangladesh
PM met External Affairs Minister and Finance Minister
on 9 July, 2009 during a stopover in New Delhi on their
way to Colombo. PM had a bilateral meeting with
Bangladesh PM on 15 July, 2009 in Sharm-el-Sheikh
(Egypt) on the sidelines of the NAM Summit and later
on the sidelines of CHOGM in November 2009 in Port of
Spain. Bangladesh Foreign Minister Dr. Dipu Moni visited
India from 7-10 September, 2009. During the visit, she
held talks with Minister of External Affairs on entire
gamut of bilateral relations. The two sides identified
priority areas of cooperation in range of areas including
trade facilitation, connectivity, transit, power etc. Both
sides agreed and reiterated their commitment to
strengthen bilateral cooperation in the field of counter
terrorism. Dr. Dipu Moni also called on the PM, Minister

Bangladesh
Bilateral relations between India and Bangladesh acquired
new momentum, following formation of the Grand
Alliance Government, led by Prime Minister
Sheikh Hasina in January 2009. India continued to engage
the Government of Bangladesh on all important bilateral
issues.
A significant development was the State visit of Prime
Minister Sheikh Hasina to India from 10-13 January, 2010.
She called on the President and held talks with
PM on a wide range of issues. Finance Minister
2

Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan, Dr. Rangin Dadfar Spanta,
calling on the Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh, in New Delhi on 27 July, 2009.

Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh meeting the Prime Minister of Bangladesh, Ms. Sheikh Hasina,
in New Delhi on 11 January, 2010.

3

Annual Report 2009 - 2010

India in January 2010. Its first meeting was held on
12 January, 2010 in New Delhi.

of Finance, Minister for Water Resources and
Parliamentary Affairs Shri Pawan Kumar Bansal. Foreign
Secretary Smt. Nirupama Rao was in Dhaka from
14-15 November, 2009 to review progress with her
counterpart. She called on the Prime Minister of
Bangladesh. Union Minister of Agriculture & Consumer
Affairs Shri Sharad Pawar visited Dhaka from
7-10 January, 2010. These high level interactions ensured
that both sides had regular exchange of views on issues of
bilateral importance.

The 11 th Meeting of the Standing Committee under
Protocol on Inland Water Transit and Trade (IWTT) was
held in New Delhi in October 2009. An Inter
Governmental Railway Meeting between India and
Bangladesh was held in May 2009 in New Delhi.
Secretaries of Water Resources met in January 2010 to
discuss water related issues including sharing of Teesta
waters and humanitarian water related issues. The third
Technical Level Meeting on Water Related Issues between
India and Bangladesh was held on 5-6 December, 2009 in
Dhaka. India and Bangladesh also met in January 2010
to discuss arbitration proceedings on the maritime
boundary issues under Annex VII of the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS).

India continued to emphasize its security concerns to
Bangladesh, especially the use of Bangladeshi territory by
Indian Insurgent Groups (IIGs) and terrorists. The
bilateral Home Secretary-level talks in New Delhi took
place from 30 November-2 December 2009.The last
DG-level border coordination conference of the respective
border security forces was held from 11-14 July, 2009. Both
sides discussed a range of issues relating to security,
terrorism and border management and agreed to
strengthen joint efforts to prevent trans-border crimes.

During the year 2009, people to people contacts between
the two countries expanded through promotion of
exchanges in the field of culture. These included musical,
dance and theatre performances; holding of art exhibitions
and workshops and training in Yoga, Hindustani classical
vocal music, Manipuri Indian classical dance by Indian
teachers sent on deputation to Bangladesh by Indian
Council for Cultural Relations (ICCR). Both India and
Bangladesh have decided to jointly celebrate the
150th birth anniversary of Rabindranath Tagore in 2011.
ICCR’s Culture Centre will be inaugurated on
11 March, 2010 in Dhaka.

The bilateral merchandise trade has been growing steadily
over the last few years. During the FY 2007-08, the
Bangladesh imports to India stood at US$ 3273.70 million
and exports stood at US$ 358.08 million. During the FY
2008-2009, Bangladesh’s imports from India were to the
tune of US$ 2841.06 million, about 13% of Bangladesh’s
global imports. Bangladesh’s exports to India stood at
US$ 276.58 million.

Bangladesh is an important ITEC partner country. A total
of 100 slots have been provided for participants from
Bangladesh in 2009-10 under ITEC Programme and
Technical Cooperation Scheme of Colombo Plan. In order
to promote people to people exchanges, 100 scholarships
are granted by ICCR every year to students from
Bangladesh for pursuing general courses in arts, sciences,
engineering and also specialized courses for culture, drama,
music, fine arts, sports etc. During the visit of PM Sheikh
Hasina to India in January 2010, India agreed to offer
300 scholarships to Bangladesh students annually for study
and training in Universities and training institutions in
India, covering a wide range of disciplines.

Many unilateral initiatives have been taken to assist the
export of Bangladeshi products to India, including
agreement to export construction bricks to Tripura worth
US$ 28 million. To facilitate trade, Belonia-Feni LCS has
been opened in October 2009. The JWG on Trade met in
August 2009 to discuss aspects relating to trade in which
matters relating to para-tariff and non-tariff barriers faced
by business community of both countries were discussed.
India promised to upgrade Bangladesh Standard Testing
Institute and also help in capacity building. The sixth
meeting of the Joint Groups of Customs took place on
11-12 February, 2010 in New Delhi. The two sides
discussed issues relating to cooperation in the field of
customs, capacity building etc.

Bhutan

The second joint steering committee meeting on
cooperation in the power sector met on 19 February, 2010
in Dhaka to discuss implementation of the MoU on Power
Cooperation signed during the visit of Bangladesh PM to

India and Bhutan enjoy close and friendly relationship
that is based on trust, understanding, mutual benefit and
well-being. During the year, there were several high-level
visits from both sides. Bilateral interaction encompasses
4

Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh
shaking hands with the Chinese Premier,
Mr. Wen Jiabao, on the sidelines of
7th India-ASEAN Summit,
in Thailand, on 24 October, 2009.

President, Smt. Pratibha Devisingh Patil and the Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh at the ceremonial reception of the
King of Bhutan, HM Jigme Khesar Namgyel Wangchuck, at Rashtrapati Bhavan, in New Delhi on 22 December, 2009.

5

Annual Report 2009 - 2010

trust, cooperation and deep understanding that mark the
bilateral relations between India and Bhutan. Discussions
covered issues of mutual interest, bilateral cooperation,
including cooperation in the hydropower sector, IT,
health, civil aviation etc. and regional and multilateral
issues.

the areas of hydro-power, transport, communications,
infrastructure, health, education, IT, industry, medicine
and agriculture.
High-level visits from Bhutan include the visit of Prime
Minister of Bhutan Mr. Lyonchen Jigmi Y. Thinley to India
in June-July 2009. High-level visits from India to
Bhutan include visits by External Affairs Minister
Shri S. M. Krishna (June 2009), Home Minister
Shri P. Chidambaram (August 2009), Minister of
Parliamentary Affairs & Water Resources
Shri Pawan Kumar Bansal (October 2009), Chief
Information Commissioner Shri Wajahat Habibullah
(May 2009), the Special Envoy of the Prime Minister,
Shri Shyam Saran (July 2009), Foreign Secretary,
Smt. Nirupama Rao (September 2009), the Comptroller
& Auditor general, Shri Vinod Rai (September 2009) and
Chief Election Commissioner, Shri Navin Chawla
(October 2009).

Twelve Agreements/MoUs were signed between the two
countries during the visit. Our Prime Minister committed
Government of India assistance of Rs. 25 crores for the
victims of the September 2009 earthquake in Bhutan.
During the visit, the King of Bhutan inaugurated a photo
exhibition – “Bhutan: An Eye to History” – profiling
Indo-Bhutan relations at the National Gallery of Modern
Arts and delivered the Madhavrao Scindia Memorial
Lecture on “Changing Times and Timeless Values”.
The Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Royal Government
of Bhutan, Lyonpo Ugyen Tshering, visited Kolkata on
17 December, 2009, to inaugurate the Royal Bhutan
Consulate in Kolkata along with the Governor of West
Bengal coinciding with the 102nd National Day of Bhutan.

The Prime Minister of the Royal Government of Bhutan
(RGoB) Lyonchen Jigmi Y. Thinley visited India from
28 June-3 July 2009. Bilateral discussions during the visit
covered various facets of Indo-Bhutan relations and
measures to further enhance the relationship. Regional
and international issues and the forthcoming 16th SAARC
Summit in Thimphu in April 2010 were also discussed.
While expressing sympathy for the loss of lives and
property from the flash floods in Bhutan, the Prime
Minister of India, Dr. Manmohan Singh, as a gesture of
solidarity, extended assistance worth Rs. 10 crores to the
victims of the flash floods.

The Minister of Economic Affairs of the Royal
Government of Bhutan, Lyonpo Khandu Wangchuk,
visited India from 4-8 January, 2010 for the Seventh
Meeting of the Punatsangchhu-I Hydropower Authority.
The Implementation Agreements of two new hydropower
projects in Bhutan – Mangdechhu and Punatsangchhu
were finalized during the visit.
External Affairs Minister of India Shri S. M. Krishna,
visited Bhutan from 18-19 June, 2009. This was his first
official visit abroad after assuming office. During the visit,
EAM had extensive exchange of views with the Bhutanese
leadership and with his Bhutanese counterpart, jointly
inaugurated the Paro -Bagdogra Druk Air flight
and launched the Nehru-Wangchuck Scholarship
Programme.

On the invitation of the President of India, the King of
Bhutan Jigme Khesar Namgyel Wangchuck, paid a State
Visit to India from 21-26 December, 2009. The King of
Bhutan was accompanied by Mr. Ugyen Tshering, Foreign
Minister, Mr. Khandu Wangchuk, Minister of Economic
Affairs, and other officials of the Royal Government.
This was the first State Visit of the King of Bhutan
to a foreign country since his formal coronation in
November 2008.

Home Minister Shri P. Chidambaram visited Bhutan from
21-24 August, 2009. During his visit, issues related to
mutual security concerns were discussed.
The Special Envoy of the Prime Minister of India on
Climate Change, Shri Shyam Saran, visited Bhutan from
27-31 July, 2009, during which he discussed the possible
agenda and activities for the forthcoming SAARC Summit
in Bhutan, which has Climate Change as its central theme.

While in India, the King of Bhutan met with the President
of India. The Vice President of India, the Prime Minister,
the Chairperson of the UPA, the Finance Minister, the
External Affairs Minister, the Home Minister, the Leader
of the Opposition, the National Security Advisor and the
Foreign Secretary called on him. All the meetings were
very friendly, warm and cordial, reflecting the spirit of

Foreign Secretary Smt. Nirupama Rao, visited Bhutan
from 12-14 September, 2009. This was her first visit abroad
6

India’s Neighbours

since assuming charge as Foreign Secretary. She had wide
ranging discussions on issues of mutual interest.

from India, Bangladesh, Nepal, Bhutan and Sri Lanka
participated in the fair. From India, the Indian Trade
Promotion Organization (ITPO) arranged the
participation of about 40 Indian companies including
TATA Motors, BHEL, L&T, HCC, various Handicrafts
and Textile SMEs in the fair.

Shri Pawan Kumar Bansal, Minister of Parliamentary
Affairs and Water Resources, attended the International
Conference on ‘Deepening and Sustaining Democracy in
Asia’ in October 2009, Chief Election Commissioner,
Shri Navin Chawla, visited Bhutan in October 2009,
Comptroller and Auditor General, Shri Vinod Rai, visited
Bhutan in September 2009, Chief Information
Commissioner Shri Wajahat Habibullah, visited Bhutan
in May 2009 and the National Security Advisor to
Prime Minister Shri M. K. Narayanan, visited Bhutan in
November 2009.

People’s Republic of China
The year saw continuing high-level engagement with
China, including meetings on the sidelines of major
international and regional events. Prime Minister
Dr. Manmohan Singh met Chinese President
Mr. Hu Jintao in Yekaterinburg on 15 June, 2009 on the
sidelines of the SCO/BRIC Summit. Prime Minister and
the Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao had a meeting in Hua
Hin, Thailand on the margins of the East Asia/ASEAN
Summit in October 2009. The Minister for External
Affairs Shri S. M. Krishna met the Chinese
Foreign Minister Mr. Yang Jiechi at Phuket (Thailand)
on 22 July, 2009 on the margins of the East Asia Summit
Ministerial Meeting, and thereafter in Bengaluru on
27 October, 2009 on the sidelines of the Russia-IndiaChina (RIC) Trilateral Foreign Ministers meeting. During
these meetings, there was fruitful exchange of views and
the leaders agreed to continue and strengthen efforts to
build mutual political trust and understanding in the spirit
of the Strategic and Cooperative Partnership between the
two countries. The leaders also underlined the immense
scope for bilateral relations and congruence emerging on
global issues facing the two countries, such as the creation
of a new global architecture, climate change, strategies
which support development in other words sustainable
development and the new global financial order.

The biannual Indo-Bhutan Joint Working Group on
Border Security and Management meeting was held from
8-9 September, 2009 in Thimphu. Secretary (Border
Management), Government of India, led the Indian
delegation.
India continues to be the largest trade and development
partner of Bhutan. The Government of India committed
assistance worth Rs. 3400 crores during the 10th Five Year
Plan (FYP). This includes Project tied Assistance
(Rs. 2000 crore for 65 projects in key socio-economic
sectors), Programme Grant (Rs 700 crore) and the Small
Development Projects (Rs 700 crore). Some of the
important projects being executed under the 10th Plan
include construction of Supreme Court building,
strengthening of Constitutional Offices such as Royal
Audit Authority, Election Commission, Anti-Corruption
Commission and Attorney General, renovation of major
Dzongs, preparation of DPRs for major power projects,
widening of major roads, E-governance, scholarships and
expansion of tertiary educational institutions.

The 13th Round of India-China Special Representatives
Talks on the Boundary Question between the National
Security Advisor, Shri M. K. Narayanan and the Chinese
State Councillor Dai Bingguo was held in New Delhi from
7-8 August, 2009. The two Special Representatives
continued discussions on a framework for the settlement
of the boundary question. The leadership of the two
countries has on various occasions expressed satisfaction
at the progress being made by the Special Representatives
towards a fair, reasonable and mutually acceptable
solution. Both sides have declared that an early settlement
of the boundary question will advance the basic interests
of the two countries and shall, therefore, be pursued as a
strategic objective. Meanwhile, in accordance with the
relevant agreements signed in 1993, 1996 and 2005, peace

The Government of India has agreed to provide assistance
to Bhutan in developing the hydropower sector and to
purchase at least 10,000 MW of power from Bhutan by
2020. For this purpose, ten hydropower projects have been
identified by the two countries.
India provided technical expertise and services of
specialists to Bhutan in various fields as well as
scholarships and capacity development to a number of
Bhutanese students and officials. Under the 10th Plan, the
undergraduate slots have been increased to 85 per year
and postgraduate to 77.
The Ninth SAARC Trade Fair was organized in Thimphu
from 11-14 September, 2009. More than 150 companies
7

Annual Report 2009 - 2010

and tranquillity continues to be maintained in the border
areas thereby creating an enabling environment for
making progress on discussions on the boundary
settlement.

on Trans-Border Rivers was held in Beijing from
21-25 April, 2009. The two countries had fruitful
exchange of views on matters of regional and international
interest under the Policy Planning Dialogue held on
9 October, 2009 in New Delhi.

China is now India’s largest trading partner. Bilateral trade
in 2008 stood at US$ 51.8 billion, registering a 34% growth
over 2007. According to Chinese Customs statistics, in
the period from January-October 2009, trade reached
US$ 34.30 billion, trade deficit standing at
US$ 12.84 billion. In the backdrop of global economic
recession, trade volume fell 26.52% over the
corresponding figure in 2008. The growth in the trade
deficit with China is a matter of concern for India, and
this issue has been flagged to the Chinese leadership at
the highest level. Chinese Premier has assured Prime
Minister that efforts would be made to ensure that more
Indian products enter China. Commerce and Industry
Minister, Shri Anand Sharma led the Indian delegation
to the Eighth meeting of the India-China Joint Economic
Group (JEG) that was held in Beijing on 19 January, 2010.
The JEG discussed this issue among other matters of
mutual concern.

With convergence of interest on issues such as Doha
Round of WTO negotiations, climate change, global
financial crisis etc., both countries have continued to
interact constructively on global issues. High-level
meetings on the sidelines of regional and multilateral
conferences also continued to be a significant feature of
the relationship. Both sides also interact at various
regional forums such as the East Asia Summit,
ASEAN-India Summit, RIC, SCO etc., as members and
observers.
Highlight of cooperation in other functional areas were:
Former Chairman of Atomic Energy Commission,
Dr. Anil Kakodkar attended the International
Ministerial Conference on Nuclear Energy organized
in Beijing from 20-22 April, 2009 by the IAEA. The
event was hosted by the Chinese government
through the China Atomic Energy Authority, and
co-sponsored by the Nuclear Energy Agency of the
OECD and the China Nuclear Energy Association.

Border trade across Nathu La, Lipulekh Pass and Shipki La
was resumed in 2009 after the temporary restrictions
imposed by the Chinese authorities in connection with
the Beijing Olympics and Paralympics in 2008.

The then Minister of State for Youth Affairs &
Sports Shri Arun Yadav led the fourth 100-member
youth delegation to China from 15-24 June, 2009.
The fourth Chinese Youth Delegation led by
Mr. He Junke, Vice President of the All China
Youth Federation visited India from
19-28 November, 2009.

Defence cooperation between India and China
maintained a healthy momentum during the year. The
Chief of Naval Staff attended the International Fleet
Review 2009 at Qingdao from 21-24 April, 2009. Indian
participation included guided missile destroyers
INS Mumbai and INS Ranveer, the guided missile corvette
INS Khanjar and the tanker INS Jyoti. Chinese “Shenzhen”
Missile Destroyer made port call at the Kochi port from
8-11 August, 2009. The Deputy Chief of General Staff of
the People’s Liberation Army of China visited India in
December 2009. The Defence Secretary led a high level
Indian delegation for the third Annual Defence Dialogue
held in Beijing on 6 January, 2010.

Minister of State for Environment and Forests
Shri Jairam Ramesh visited Beijing from
24-27 August, 2009 and held consultations with
China on Climate Change issues in run up to the
Copenhagen Conference in December 2009. He also
visited China from 27-28 November, 2009 to attend
the meeting of the BASIC countries, during which
he called on Chinese Premier Mr. Wen Jiabao.

The institutional dialogue mechanisms between India and
China covering a wide range of issues showed a steady
progress during the year. The second round of Consular
Talks between the two countries took place in Beijing on
5 March, 2009. The discussions focused on various
outstanding bilateral, consular and visa matters. The
third meeting of the India-China Expert Level Mechanism

Under the exchange programme institutionalized in
2004 between the Ministry of External Affairs and
the International Liaison Department of the
Communist Party of China (MEA-ILD programme),
the Karnataka Chief Minister Shri B. S. Yeddyurappa
visited China in September 2009.
8

President of Maldives, Mr. Mohamad Nasheed meeting the Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh,
in New Delhi on 22 October, 2009.

Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh at the delegation level talks with the
Prime Minister of Nepal, Shri Madhav Kumar Nepal, in New Delhi on 19 August, 2009.

9

Annual Report 2009 - 2010

The Minister for Petroleum and Natural Gas,
Shri Murli Deora visited China in October 2009 to
attend the SCO Head of Government Council
Meeting.

sectors. The Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of
Maldives Mr. Abdullah Saeed also visited India from
19-23 September, 2009 and participated in the Regional
Conference on International Trade Law and Legal Aspects
of Trans Border Investment, New Delhi. During the visit,
Chief Justice Abdullah Saeed also met with the Minister
of Law and Justice and the Chief Justice of India.

The Sichuan Party Secretary Liu Qibao visited India
in November 2009, during which he called on the
External Affairs Minister in New Delhi and had a
meeting with the Chief Minister of Karnataka in
Bengaluru.

Defence Minister paid an official visit to Maldives from
20-22 August, 2009. Both the countries identified various
areas of cooperation, including enhancing cooperation in
the area of coastal security and maritime surveillance.
During this visit Defence Minister had called on the
President of Maldives and the Vice President
Dr. Mohamed Waheed Hassan Manik. Defence Minister
had met the Defence Minister of Maldives. He also called
on President of Maldives and the Vice President
Dr. Mohamed Waheed Hassan Manik. The National
Security Adviser led a high level delegation from India to
Maldives from 29-30 June, 2009. The delegation held wide
range discussions with the President of Maldives and other
senior Ministers.

Maldives
The bilateral relations between India and the Maldives
continued to be close and friendly. Both the countries
remained engaged in further strengthening this
relationship through high-level exchanges.
Mr. Mohamed Nasheed, President of the Republic of
Maldives visited India in October 2009 at the invitation
of Prime Minister as the Guest of Honour at the
‘Delhi High Level Conference on Climate Change:
Technology Development and Transfer’ held from
22-23 October, 2009.

Foreign
Secretary
visited
Maldives
from
22-25 January, 2010. During the visit, Foreign Secretary
Smt. Nirupama Rao met the Foreign Minister of Maldives
and reviewed the state of bilateral relations. She also called
on the President of Maldives. She also visited the
Hanimadhoo Island where GMR is involved in setting up
the Airport.

At the invitation of Vice President of India
Shri Hamid Mohamed Ansari Vice President of
Maldives Dr. Mohamed Waheed visited India from
18-24 February, 2010. During the visit Dr. Waheed called
on the President of India Smt. Pratibha Devi Singh Patil
and the Vice President and met External Affairs Minister
Shri S. M. Krishna. The visit further strengthened friendly
relations between India and Maldives.

Mr. Mohamed Shihab, Minister of Home Affairs of
Maldives visited India from 3-8 February, 2010. During
his visit, Mr. Shihab met the Union Home Minister and
visited some police related institutions. The Chief of Army
Staff visited Maldives from 11-14 February, 2010.

Dr. Ahmed Shahid, Foreign Minister of Maldives visited
India on an official visit from 27-30 July, 2009. He met
the Minister of External Affairs Shri S. M. Krishna on
28 July, 2009 and both the leaders reviewed the state of
bilateral relations between the two countries.
Mr. Ibrahim Hussain Zaki, Special Envoy of the President
of the Republic of Maldives visited India from
22-24 April, 2009. During his visit Mr. Zaki had called on
the National Security Adviser Shri M. K. Narayanan,
Foreign Secretary Shri Shiv Shankar Menon and
Shri Shyam Saran, Special Envoy of the Prime Minister.
Mr. Zaki again visited India in August, 2009 when he met
the National Security Adviser. Minister of Defence and
National Security Ameen Faisal visited India from
27-31 October, 2009. During the visit Mr. Faisal met the
Defence Minister and other senior Indian defence officials.
The discussions between the two sides focused on ways
to expand the bilateral cooperation in various defence

India also continued to provide assistance in development
efforts of Maldives. A team of experts from India visited
Maldives from 6-11 July, 2009 and held discussions with
Maldivian authorities on the setting up of a Police
Academy in Maldives. India also continued to provide
training facilities to Maldives nationals in both civil and
security related areas.
The Director General of Health Services, Ministry of
Health and Family Welfare had led the Indian delegation
to the First Meeting of Joint Committee on Indira Gandhi
Memorial Hospital (IGMH), Male held in Male from
9-11 August, 2009. The Joint Committee agreed on a
number of measures to improve upon the services being
10

India’s Neighbours

provided by the IGMH. This includes deputing medical
specialists from India, providing medical consumables and
equipment, providing assistance in renovation of the
existing IGMH structure etc.

presented by teams sponsored by ICCR, Lambada music
show by Indian artistes and film festival. The Grand Finale
of the Friendship Week on 21 August, 2009 was
inaugurated by President of Maldives Mohamed Nasheed
in the presence of Vice President Dr. Mohamed Waheed
Hassan Manik and several Cabinet Ministers and senior
functionaries of the Government of Maldives.

The Indo-Maldivian troops joint exercise “EKUVERIN”
were conducted from 18-30 October, 2009 at the
Rohideshwar Camp off Belgaum city. The Maldivian
Defence Minister Mr. Ameen Faisal witnessed the mock
drill on the final day.

The India-Maldives Literary Society was inaugurated on
25 June, 2009 by the Tourism Minister of Maldives
Dr. Ahmed Ali Sawaad. The High Commission also
presented over 150 books to the National Library towards
the opening of an ‘Indian Corner’ at the National
Library.

India-Maldives Joint Coast Guard Exercises, DOSTI-X
were held at/off Male from 1-4 December, 2009. The
Director General of Indian Coast Guard visited Maldives
in December 2009 to coincide with the holding of the
above exercises.

A five member Maldivian Rock Band was sponsored by
ICCR for the third edition of the South Asian Bands
festival held at Purana Qila, New Delhi from
11-13 December, 2009.

Economic and Commercial ties also continued to widen
and deepen between the two countries. Bilateral trade
touched Rs.578 crores in the first ten months of year
2008-2009 marking a growth of more than 50 percent
over the corresponding period in the previous year. In
December 2009, State Bank of India (SBI), Male
subscribed to the entire issue of US$ 100 million Treasury
bonds issued by the Maldivian Monetary Authority
(MMA).

Myanmar
India-Myanmar relations are rooted in shared historical,
ethnic, cultural and religious ties. India and Myanmar
share a long land border of over 1640 km and a maritime
boundary in the Bay of Bengal. Moreover, Myanmar being
the only ASEAN Country having border with India, is an
important link between India and South East Asia.

During the year, a lot of Indian private companies also
showed interest to undertake investment projects in
Maldives. In November 2009, three Indian companies
namely GMR Infrastructure Global Limited, Suzlon
Energy and Sri Educare Pvt. Ltd. signed agreements with
the Maldivian government in the field of infrastructure,
clean energy and education respectively.

The
momentum
of
bilateral
interaction
and visits continued during the year. External Affairs
Minister Shri S. M. Krishna visited Myanmar from
10-11 December, 2009 to attend the 12th BIMSTEC
Ministerial Meeting at Nay Pyi Taw. During the visit, EAM
called on Myanmar Prime Minister General Thein Sein
to discuss bilateral matters.

India-Maldives Friendship Week: As part of the
celebrations of the 63 rd Independence Day, the
‘India-Maldives Friendship Week’ was organized by the
Mission in collaboration with the India Club, Ministry of
Tourism, Arts and Culture of Maldives and the Ministry
of Foreign Affairs of Maldives from 12-21 August, 2009.
On 12 August, a seminar on ‘Socio -political
transformation: Future of Culture in Changing Societies’
was held in which three eminent speakers from India
sponsored by the Indian Council of World Affairs delivered
lectures. Vice President Dr. Mohamed Waheed Hassan
Manik formally inaugurated the Friendship Week on
14 August, 2009. Other activities in connection with the
Friendship Week included cultural programmes, Walk for
Peace and Friendship, Food festival, Inter-school Painting
competition, Essay competition, music and dance shows

At the invitation of Minister for Heavy Industry
Shri Vilasrao Deshmukh, Myanmar Minister for Industry
No. (2) Vice Admiral Soe Thane visited India from
19-23 December, 2009. During the visit, the Minister also
visited Jamshedpur Tata Motor Plant.
The cooperation and exchanges in the defence sector
continued through bilateral visits and various training
programme for Myanmar Army personnel.
At the invitation of Vice Senior General Maung Aye,
Vice Chairman of the State Peace and
Development Council, a four member delegation led by
General Deepak Kapoor, COSC & COAS visited
Myanmar from 12-14 October, 2009. During the visit, he
held meeting with Vice Senior General Maung Aye and
11

Annual Report 2009 - 2010

called on Senior General Than Shwe, Chairman of
SPDC.

necessary machine and equipments for the training centre.
11 Myanmar personnel are being imparted training in
Bhubaneswar from September-December 2009.

Foreign Secretary Smt. Nirupama Rao visited Myanmar
for Foreign Office Consultations (FOC) from
28 February-2 march 2010. She met senior officials of
Government of Myanmar and reviewed the state of
bilateral relations and discussed range of areas of
cooperation between the two countries.

The work on the Kaladan Multi-modal Transit Transport
Project has reached the post-bidding stage. WAPCOS
delegation visited the project sites for five mini-hydel
power projects in Chind Win River valley in Myanmar
from 10-24 December, 2009.

Lt. Gen. Yogendra Singh, Director General, Armed
Forces Medical Corps visited Myanmar from
16-20 February, 2009. A 15-member Indian Army
delegation led by Maj. Gen. Shakti Gurung visited
Myanmar 23-27 February, 2009 for 35th India-Myanmar
Border Liaison Meeting. A three member delegation led
by Lt. Gen B. S. Bartwal, Director General, Military
Intelligence visited Myanmar from 2-6 March, 2006. A
two member delegation led by Lt. Gen. P. K. Goel, Chief
of Staff, Eastern Command visited Myanmar from
18-20 August, 2009. A three member delegation led by
Lt. Gen V. K. Ahluwalia, Director General of
Military Training (DGMT) visited Myanmar from
2-4 September, 2009.

Bilateral trade was US$ 950 million in 2008-09 and around
US$ 365 million over the April- July of the current fiscal
year. With the support of Indian Embassy in Yangon, the
Myanmar Medical and Pharmaceuticals Association
organized the “Indian Pharmaceuticals Exposition 2009”
in June 2009. 12 Indian and 50 Myanmar companies
participated in the exposition and Buyer and Seller Meet.
A delegation from North East Federation on International
Trade (NEIFT) held meeting with the Union of Myanmar
Federation of Chambers and Commerce and Industry
(UMFCC) on 28 July, 2009 and signed an MoU. A
15-member fisheries delegation from Myanmar
Department of Fisheries visited India to study Rohu
Aquaculture at the Central Institute of Freshwater
Aquaculture (CIFA), Bhubaneshwar and aquaculture
farms in Andra Pradesh from 13-20 July, 2009.

Maj. Gen. Khin Aung Myint, Chief of Myanmar Air Staff
visited India from 11-15 February, 2009 to take part in
the 7th International Aerospace Exposition – Aero India
2009.

India’s assistance for development of human resources in
Myanmar continued to expand. Myanmar is a beneficiary
of training programmes under ITEC, TCS of Colombo
Plan and GCSS of ICCR. The slots for Myanmar trainees
in 2008-09 were as follows: ITEC 105; Colombo Plan –
55; and GCSS of ICCR – 10. In 2009-10, the ITEC slots
increased to 140, while the TCS and GCSS remained
unchanged. Utilization of the slots has been excellent.

India remains committed to provide assistance in
developing infrastructure and human recourses within
Myanmar. A number of projects are under implementation
between the two sides. A number of delegations from
HMTI, TATA Motors, EIL, IOCL, BHEL, NHPC, RITES,
IWAI and Exim Bank visited Myanmar in connection with
various development projects in Myanmar.

India and Myanmar share close cultural ties. There is a
deep sense of kinship, particularly amongst the Buddhist
community, given India’s association with Buddhism.
Cultural performances by Indian cultural troupes in
Myanmar have been organized on a regular basis. Various
cultural troupes have exchanged visits and performed in
both countries in 2009-10. A 13-member student group
from Myanmar attended the SAARC Cultural Festival in
India. A 15-member Myanmar cultural group visited India
to participate in the ‘Famous Hornbill Festival” in Kohima
from 1-5 December, 2009. A Qawwali Group from India
performed in Yangon, Mandalay, Mawlamyine and
Thanlyn in the second week of December 2009. A

Two experts from English and Foreign Languages
University (EFLU), Hyderabad have joined MyanmarIndia Centre for English Training (MICELT) in
November 2009.
On road development projects, Tamu-Kyigone-Kalemyo
stretch of the Tamu-Kalewa-Kalay (TKK) Road has been
handed over to Government of Myanmar in
October 2009. It has been decided to take up upgradation
work at the remaining Kyigone - Kalewa stretch
(28 kilometers) also.
An India-Myanmar Industrial Training Centre (IMITC)
has been up by HMT(I). HMT (I) has been sending
12

President of Nepal, Dr. Ram Baran Yadav and his daughter Ms. Anita Yadav with the
President, Smt. Pratibha Devisingh Patil and the Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh
at the ceremonial reception, at Rashtrapati Bhawan, in New Delhi on 16 February, 2010.

Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh meeting the President of Sri Lanka, Mr. Mahinda Rajapaksa,
on the sidelines of the 15th NAM Summit, at Sharm-el-Sheikh, Egypt, on 16 July, 2009.

13

Annual Report 2009 - 2010

with the Minister of Irrigation of Nepal
Mr. Bal Krishna Khand. The two Ministers expressed
satisfaction over the timely completion of the Kosi
breach closure and other repair works relating to
Kosi afflux bund in Nepal.

Myanmar Band took part in the South Asian Band Festival
organized by ICCR from 13-14 December, 2009.

Nepal
India and Nepal enjoy very close and friendly relations,
which continued to grow and strengthen during the year.
India attaches the highest priority to strengthening the
existing understanding and co-operation with Nepal. In
this spirit, India continued close consultations with the
Government of Nepal and the major political parties with
a view to support Nepal’s transition to a stable, peaceful,
prosperous and a multi-party democracy.
During the year, the bilateral relationship strengthened
further and was characterized by extensive interaction and
high-level visits.

vi

Foreign Secretary, Shri Shiv Shankar Menon visited
Nepal from 20-21 June, 2009. Foreign Secretary
Smt. Nirupama Rao visited Nepal from
14-15 September, 2009 to exchange views on issues
of mutual interest, in pursuance of the decisions
taken during the visit of the Prime Minister of Nepal
to India in August 2009.

vii

The Minister of External Affairs of India
Shri S. M. Krishna paid an official visit to Nepal
from 15-17 January, 2010 at the invitation of
Ms. Sujata Koirala, Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister of Foreign Affairs of Nepal. During the visit
the Minister of External Affairs of India held official
talks with the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Nepal on all aspects of bilateral
relations and issues of mutual interest. He also called
on the President and Prime Minister of Nepal. Four
MoUs viz., on strengthening of the Terai roads with
Indian assistance, construction of a Science
Learning Centre, establishment of a Central
Depository System crores and MoUs for
electrification of five different VDCs in Nepal were
signed.

i

Prime Minister Madhav Kumar Nepal paid an official
visit to India from 18-22 August, 2009 at the
invitation of the Prime Minister of India
Dr. Manmohan Singh. The two leaders had met
earlier on the sidelines of the 15th NAM Summit in
Sharm-el-Sheikh, Egypt. The two Prime Ministers
expressed their satisfaction at the age-old, close,
cordial and multifaceted relations between Nepal
and India and agreed to expand them further. India
expressed full support for the ongoing peace process
and the efforts to bring about economic
transformation in Nepal.

ii

Defence Minister Mrs. Bidya Bhandari visited India
in July 2009 during which she met Defence Minister
Shri A. K. Antony and Minister of External Affairs
Shri S. M. Krishna.

viii

The Home Minister Mr. Bhim Bahadur Rawal visited
India from 18-21 January, 2010 during which he met
with the Finance Minister, Minister of External
Affairs and the Home Minister.

iii

Minister for Foreign Affairs of Nepal
Ms. Sujata Koirala visited India from
10-14 August, 2009 during which she called on the
Prime Minister and had meetings with Minister of
External Affairs, Finance Minister, Home Minister
and Defence Minister.

ix

The President of Nepal Mr. Ram Baran Yadav visited
India on a State Visit from 15-18 February, 2010.
During the visit, a number of Memorandums of
Understandings/Agreements were signed reflecting
the close, multifaceted and unique relationship
between the two countries.

iv

Commerce
and
Industry
Minister
Shri Anand Sharma visited Nepal from
27-28 October, 2009 during which the revised Treaty
of Trade and Agreement of Cooperation to Control
Unauthorized Trade were signed.

v

Minister of Parliamentary Affairs and Water
Resources Shri Pawan Kumar Bansal visited Nepal
from 11-13 July, 2009 to undertake a joint inspection
of the Kosi breach closure works and barrage

In addition, several important bilateral meetings were
held, including the Home Secretary Level-Talks
(5-7 November, 2009), Fifth Meeting of Joint Committee
on Water Resources (19-22 November, 2009), Rail
Services Agreement Meeting (12-14 November, 2009)
and Civil Aviation Talks (7-8 September, 2009) and IndiaNepal Bilateral Consultative Group on Security Issues
(4-6 December, 2009). As a result, significant progress
was achieved on several bilateral issues.
14

India’s Neighbours

Sharm-el-Sheikh on 16 July, 2009 on the sidelines of NAM
Summit. Prime Minister conveyed the deep anger and
hurt of the people of India due to the persistence of
terrorist attacks on our people, urged Prime Minister
Gilani not to make any distinction between different
terrorist organisations, and told him that operations of
all terrorist groups that threaten India must permanently
end. Similar views were also conveyed by External Affairs
Minister Shri S. M. Krishna in his meetings with the
Foreign Minister Mr. Shah Mehmood Qureshi of Pakistan
on the sidelines of G-8 Outreach meeting on
26 June, 2009 in Trieste (Italy), and later on the sidelines
of UNGA on 27 September, 2009 in New York.

During the year, the following agreements/documents
were concluded: (i) Revised Treaty of Trade
(ii) Agreement of Cooperation to Control Unauthorized
Trade (iii) An MoU to immediately bring into effect the
provisions of the revised Air Services Agreement (ASA).
India continued to contribute to Government of Nepal’s
development efforts by undertaking various development
project in the areas of infrastructure, health, rural and
community development, education, etc. In overall terms,
there are presently over 350 small and large projects being
undertaken under the India-Nepal Economic Cooperation
Programme, which are at different stages of
implementation. India has also agreed to assist Nepal to
develop its infrastructure in the border areas adjoining
India through the development of Integrated Check Posts,
Cross-Border Rail Links and the feeder and lateral roads
in the Terai area of Nepal. This will give further impetus
to the development of the Terai areas of Nepal and usher
in economic prosperity.

India and Pakistan held talks at the level of Foreign
Secretaries in New Delhi on 25 February, 2010. The Indian
delegation reiterated the need to fulfill the repeated
assurances given by the leaders of Pakistan not to allow
the use of Pakistani soil for terrorist activities against India.
Additional information on terrorist activities against India
emanating from Pakistan was also handed over to the
Pakistani side for investigation and appropriate action.
The Pakistan Foreign Secretary expressed the desire and
determination of the Government of Pakistan to make
all possible efforts for a successful conclusion of the
Mumbai attack trial which is underway in Pakistan. He
stated that Pakistan was determined not to allow its
territory to be used for terrorist activity against any
country, and said that the additional information provided
by India will be studied. The two delegations agreed to
address some urgent and humanitarian matters. The
Foreign Secretaries also agreed to remain in touch.

India continued to be Nepal’s largest trade partner, source
of foreign investments and tourist arrivals in Nepal. The
bilateral trade more than doubled in the preceding five
years reaching Rs. 9402 crores in 2008-09. The trend of
growth in bilateral trade continued in 2009-10.
The Kosi breach closure work undertaken by the
Government of India in Nepal was satisfactorily completed
on schedule. It withstood a flood discharge of more than
300,000 cusecs during 2009 floods.
India continued its assistance to the development of
human resources in Nepal by offering a number of
scholarships to Nepalese students for study in India and
Nepal. At the request of Nepal, GoI has agreed to double
the number of scholarships offered to Nepalese students
for education in India during PM Nepal’s visit to India in
18-22 August, 2009.

Follow-up of the terrorist attack on Mumbai
Evidence on the role of Pakistani nationals in the terrorist
attack on Mumbai has been shared with Pakistan in the
form of seven dossiers. A compilation of evidence on the
involvement of Hafiz Saeed in the terrorist attack on
Mumbai was also handed over to Pakistan.

Pakistan

After admitting for the first time, on 12 February, 2009,
that the terrorist attack on Mumbai on
26 November, 2008 was planned and launched from
Pakistan, in its dossier of 11 July, 2009 Pakistan also
acknowledged that substantial incriminating evidence had
been unearthed which directly connects five accused LeT
operatives under Pakistani custody. Two more suspects
were arrested later. On 25 November, 2009, the
Government of Pakistan reportedly filed a charge sheet

High-level meetings
India’s concerns and expectations have been conveyed
to Pakistan on several occasions, including in the meeting
of Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh with President
of Pakistan Mr. Asif Ali Zardari on the sidelines of the
SCO-BRIC summit in Yekaterinburg on 16 June, 2009
and in Prime Minister’s meeting with the Prime Minister
of Pakistan Mr. Syed Yousuf Raza Gilani at
15

Annual Report 2009 - 2010

in an Anti Terrorism Court in Pakistan against the seven
suspects and 20 proclaimed offenders for their role in the
terrorist attack on Mumbai.

Humanitarian issues
A significant number of Indian prisoners, fishermen and
boats are in Pakistani custody. Pakistan too has concerns
about its nationals in jails in India. As per the
recommendations of the India-Pakistan Judicial
Committee on Prisoners and Fishermen, lists of prisoners
and fishermen in each other’s custody were exchanged
between India and Pakistan. Pakistan released 100 Indian
fishermen on 26 December, 2009. There are still over
500 Indian fishermen and over 400 Indian fishing boats
in Pakistan’s custody. India has confirmed nationality of
all 553 fishermen to whom consular access has been
provided. India released 31 Pakistani fishermen on
2 January, 2010. Efforts are underway for the release of
the remaining 19 fishermen whose nationality has been
confirmed by Pakistan.

The arrest of persons of Pakistan origin –
David Coleman Headley and Tahawwur Hussain Rana in
the US by the FBI is significant. Investigations into the
involvement of David Coleman Headley and Tahawwur
Hussain Rana in various terrorist acts, including the
Mumbai terrorist attack, are ongoing.
India has continuing concerns on cross-border infiltration
from Pakistan and ceasefire violations by Pakistan across
Line of Control and International Border. These have been
taken up with the Government of Pakistan through
existing mechanisms.
The position that there can be a meaningful dialogue with
Pakistan only if it fulfils its commitment, in letter and
spirit, not to allow its territory to be used in any manner
for terrorist activities against India was reiterated on
several occasions, including by Prime Minister in
Parliament on 29 July, 2009.

Commerce and Trade
India’s bilateral trade with Pakistan at US$ 1.78 billion in
the year 2008-2009 was 17% less than that in 2007-2008
(US$ 2.14 billion). Unofficial trade through third
countries is also of significance and increases the
transaction costs for end users in Pakistan. While India
has accorded MFN status to Pakistan, the latter continues
to restrict items of import from India to a positive list of
1934 items. On SAFTA, Pakistan has refused to extend
the negotiated tariff concessions to items outside the
positive list to India thereby negating the letter and spirit
of the agreement, as exports are limited only to items on
the positive list.

People to people contacts and visits
Despite terrorist attack on Mumbai and following grave
provocations from Pakistan, the people-to-people contacts
were allowed to continue. The transport links established
in the previous rounds of the Composite Dialogue
continued to operate successfully, facilitating the
movement of people and bilateral trade. Cross - LoC travel
and trade on Srinagar-Muzafarrabad and
Poonch-Rawalkot routes has been continuing. In addition,
five points for on-foot crossing at Nauseri-Tithwal;
Chakoti-Uri, Hajipur-Uri; Rawalkot-Poonch and
Tattapani-Mendhar, opened to facilitate humanitarian
work after the earthquake in 2005, have also been allowed
to operate as earlier. A number of Pakistani cultural,
academic and trade delegations visited India. Government
also facilitated visits to places of pilgrimage under the
Protocol on Visits to Religious Shrines (1974). The Times
of India and Jang Group of Pakistan have launched a nongovernmental campaign ‘Aman ki Asha’ on 1 January, 2010.
The year-long event will have cultural, literary and
academic interactions.

Other Issues/Developments
Government of India strongly protested Pakistan
Government’s announcement of a package in the form of
so- called ‘Gilgit-Baltistan Empowerment and Self
Governance Order -2009’ in August 2009 and holding of
‘elections’ for the ‘legislative assembly’ of Gilgit-Baltistan
in November 2009, characterizing both these
developments as nothing but cosmetic exercises intended
to camouflage the fact of Pakistan’s illegal occupation of
areas of the state of Jammu and Kashmir.

Sri Lanka
Relations between India and Sri Lanka progressed apace
in all spheres of bilateral interaction. Significant
developments in Sri Lanka included the end of the military
conflict with the LTTE and its aftermath, including the
rehabilitation of the Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs),
mostly Tamils. In January 2010, President Rajapaksa

A delegation from Pakistan led by the Speaker
of National Assembly
Dr. Fehmida Mirza visited India from 4-9 January, 2010
in connection with the 20th Conference of Commonwealth
Speakers and Presiding Officers in New Delhi.
16

India’s Neighbours

secured a convincing victory in the Presidential
elections defeating his rival former Chief of Army
Gen. Sarath Fonseka.

President Mr. Lalith Weeratunga visited India in June and
December 2009. India has emphasized that there is an
opportunity to make a new beginning and find a
permanent political solution within the framework of a
united Sri Lanka that addresses the legitimate aspirations
of the Tamil community and other minorities.

Regular bilateral contacts were maintained at all levels
contributing the close relations between the two countries.
Prime Minister met President Mahinda Rajapaksa on the
sidelines of the 15 th NAM Summit in Egypt on
16 July, 2009 during which they discussed the entire gamut
of bilateral relations. External Affairs Minister
Shri S. M. Krishna met with Sri Lankan Foreign Minister
Mr. Rohitha Bogollagama at the ASEAN Foreign
Ministers Meeting in Phuket on 22 July, 2009 and
again in New York at UN General Assembly on
22 September, 2009. PM and External Affairs Minister
met Sri Lankan Prime Minister and Foreign Minister
respectively on the sidelines of CHOGM 2009.

Indian Assistance: Since October 2008, India has been
engaged in providing humanitarian relief assistance to Sri
Lankan Tamil civilians affected by the military conflict in
Northern Sri Lanka. 2.5 lakh family relief packs from Tamil
Nadu have been rushed across to the displaced Tamil
population in the North in several consignments. The
packs include dry rations, personal hygiene items, clothing,
utensils, footwear, and other essential supplies. Two
consignments of medical supplies worth around
Rs. 9.2 crores have been gifted to the Sri Lankan
Government to cater to the requirements of IDPs.

From the Sri Lankan side, President Rajapaksa
accompanied by several members of his Cabinet including
Foreign Minister Mr. Rohitha Bogollagama, paid a private
visit to India on 31 October, 2009. Prime Minister
Ratnasiri Wickremanayake visited India from
30 October-1 November 2009 to inaugurate the newly
built Buddhist Pilgrims rest in Sanchi.

A 60-member emergency field hospital was set up in
Northern Sri Lanka to provide urgent medical care of the
IDPs. The hospital treated about 50,000 patients during
its deployment from March-September 2009 and its work
was greatly appreciated.
India’s humanitarian effort in Sri Lanka has expanded
since the end of military hostilities to encompass
rehabilitation and reconstruction. On 9 June, 2009, Prime
Minister announced India’s commitment to engage with
the process of relief and rehabilitation in Sri Lanka. The
Government accordingly earmarked Rs. 500 crores for this
purpose. In order to facilitate the process of rapid
rehabilitation and resettlement, India has deployed seven
demining teams in Northern Sri Lanka. India has sent
70,000 agricultural starters packs and 2600 tons of shelter
material to Sri Lanka for resettling the IDPs, and another
consignment of 2600 tons is being dispatched in parts.
India will also be donating cement packs and take up
various projects in Sri Lanka including revival of
agricultural, reconstruction of infrastructure, livelihood
generation, capacity building and skills development etc.

On 24 April, 2009, National Security Adviser and Foreign
Secretary visited Colombo. They visited again from
20-21 May, 2009 immediately after the end of military
hostilities. During their visit, it was agreed that the time
was opportune to focus attention on issues of relief,
rehabilitation, resettlement and re-conciliation of IDPs
in Northern Sri Lanka and reconciliation, including
permanent settlement in Sri Lanka. India conveyed its
concerns on the IDPs and urged the Government of
Sri Lanka to resettle them at the earliest to their original
places of habitation. Sri Lanka indicated its intention to
complete the settlement by end January, 2010.
From 10-14 October, 2009, a 10-member delegation
comprising of DMK, Congress and VCK Parliamentarians
elected from Tamil Nadu visited Sri Lanka, during which
they also visited Jaffna, upcountry areas and IDP camps
in Vavuniya. Following the visit more than one lakh IDPs
were resettled. Foreign Secretary Smt. Nirupama Rao
visited in February 2009 – the first visit after Prsident
Rajapaksa’s success in the Presidential elections.

India has also extended LoC of US$ 425 million for
Omanthai-Pallai and Madhu Church-Talaimannar railway
lines and for supplying rolling stock for Northern Sri Lanka
railway lines. These projects will be taken up by RITES
and IRCON.

From Sri Lanka, a high-level delegation comprising of
Senior Presidential Adviser Mr.Basil Rajapaksa, Defence
Secretary Mr. Gotabaya Rajapaksa, and Secretary to

Bilateral Trade and Economy: Bilaterally, economic and
trade ties maintained a steady momentum during the
period under review. India is now Sri Lanka’s largest trade
17

Annual Report 2009 - 2010

partner overall accounting for 16.8% or 1/6th of the trade
turnover of Sri Lanka, and Sri Lanka is India’s largest trade
partner in South Asia. The overall trade turnover has
grown five times since the entry into force of the FTA
and touched US$ 3.265 billion in 2008. India is also one
of the largest foreign investors in Sri Lanka. Last year, we
were the second largest investor in Sri Lanka at
US$ 126 million. In 2009 (January-September) the
bilateral trade between the two stands at US$ 1.44 billions
and is expected to improve with the signs of global
economic recovery.

In the education sector, India continued to push the initiative
to upgrade the educational infrastructure of schools in the
Central Province, including teachers’ training, setting up of
computer labs, and awarding of scholarships to students from
the Tamil plantation community.
On the cultural side, an exhibition of photographs of the
Buddhist art and heritage sites by reputed photographer
Shri Benoy Behl was organized in Matara along with
Mahatma Gandhi Photographic Exhibition in May 2009.
In September 2009 Indian Cultural Centre hosted a folk
dance troupe from Thanjavur (Tamil Nadu) in
Polonnaruwa, Batticaloa, Triconmalee and Hatton apart
from assisting in the production of Kalidasa’s
‘Abhijnanasakuntalam’ as a musical dance drama in
Sinhalese. ICCR has also sent Kathak and Bharatnatyam
troupes which performed in Colombo, Kandy and also
surrounding areas of Central Province.

Development assistance to Sri Lanka is another significant
plank of India’s bilateral engagement with Sri Lanka.
Projects completed with Indian assistance include setting
up 20 Nenasalas ((e-learning kiosks), vocational training
centre at Puttalam, rail bus project in the Eastern
province, Centre for English Language Training in
Peradeniya, and 20 buses to the Central Province.

18

South East Asia and the Pacific

Australia

2

a Joint Declaration on Security Cooperation was
issued at the conclusion of the visit. An MoU on
cooperation in the field of water resources was also
signed. It was decided that an annual ministerial
level dialogue on education would be established.
PM Kevin Rudd announced investment of
A$ 50 million for the Bilateral Strategic Fund,
A$ 1 million for Australia – India Solar Cooling
Research Project, and another A$ 20 million for
research into dry land farming in India. Our Prime
minister conveyed the high priority that GoI
attaches, to the safety, security and well being of
the Indian students (as also the Indian community)
in Australia. Australian PM provided an update on
the efforts of the Australian Government and
various state governments to enhance law
enforcement, extend student welfare measures,
re-register all education providers, adult vocational
education and training institutions, and strengthen
the integrity of the visa system

I

ndia-Australia bilateral relations continued to develop
in all fields and several high-level visits from both sides
took place during the year.
From India the visits included
Shri Sharad Pawar (Minister of Agriculture &
Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution) to
Perth, January-February 2009 to attend an ICC
Meeting in his capacity as the Vice President and
President-elect of the International Cricket Council
(ICC).
Dr. M. S. Gill, Minister of State (Independent
Charge) Youth Affairs & Sports visited Melbourne
and Sydney (25-29 March, 2009) in connection with
preparations for Common Wealth Games, 2010.
Shri S. M. Krishna, External Affairs Minister
(August 2009) participated in the 21 Post-Forum
Dialogue (PFD) Partners’ Meeting in Cairns, which
was held on 7 August, 2009.

The First meeting of the Joint Working Group
between Indian and Australia on Student mobility
was held on 6 October, 2009 in New Delhi

Shri Sriprakash Jaiswal, Minister of State
(Independent Charge) for Coal Statistics and
Programme Implementation visited Australia from
30 August-6 September 2009 to explore possibilities
of cooperation in coal mining and coals resources.

Brunei Darussalam
The period focused on the follow-up to the visit of the
Sultan of Brunei’s, visit to India in May 2008. Efforts
continued to get the Bruneian side to sign a Mutual Legal
Assistance Treaty and an Agreement of Visa Waiver for
holders of Diplomatic and Official Passports.

From the Australian side
Mr. Christopher Vaughan Evans (Minister of
Immigration & Citizenship), Ms. Julia Gillard,
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Education, Employment and Workplace Relation
(September 2009), Mr. Simon Crean, Trade Minister,
Mr. Wayne Swan, Treasurer (September 2009);
Mr. John Brumby, Premier of the State of Victoria,
Ms. Anna Bligh, Premier of the State of Queensland
(9-10 October, 2009) Mr. Stephen Smith, Foreign
Minister (12-16 October, 2009) for the sixth IndiaAustralia Foreign Ministers Framework Dialogue.

India participated in the 2nd Brunei International Defence
Exhibition (BRIDEX 2009, 12-16 August, 2009). The
Indian pavilion was adjudged the ‘Overall Best Booth’.
Two Indian Naval Ships, INS Airavat and INS Khukri paid
goodwill visits which coincided with the Brunei
International Defence Exhibition 2009. They also
participated in professional exercises with the Royal
Brunei Navy.
A nine member Chemical & Allied Products Export
Promotion Council delegation visited Brunei Darussalam
to conduct a Multi-Product Exhibition-cum-Buyer Seller
Meet. A delegation from Indian Oil Corporation visited

Australian Prime Minister Mr. Kevin Rudd, paid his
first visit to India (11-13 November, 2009). During
this visit bilateral relationship was upgraded to a
strategic partnership. Apart from a Joint Statement,
19

Annual Report 2009 - 2010

been offered, 10 under MGC, and four under CEP/GCSS
(two each). Till date, 790 Cambodian nationals in various
disciplines under ITEC have been trained. An Indian
expert in water management has been deputed for one
year period under ITEC to assist APSARA Authority at
Siem Reap. Five Cambodian students visited India in
March under India’s offer to ASEAN for the visit of
100 ASEAN students every year.

Brunei for finalization of crude oil term contract for the
year 2009-10 with Brunei Shell Petroleum (BSP). A similar
delegation from Bharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd. visited
Brunei and signed a Crude Oil Agreement with BSP.

Cambodia
Bilateral relations between India and Cambodia remained
cordial and friendly. India continued its bilateral assistance
to Cambodia through grants and Lines of Credit.

A batch of 17 officers from National Defence College
(NDC), New Delhi led by Rear Admiral V. S. Chaudhari
visited Cambodia in May, as a part of their study tour.
Another team from Higher Air Command visited
Cambodia in November. Cambodia formally
communicated its support for our candidature for a
nonpermanent seat on the United Nations Security
Council for the years 2011-12. India supported Cambodia’s
candidature for World Heritage Committee.

Several projects under India’s assistance in the areas of
electric transmission lines, irrigation, and restoration of
temples are under implementation. Archeological Survey
of India has been working from December 2003 for
restoration of Ta Prohm Temple at Siem Reap with funds
provided under ITEC programme. Two projects –
installation of hand pumps for drinking water supply in
rural Cambodia and establishment of Centre of Excellence
in IT under grants in aid are being processed.

Fiji

Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh met his Cambodian
counterpart Mr. Hun Sen and discussed bilateral affairs
on the sidelines of seventh India-ASEAN Summit in
October 2009 in Hua Hin (Thailand). During the meeting,
PM reaffirmed India’s commitment to furthering
cooperation in sectors including IT, water resource
management and electric transmission lines.

India continued its focus on social and economic
assistance programme while maintaining cordial ties with
Fiji Islands, Tonga, Tuvalu and Cook Islands, in line with
its Look East Policy.
Fiji Prime Minister Cmde Bainimarama visited India in
private capacity from 25-31 March, 2009. Secretary (East),
Shri N. Ravi visited Fiji Islands to discuss bilateral ties
(3-5 August, 2009.) He met the Attorney General and
Minister for Justice, Electoral Reform, Public Enterprises
and Anti-Corruption; Minister for Industry, Tourism,
Trade and Communications Mr. Aiyaz Sayed-Khaiyum,
Foreign Minister Mr. Ratu Inoke Kubuabola, and Foreign
Secretary Mr. Peceli Vocea.

Bank of India opened a branch in Phnom Penh in
May 2009. A number of trade delegations visited
Cambodia to explore business opportunities, [ (i.e. a
15-member delegation from the Solvent Extractors’
Association of India (SEA) in May 2009) a textile
delegation led by Smt. Rita Menon, Secretary (Textiles),
in July 2009 and a 23-member Cashew Traders, Producers
and Exports delegation in October 2009.] First IndiaCambodia Trade Investment Business Forum & Exhibition
and a cultural programme by ICCR Cultural troupe from
Assam was organized in Phnom Penh in November 2009.

At the request of Ministry of Social Welfare, Women and
Poverty Monitoring of Government of Fiji, India donated
200 sewing machines for distribution from March-April 2009
to assist disadvantaged women in rural communities and
semi-urban squatter settlements to generate cash for basic
family needs. Based on a request from Fijian Ministry of
Finance, as a special gesture, five special slots under TCS
Colombo Plan were offered.

India-Cambodia has signed an Agreement on Combating
International Terrorism, Organized Crimes and Illicit Drug
Trafficking in December 2005. In pursuant to that
Agreement, two specialized training programmes:
(1) “Investigation of Bank Fraud Cases” in July and
(2) “Cyber Crime and Network Course” in September
2009 were organized by Ministry of Home Affairs.
Shri Om Prakash, Deputy Director General, Narcotics
Control Bureau (NCB), attended second ASEAN Senior
Officials Meeting on Drug Matters (ASOD) + India, in
Phnom Penh in October 2009.

Indonesia
The year witnessed continued close bilateral relations with
Indonesia. There are regular exchanges of high-level visits
between the two countries. The Indonesian Trade Minister
visited India in September for the G-20 Trade Ministers’
meeting. Our Commerce Minister visited Indonesia in
June to attend the Cairns Group Meeting in Bali. MoS
(Commerce & Industry) Shri Anand Sharma visited
Indonesia in August to inaugurate the ‘Made in India’

Slots under ITEC for Cambodia were enhanced to 85 from
75 for 2009, and separately 14 education scholarships have
20

South East Asia and the Pacific

Lao PDR

trade exhibition. The MoS for Health & Family Welfare
Shri Ghulam Nabi Azad visited Yogyakarta and Bali in
August to attend the ninth International Congress on
AIDS. The Minister of Housing, Urban Poverty
Alleviation & Tourism, Shri Jaipal Reddy and
Kumari Selja visited Jakarta for the fourth meeting of the
Second Bureau of Asia-Pacific Ministers’ Conference on
Housing and Urban Development. The Indonesian
Minister of Energy & Mineral Resources visited India in
September for discussions on cooperation in the energy
sector. Our Minister for Chemicals & Fertilizers,
Shri M. K. Azhagiri visited Indonesia in November for
discussions with the Indonesian Industry Minister and the
Indonesian Chamber of Commerce & Industry.
Regular defence exchanges including exchanges of high
level visits, ship visits, training in Staff Colleges in either
country and joint coordinated patrols at the mouth of
the Malacca Straits also took place. Defence relations
have also moved towards defence sales. Chief of Naval
Staff (Designate) visited Indonesia in August 2009.

Relations with India continued to grow, with bilateral
trade witnessing a significant increase because of
utilization of Line of Credit given by the Government of
India for three hydropower projects. Laos continued to
look at India as a source of assistance for its IT sector,
capacity building programme and human resource
development through 20 scholarships for university
education under the Mekong Ganga Cooperation (MGC)
and General Cultural Scholarship Scheme (GCSS) of
ICCR, and about 120 scholarships under ITEC and
Colombo Plan. The Indian Embassy organized a medical
camp for fitting of light weight calipers developed by
DRDO to handicapped Lao patients for ten days during
which more than 50 Lao displaced people received
calipers. Restoration work at Wat Phou temple was started
by Archeological Survey of India in June. India
participated in the World Eco Tourism Conference and
Exhibition from 14-17 July, 2009, with Minister of State
for Tourism Shri Sultan Ahmed leading the Indian
delegation.

Indonesia became the third largest trading partner of India
within ASEAN with bilateral trade of US$ 10 billion in
2008. India remains a major buyer of palm oil and natural
resources like coal from Indonesia. In a major initiative, a
‘Made in India’ show was organized in Jakarta in
August 2009.

The sixth meeting of the Lao-Indian Joint Commission
was held in New Delhi on 1 February, 2010. The Lao
delegation was led by Dr. Thongloun Sisoulith, Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Lao
People’s Democratic Republic and the Indian delegation
was led by Shri S. M. Krishna, Minister of External Affairs.

In a major initiative, a ‘Festival of India’ was launched on
in October featuring performing troupes – both classical
and folk, an Art Exhibition, an Exhibition of Medieval
Indian Art, a Film Week, a Fashion Show, a Lifestyle
Products Exhibition, a Food Festival and Seminars on
contemporary and historical linkages between India and
Indonesia.

Malaysia
India’s relations with Malaysia were further strengthened
during the year. The Prime Minister of Malaysia
Mr. Dato’ Sri Mohd. Najib Tun Abdul Razak, paid a State
visit to India from 19-23 January, 2010 in the very first
year of his assuming power. An extradition treaty and two
MoUs were signed during the visit. Malaysian PM also
conveyed his government support for India’s candidature
for the permanent membership of the expanded UN
Security Council. In addition, as many as 16 commercial
agreements were also signed. Human Resources
Development Minister Shri Kapil Sibal visited Malaysia
in June to participate in the 17 th Conference of
Commonwealth Education Ministers. A three member
Indian Parliamentary delegation visited Kuala Lumpur to
attend the Seventh Asia-Pacific Women Parliamentarians
and Ministers Conference (from 14-15 November, 2009).
Malaysian Tourism Minister Mr. Ng Yen Yen visited four
cities in India from 14-17 August, 2009. The Chief
Minister of Melaka, Mr. Mohd Ali Mohd Rustam visited
India in August. Malaysian Minister for International
Trade & Industry Mustapa Mohamed participated in

During the year, Indonesia was offered 75 training slots
under ITEC, 38 training slots under Technical
Cooperation Scheme of Colombo Plan, 25 General
Cultural Scholarship Scheme scholarships slots and
two Hindi one-year course scholarships.
The Secretary (Agriculture & Cooperation),
Shri T. Nand Kumar visited Indonesia in April 2009 and
finalized a Work Plan on Cooperation in Agriculture under
the MoU on Agricultural Cooperation. The first meeting
of the Joint Working Group on Tourism was held in
Yogyakarta in August.
Indonesia is currently the ASEAN Coordinator for India’s
Dialogue Partnership with the ASEAN.
21

Annual Report 2009 - 2010

informal WTO Ministerial Meeting held at New Delhi
from 3-4 September, 2009. He, thereafter, paid a
second visit to India to lead a Trade and Investment
Mission to Mumbai, Bengaluru and Chennai from
29 October-3 November 2009.

India and Malaysia continued with their efforts to improve
the working conditions of Indian workers in Malaysia, by
taking follow-up measures as envisaged in an MoU on
Employment of Workers, which was signed in
January 2009.

Malaysia has now emerged as India’s second largest trading
partner in the ASEAN after Singapore. The two-way trade
between India and Malaysia during January-August 2009
touched US$ 4.6 billion (with India’s exports at
US$ 1.5 billion and India’s import US$ 3.1 billion.)

New Zealand
New Zealand Trade Minister Mr. Tim Groser visited India
twice in 2009, as leader of the NZ delegation at the
informal Ministerial meeting from 3-4 September, 2009
in New Delhi on Doha Round of WTO negotiations.
During his visit, Mr. Groser announced that New Zealand
would open a Consulate-General in Mumbai to further
bilateral trade and investment linkages. Minister of State
(Independent Charge) for Youth Affairs &
Sports, Dr. M. S. Gill visited New Zealand from
22-25 March, 2009 at the invitation of NZ Minister of
Sports & Recreation. India-New Zealand Foreign Office
Consultations were held in Wellington on 30 March, 2009
with Secretary (East), Shri N. Ravi leading the Indian
delegation. Council for Leather Exports organized a BuyerSeller-Meet in Auckland (31 August-1 September 2009)
as part of their Focus ASEAN Plus Australia and
New Zealand programme of the Department of
Commerce.

Malaysian companies completed 52 construction projects
worth US$ 2.34 billion in India, while 22 projects valued
at US$ 2.3 billion are under various stages of
implementation. Fresh Indian investments in Malaysia in
the first half of 2009 were US$ 17.3 million. Cumulative
Indian investments in Malaysia stand at around
US$ 2 billion.
India and Malaysia continued their discussions through
video conferencing on finalization of the Comprehensive
Economic Cooperation Agreement (CECA). Both sides
have also finalized the text of the Extradition Treaty, which
would be signed soon. Two handbooks titled ‘Doing
Business in India: Handbook for Malaysian Business’ and
‘Doing Business in Malaysia: Handbook for Indian
Business’ were brought out with the support of FICCI and
CII as well as local partners. The first-ever Conference
on Traditional Indian Medicine followed by a Buyer-Seller
Meet (BSM) was held on 21 July, 2009 in Kuala Lumpur.
A seminar to highlight the emerging opportunities for
Indian and Malaysian businesses from the ASEAN-India
FTA in Goods was organized in Kuala Lumpur and Penang.

Bank of Baroda has been granted a license by the Reserve
Bank of New Zealand on 1 September to open a subsidiary
in Auckland New Zealand which will open in
January 2010.

Papua New Guinea (PNG)
India’s relations with Papua New Guinea (PG) continue
to be warm and friendly. PNG conveyed support for India’s
candidature for a permanent seat in the UNSC.

India-Malaysia Defence Cooperation witnessed steady
growth. The Chairman Chiefs of Staff Committee & Chief
of Naval Staff, Admiral Suresh Mehta paid an official visit
to Malaysia from 26-28 May, 2009. Chief of the Royal
Malaysian Air Force Gen. Tan Sri Azizan bin Ariffin,
visited India from 27-29 July, 2009. Indian Naval and
Coast Guard ships visited Malaysia as part of their
Overseas Deployment to Southeast Asia. The newly
acquired submarine of the Royal Malaysian Navy,
KD Tunku Abdul Rahman, paid a port call at Cochin from
18-20 August, 2009 during its maiden voyage from France
to Malaysia. Malaysia hosted the Navy-to-Navy and Air
Force-to-Air Force staff talks between 4-7 August, 2009
and 13-15 October, 2009 respectively.

Mr. Sam Abal, (Minister of Foreign Affairs, Trade &
Immigration) of Papua New Guinea (PNG) paid a
four-day visit to India in July 2009. The visit had a special
significance as this was the first-ever ministerial visit
between the two countries. Mr. Abal met External
Affairs Minister (MoS) Dr. Shashi Tharoor and
Shri Anand Sharma Commerce & Industry Minister and
visited Indian Council for Research and Development in
Community Education (ICRDCE), Chennai which is
assisting PNG in setting up of 13 vocational training
colleges for the disadvantaged sections of the society.
PNG has sought India’s assistance in building and
launching of a multi-purpose satellite for which a PNG
delegation visited Bangalore in April 2009 for technical
discussions with Antrix Corporation/ ISRO. A delegation
of senior technical officers from Gas Authority of India

The first ‘India Education Fair’ in almost a decade was
organized in Kuala Lumpur in July 2009.
A new full-fledged Indian Cultural Centre (ICC) was
opened in Kuala Lumpur on 4 November, 2009.
22

Prime Minister of Malaysia, Mr. Dato’ Sri Mohd Najib Tun Abdul Razak meeting the
Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh, in New Delhi on 20 January, 2010.

Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh meetinh the President of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam,
Mr. Nguyen Minh Triet on the sidelines of the 15th NAM Summit, at Sharm El Sheikh, Egypt, on 15 July, 2009.

23

Annual Report 2009 - 2010

and second largest source of FDI inflows. Bilateral trade
turnover was US$ 19.83 billion in 2008. The global
financial crisis and subsequent economic slowdown
impacted bilateral trade. FDI inflows from Singapore,
however, amounted to US$ 8.57 billion (cumulative) over
the period April 2000-July 2009.

Ltd. (GAIL) visited PNG in September 2009 to explore
the possibilities of participation in an LNG project led by
Canada’s InterOil.
Indira Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU) and
the University of Technology (UNITECH) of PNG have
started consultations for extending IGNOU’s coverage
to PNG.

Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh held a bilateral
meeting with PM Mr. Hsein Loong Lee on the sidelines
of the seventh India-ASEAN Summit and East Asia
Summit on 25 October, 2009. External Affairs Minister
Shri S. M. Krishna met Foreign Minister Mr. George Yeo
on the sidelines of Non-Aligned Movement Summit in
Sharm-el Sheikh in July 2009 and at the margins of United
Nations General Assembly, New York in September 2009.
In their meeting in Sharm-el-Sheikh, Foreign Minister
Mr. George Yeo conveyed to EAM Singapore’s
government support for India’s candidature for a nonpermanent seat in the UN Security Council for the term
2011-12. The other high level visits included the visit by
Minister Mentor Lee Kuan Yew in December 2009 and
Senior Minister Goh Chok Tong in March 2010.

India has offered a fresh grant-in-aid of US$ 125,000 to
PNG under Government of India’s Regional Assistance
Initiative for Pacific Island Countries. In addition,
setting -up of one IT Centre of Excellence as well as three
Hole-in-the-Wall (HiWEL) learning stations have also
been offered.
Under the ITEC Programme, India increased the number
of slots from 20-25 for PNG. Another four slots are offered
to PNG under the TCS of Colombo Plan.

Philippines
The year 2009 has been a special one for India-Philippines
bilateral relations because it is the 60th anniversary year
of the establishment of bilateral diplomatic relations. A
special stamp on the exact day of the signing of the
agreement (16 November, 2009) was released in Delhi to
mark the occasion as also by Philippines in Manila. The
President of Philippines issued a proclamation declaring
November 2009 as Philippines- India Friendship Month.

A number of seminars and road-shows were organized in
Singapore to attract investment in infrastructure and
hydrocarbon sector. Shri Kamal Nath, Union Minister for
Road Transport and Highways visited Singapore from
16-19 July, 2009 to attend a conclave on “Enhancing
International Cooperation in Road Infrastructure in
India”, organized by Federation of Indian Chambers of
Commerce and Industry and a “Road Infrastructure
Summit” jointly organized by ICICI securities and
JM Financial. He also delivered a Public lecture on “New
Government in India – Vision for the Next Five Years”,
which was jointly organized by Singapore India Chamber
of Commerce and Industry (SICCI) and Institute of South
Asian Studies (ISAS).

The ninth bilateral Foreign Policy Consultations and the
third Security Dialogue took place in Manila from
29-30 October, 2009. Government of India made a cash
donation of US$ 100,000 for relief assistance towards
damage caused by severe typhoons that hit Philippines
during the year. Secretary Foreign Affairs of the Republic
of Phillippines, Mr. A. Ramulo led a delegation to India
for the first meeting of the Joint Commission co-chaired
by the External Affairs Minister Shri S. M. Krishna.

The Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas, Government
of India, organized an Investor Meet for potential investors
about the bidding process for the eighth bid round of New
Exploration Licensing Policy (NELP-VIII) and fourth bid
round of Coal Bed Methane (CBM-IV) blocks in
Singapore on 28 September, 2009. Shri Jitin Prasada,
Minister of State for Petroleum and Natural Gas led the
four member delegation at the Investors Meet.
BNP Paribas, CII and Feedback Ventures jointly
organized a conference “India Infrastructure Day” on
11 September, 2009 to highlight the investment
opportunities in the infrastructure sector in India. An
eight member infrastructure delegation from National
Highway Authorities of India participated in the
conference. The Conference hosted two special sessions

Two Indian Naval Ships INS ‘Jyoti’ and ‘Khanjar’ paid a
goodwill visit to Philippines from 7-10 April, 2009. The
growing India-Philippines relations got reflected in trade;
Indian exports to Philippines grew by 19% in 2008-09,
whereas Philippine exports to India grew by 23% in the
same year.

Singapore
The continuing transformation in Indo-Singapore bilateral
relations in recent years is characterized by regular
contacts at political and official level and a wide ranging
dialogue covering strategic, security, defence, trade and
investment. Singapore is our sixth largest trading partner
24

South East Asia and the Pacific

on “Market and Financing Challenges for Infrastructure
in India” and “Regulatory and Political Challenges for
Infrastructure in India”.

While the annual armour and artillery exercises were
conducted by the two armies in Babina and Devlali in
February-March and October 2009, the two air forces held
their second, Joint Military Training (JMT 2009) in
November 2009 in India. The Naval bilateral exercise
SIMBEX 09 was held in the Malacca Straits and off
Singapore from 24 March-2 April 2009. Two Indian Naval
ships, INS Ranvir and INS Jyoti and one Coast Guard Ship
participated in IMDEX Asia 2009 Warships Display at
Changi Naval Base from 11-15 May, 2009. Naval ships’
visits included INS Airavat, (a landing ship) and Khukri,
a (missile Corvette), from the Eastern Fleet from
26-29 August, 2009.

Japan External Trade Organization (JETRO), CII &
International Enterprise (IE) Singapore together organized
a seminar on the investment opportunities for Japanese
and Singapore companies in India on 27 August, 2009.
Shri J. J. Singh, Governor of Arunachal Pradesh
was a keynote speaker at the second edition of
Singapore International Water Week (SIWW) from
22-26 June, 2009. Shri Lal Thanhawla, Chief Minister of
Mizoram also participated in the event.
Indian Chamber of Commerce, Kolkata with the support
of SICCI and IE Singapore organized a seminar “India
invest 2009” on 21 October, 2009. Shri Kamal Nath,
Union Minister for Road Transport and Highways
delivered the special address. The seminar was also
addressed by Shri D. D. Lapang, Chief Minister of
Meghalaya. The Engineering Export Promotion Council
(India) organized a Buyer-Seller Meet in Singapore on
3 April, 2009 jointly with Singapore Business Federation
& Singapore Manufacturer Federation. A 13-member
delegation from the Kerala chapter of the Indus
Entrepreneurs visited Singapore from 6-9 May, 2009 to
explore business and investment opportunities. The
delegation had meetings with Singapore Business
Federation (SBF) and SICCI.

Consequent to the contribution of India to Project
No. one – Hydrographic Training for Wreck Assessment
and Project No. four – Setting up Tide, Current, and Wind
Measurement System of the “ Co-operative Mechanism”,
under International Maritime Organisation (IMO) aegis,
for safety of navigation and environmental protection in
the Malacca Straits, India was invited to participate in
the 34th Tripartite Technical Experts Group (TTEG)
Meeting, second Cooperation Forum Meeting and second
Project Co-ordination Committee Meeting held in
Singapore from 12-16 October, 2009. China and India
jointly conducted the survey of sites for Project four and
presented the findings during the Cooperation Forum.

India and Singapore signed an Agreement on Cooperation
in science and technology to formalize collaboration
biotechnology and renewable energy during the visit of
Singapore’s Senior Minister for Trade and Industry,
Mr. S. Iswaran to Delhi (2-4 August, 2009). During the
visit, a Joint Action Plan on tourism cooperation was also
signed. Senior Minister of State for Foreign Affairs
Dr. Balaji Sadasivan paid an official visit to Tamil Nadu
(6 -10 September, 2009).

Thailand
India-Thailand relations remained close and friendly with
high level visits taking place on a regular basis.
Princess Maha Chakri Sirindhorn visited India twice (in
February and August 2009.) Deputy Prime Minister
Mr. Korbsak Sabhavasu, along with Vice Foreign Minister
Mr. Panich Vikitstreth visited India in October 2009 for a
Road-Show (promoting Thailand as an investment and
tourism destination). Our PM also visited Thailand in
end October 2009 for the India-ASEAN and East Asia
Summit level meetings. Thai Foreign Minister
Mr. Kasit Piromya visited India in December 2009.

In the area of defence cooperation, the sixth Defence
Policy Dialogue between the two countries, was held at
New Delhi (23-25 November, 2009). The fourth Defence
Working Group (DWG) Meeting was held in Singapore
(6-8 April, 2009). The annual Staff Talks between each
of the three services were also conducted during the year.
The Defence Secretary led a four member Indian
delegation for the Shangri-La Dialogue (29-31 May, 2009).
He called on Singapore’s Deputy Prime Minister and
Defence Minister Mr. Teo Chee Hean and met with
Permanent Secretary for Defence. An eighteen member
National Defence College delegation from India visited
Singapore (22-25 September, 2009).

Thai Parliamentarians formed a Thailand – India
Parliamentarians Friendship Group to promote ties
between Parliaments of the two countries.
A new Indian Cultural Centre started functioning in
Bangkok from September 2009 to better promote bilateral
cultural ties.
India-Thailand bilateral trade crossed US$ 6 billion
mark.
25

Annual Report 2009 - 2010

Timor Leste

(CAPEXIL) visited Hanoi and Ho Chi Minh City in
October.

As a contribution towards the Timor Leste’s efforts
towards nation-building, India offered to support and assist
in capacity building as also training slots under ITEC and
GCSS Scholarships. (For 2009-2010, 5 ITEC training slots
and 10 GCSS Scholarships were provided, though
utilization has been low due to the inability of
TL Government to spare their personnel for training).
India has extended a US$ 100,000 grant to Timor Leste
in 2009 for purchase of equipment and materials for
sustainable development. One IT Capacity Building
Project for Timor Leste under ITEC is under active
consideration of the MEA.

Vietnam continued to be an attractive investment
destination for Indian companies. Essar Exploration and
Production Limited was awarded oil and gas block 114 in
Vietnam. McLeod Russel, a leading producer of tea in
India acquired Vietnam-based Phu Ben Tea Company. It
plans to double the tea production capacity from 5 million
kgs to 10 million kgs and acquire new tea gardens in
Vietnam. A US$ 19.5 million Line of Credit was extended
by India to Vietnam for setting up three hydropower
projects, General Phung Quang Thanh, Minister
for Defence paid an official visit to India from
4-8 November, 2009. An Memorandum of Understanding
was signed during the visit by the two Defence Ministers.
Lt. Gen. Nguyen Chi Vinh, Vice Minister of Defence,
Vietnam also visited India from 25-28 August, 2009. ViceAdmiral Nirmal Verma, FoC-in-C, Eastern Naval
Command visited Vietnam from 7-11 April, 2009 along
with the visit of two Naval Ships, INS Mumbai and INS
Ranvir. A study tour of the Army High Command Course
from Army War College, Mhow comprising 16 officers
visited Vietnam from 22-27 September, 2009. Another
study tour of Higher Defence Management Course from
College of Defence Management, Secunderabad
comprising 22 officers visited Vietnam from
18-24 November, 2009.

A delegation from Commission E ‘Poverty reduction,
Rural development and Regional and Gender Equality’
of Timor Leste’s National Parliament visited India
(7-15 September, 2009).

Vietnam
India-Vietnam bilateral relations remained friendly and
cordial. In the year 2009, the ‘Strategic Partnership’
acquired greater depth with several high-level visits. The
fourth Foreign Office Consultations and the First Strategic
Dialogue between India and Vietnam were held in New
Delhi in October 2009. Prime Minister met Vietnamese
President Mr. Nguyen Minh Triet, on the sidelines of the
NAM Summit in Sharm-el-Sheikh in July and Mr. Nguyen
Tan Dung, PM of Vietnam at the seventh India-ASEAN
Summit at Hua Hin, Thailand in October 2009.
Ms. Nguyen Thi Doan, Vice-President of Vietnam led a
70-member high-powered business delegation to India in
October. Cooperation in defence and security was
strengthened with the visit of Sr. Lt. General Phung Quang
Thanh, Defence Minister in November 2009.
Mr. Le Doan Hop, Vietnam’s Minister for
Communications and Technology paid an official visit to
India in July, 2009. Chairman, National Assembly
of Vietnam visited India in February 2010.
Mr. Nguyen Phu Trong, Chairman National Assembly of
Vietnam (equivalent to our Speaker, Lok Sabha) paid an
official visit to India from 23-27 February, 2010.

More than 100 scholarships were offered to Vietnamese
officials and students under the ITEC and other
scholarship schemes.Maulana Abdul Kalam Azad
Institute of Asian Studies, Kolkata (India) & University
of Social Sciences and Humanities (Vietnam) jointly
organized a conference, “The Relationship between India
and Southeast Asia – a Strategic Commitment or Regional
Integration” in Ho Chi Minh City from 27-29 May, 2009.

Pacific Islands
Emphasis on encouraging Human Resources
Development in the Pacific Island countries continued.
India attended the 21st Post-Forum Dialogue (PFD)
Partners Meeting in Cairns, Australia (7 August, 2009)
after the 40th Pacific Islands Forum (PIF) Summit meeting
there. During the PFD, External Affairs Minister
Shri S. M. Krishna emphasized that India’s focus continues
to be HRD and enhanced investment and trade so
as to assist the Pacific Island Forum Countries in
capacity-building and project assistance according to their
specific requirements for economic & social development.

Despite global recession, bilateral trade in 2008 was
US$ 2.5 billion. India has emerged as the tenth largest
exporter of items to Vietnam. India granted Market
Economy Status to Vietnam which will provide a fillip to
the bilateral commercial ties.
A 53-member delegation led by Federation of Indian
Chambers of Commerce and Industry (FICCI) and
Chemicals and Allied Product Export Promotion Council

External Affairs Minister announced an increase in our
annual Grant-in-aid for each of the 14 PIF Countries from
26

South East Asia and the Pacific

Niue

US$ 100,000 to US$ 125,000. In addition, offers of courses
for diplomats in FSI and ITEC training programmes and
one scholarship each for undergraduate or post graduate
studies were re-iterated. EAM also announced setting up
of HiWEL Learning Stations (Hole-in-the-Wall Education
Ltd.) and IT Centres of Excellence for helping in the
education needs of the underprivileged in each PIF country.

An amount of US$ 100,000 representing grant-in-aid for
2008, was disbursed in May 2009 for three projects:
(i) Lialagi Restoration Project (phase two),
(ii) Tamakautoga New Pastor’s Residence Project, and
(iii) Sunema Training Centre

Nauru

Training under the ITEC and Colombo Plan were
promoted among the people of Fiji, Tonga and Tuvalu. In
order to improve HRD capabilities in the Pacific region,
Ministry of External Affairs, in cooperation with IMF,
organized a common training programme in Public
Finance Management at the National Institute of
Financial Management in September 2009. This course
was attended by government servants from all Pacific
Island countries.

Ministry of External Affairs in May 2009 sanctioned an amount
of US$ 1,86,000 to the Government of Nauru for funding
construction of Nauru Government Expatriate Employees
Apartment Project of the Government of Nauru, out of the
grants-in-aid for 2007 and 2008. An amount of US$ 93,000
representing 50% of the amount was disbursed by India in
July 2009 with the remaining amount to be released in phases.
Under ITEC, two slots were allocated for 2009-10.

Federated States of Micronesia

Republic of Palau

India-Federated States of Micronesia bilateral relations
continued to be warm. A development grant assistance
of US$ 73,145 was given by India for purchase of
machinery for their coconut industry.

India-Republic of Palau bilateral relations continued to
be cordial during the year with Palau supporting India’s
candidature and stand point in various international fora.

Republic of Marshall Islands
Kiribati

India-Republic of Marshall Islands relations continued to
be warm and friendly. In the international fora, Marshall
Islands was supportive of Indian candidatures.

Mr. Anote Tong, President of the Republic of Kiribati
visited India for the Delhi Sustainable Development
Summit (DSDS) in Delhi, from 5-7 February, 2010.

Samoa

US$ 253793.65 was released in June 2009 as
Grant-in-Aid to the Government of Kiribati to fund the
purchase of a 500 KW generator and overhead cables out
of grants in aid of years 2007, 2008 and 2009. Under ITEC
four slots were allotted for 2009-10.

Grant in aid amounting to NZ$ 65,030 (US$ 33,877.55)
was released in April 2009 for purchase of six units of portable
Reverse Osmosis systems for the Government of Samoa.
Under ITEC ten slots were allotted to Samoa for 2009-10.

Tonga

These grants-in-aid and assistance under ITEC
Programme contributed to strengthening our bilateral
relations with these island countries.

The king of Tonga paid a private visit to India in
September 2009.

27

3

East Asia

Japan

Shri S. M. Krishna, External Affairs Minister visited Japan
for the third round of Strategic Dialogue on 3 July, 2009.
He had wide-ranging talks with the then Foreign Minister,
Mr. Hirofumi Nakasone.

I

ndia-Japan relations have undergone a significant and
qualitative shift in recent years, propelled by the
successful regular summit level exchanges. The
Joint Statement signed during Prime Minister
Dr. Manmohan Singh’s visit in 2006 established an
India-Japan Strategic and Global Partnership.

Other Ministerial-level dialogues with Japan include the
India-Japan Policy Dialogue between Commerce &
Industry Minister and Minister of Economy, Trade and
Industry (METI) of Japan and the India-Japan Energy
Dialogues between Deputy Chairman of the Planning
Commission and METI Minister. Both Dialogues were
launched in 2007. These dialogues are to be held in India
in early 2010.

The momentum of high-level exchanges continued in
2009. Prime Minister met with the then Prime Minister
of Japan Mr. Taro Aso, on 2 April, 2009 on the margins of
the G-20 Summit in London and on 10 July, 2009 on the
sidelines of the G-8 Summit in L’Aquila (Italy). Soon after
taking over as Japan’s Prime Minister following elections
on 30 August, 2009, Dr. Yukio Hatoyama met Prime
Minister Dr. Singh in Pittsburgh on 25 September, 2009
on the sidelines of the G-20 Summit. The two Prime
Ministers had another meeting on the sidelines of the East
Asia Summit in Hua Hin (Thailand) on 24 October, 2009.

There were a number of Ministerial visits in
both directions in 2009. The Textiles Minister
Shri Dayanidhi Maran, visited Japan from
20-23 July, 2009. Dr. Karan Singh, President of ICCR
visited Japan from 25-27 September, 2009. During his visit,
he also inaugurated India Cultural Centre in Tokyo.
Minister of State (PMO), Shri Prithviraj Chavan, attended
the Forum on Science, Technology and Society in Japan
from 4-6 October, 2009. National Security Adviser (NSA)
Shri M. K. Narayanan visited Tokyo on 19 October, 2009
as Prime Minister’s Special Envoy to reiterate our desire
to strengthen existing partnership with Japan with the
new Japanese Government. He called on Japanese Prime
Minister and Foreign Minister, besides meeting Chief
Cabinet Secretary and Leader of the Opposition Liberal
Democratic Party. Defence Minister Shri A. K. Antony
paid a visit to Japan at the invitation of the Japanese
Minister of Defence from 8-10 November, 2009. A Joint
Press Statement was issued during the visit. Minister for
Road Transport and Highways Shri Kamal Nath, visited
Japan from 17-19 January, 2010 to explore the possibility
of cooperation in the development of transport
infrastructure in India. From the Japanese side, Minister
for the Environment Mr. Sakihito Ozawa visited India
from 18-20 October, 2009. Minister for Internal Affairs
& Communications, Mr. Kazuhiro Haraguchi, visited
India from 6-9 January, 2010 to push for greater
cooperation in the ICT sector. The sharp increase in highlevel exchanges has also been accompanied by more broad
based exchanges of business delegations, parliamentary

Prime Minister Dr. Yukio Hatoyama visited India from
27-29 December, 2009 for the Annual Summit. During
the visit, the two sides issued a Joint Statement on the
New Stage of India- Japan Strategic and Global
Partnership and an Action Plan to advance bilateral
security cooperation. In addition, the Japanese
contribution to the joint Project Development Fund for
Delhi-Mumbai Industrial Corridor (DMIC) was
formalized, while an MoU was signed between DMIC
Development Corporation and Japan External Trade
Organization (JETRO) for development of eco-friendly
cities and smart communities along the Delhi-Mumbai
Industrial Corridor. Important progress was made on the
Western Dedicated Freight Corridor project, with the two
sides agreeing to conclude the agreement for the Main
Loan for the first phase of the project by March 2010.
Prime Minister Dr. Hatoyama had delegation-level talks
with Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh and met UPA
Chairperson, Smt. Sonia Gandhi besides meeting top
industry leaders of India in Mumbai.
The annual Foreign Minister-level Strategic Dialogue
initiated in March 2007 has been held regularly.
28

Prime Minister of Japan, Dr. Yukio Hatoyama calling on the
Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh, in New Delhi on 28 December, 2009.

29

Annual Report 2009 - 2010

delegations and interactions between provincial and local
governments of both countries.

a new IIT in Hyderabad through various contributions
from Japan.

India and Japan have launched a number of high-visibility
projects under the Special Economic Partnership Initiative
launched in 2006.

The official-level dialogue architecture with Japan is
clearly defined, and covers a wide range of issues. Foreign
Secretary’s dialogue with Japanese Vice- Foreign Minister
and annual Foreign Office Consultations with Deputy
Foreign Minister were held in Tokyo on 4 December, 2009.
Other dialogues between India and Japan include dialogue
on Disarmament & Non-Proliferation, Joint Working
Group on Counter-terrorism, Consular Talks, Policy
Planning Dialogue and Track 1.5 Strategic Dialogue. The
two sides have established a bilateral Consultative
Mechanism for High Technology Trade to address matters
relating to their respective export control systems. The
fourth round of the mechanism was held in Tokyo on
24 April, 2009. A High Level Strategic Economic
Dialogue has been established in order to develop an
overarching dialogue mechanism on all economic issues.
The third meeting of this dialogue, co-chaired by Finance
Secretary and Deputy Foreign Minister of Japan, was held
in New Delhi on 16 November, 2009. Secretary (Urban
Development) visited Japan from 11-12 June, 2009 for
the third Meeting of Joint Working Group on Urban
Development.

During Prime Minister’s visit to Japan in December 2006
the two sides agreed to cooperate on establishing a
Dedicated Multi-modal High Axle Load Freight Corridors
Mumbai-Delhi route. The project entails construction of
a rail freight corridor from Jawaharlal Nehru Port (JNPT)
in Mumbai to Tughlakabad/Dadri in Delhi to be funded
through Japan’s Overseas Development Assistance
(ODA) under their Special Terms for Economic
Partnership (STEP) scheme. Government of Japan has
committed to funding for the entire Dedicated Freight
Corridor – Western (DFC-W). An Engineering Services
Loan Agreement to start Japanese assistance by way of
engagement of a General Contractor was signed in
October 2009. The Japanese side has also proposed a
schedule for preparatory Environmental Impact
Assessment (EIA) and Rehabilitation and Resettlement
Plan (RRP) for DFC-W Phase-II.
The proposal for the development of Delhi-Mumbai
Industrial Corridor (DMIC) was agreed during the visit of
Prime Minister to Japan in December 2006. The alignment
of the 1483 km DMIC is via Ahmedabad, Palampura,
Phulera, Rewari and Dadri. A Joint Task Force (JTF),
co-chaired by the Secretary, Department of Industrial Policy
and Promotion (DIPP) and Japanese Vice Minister, Ministry
of Economy, Trade and Industry (METI) has been
established to work out the details. Seven meetings of the
JTF have been held so far, the last two rounds in New Delhi
on 13 July, 2009 and 24 December, 2010. DMICDC has
identified early-bird projects and is finalizing DPRs for the
investment regions in consultation with State
Governments. The Japanese commitment to the Project
Development Fund was formalized in December 2009
during Prime Minister Dr. Hatoyama’s visit.

Bilateral economic relations have vast potential for
growth. During Prime Minister Abe’s visit in 2009, it was
agreed to work towards a trade target of US$ 20 billion
by the year 2010. However with the onset of the global
economic crisis, the recovery in bilateral trade suffered a
setback as the growth momentum slowed down. As per
official Japanese statistics, bilateral trade during fiscal
2008-09 reached US$ 12.18 billion marginally above
US$ 11.23 billion recorded in the previous year.
Japan ranks sixth largest in cumulative Foreign Direct
Investment (FDI) flows into India. Japanese companies
have made actual investments of US$ 2.530 billion
between April 2000 and March 2009. Japanese
investments in the infrastructure and industry sectors will
secure a boost from DFC and DMIC projects under
finalization.

To accelerate the positive bilateral trade and investment
trends, India and Japan are currently discussing the signing
of a Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement
(CEPA). Negotiation is led by the Commerce Secretary
from the Indian side and Deputy Foreign Minister from
the Japanese side. So far, twelve rounds of negotiations
have been held. The last round was held in Tokyo from
29 September-1 October 2009.

Since FY 2003-04, India has become the largest recipient
of Japanese ODA loan assistance. Cumulative
commitment of Japanese ODA to India up to
October 2009 is about Yen 2.9 trillion (approx.
Rs. 113209.77 crores). For FY 2008-09, total ODA
was Yen 236 billion (approx. US$ 2.5 billion or
Rs. 11713 crores) which is an increase of 4.8% over the
previous year and is 30% of Japan’s global ODA. For the
current financial year (2009-10), the Japanese side has

During Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh’s visit to
Japan in October 2008, the two Prime Ministers confirmed
their commitment to collaborate in the establishment of
30

East Asia

approved two ODA projects under the first batch,
including the Delhi and Kolkata Metro projects, costing
57 billion yen.

External Affairs Minister. During the visit, the ROK
Foreign Minister also called on the Prime Minister and
Minister of Commerce & Industry. This visit, which took
place within a few days of the new Government taking
over in India, indicated the importance that both sides
attach to bilateral relations.

Defence and security has emerged as an important area
of bilateral relations. A calendar of events for 2009 was
finalized for promoting exchanges and cooperation in an
institutionalized framework. Dialogues on defence and
security-related matters include Defence Policy Dialogue
at Secretary-level, Comprehensive Security Dialogue
(CSD), Military-to-Military (M2M) talks, Navy-to-Navy
talks. The second Navy-to-Navy Staff Talks were held in
October 2009 in Tokyo. The new Bilateral Maritime
Security Dialogue was held in New Delhi on
14 October, 2009. Four Indian warships visited Japan from
26-29 April, 2009 for bilateral and trilateral Malabar
Exercises with Japan and the USA. Japanese Maritime
Self Defence Force (JMSDF) ships Kashima, Shimayuki and
Yuugiri visited Goa from 6-10 May, 2009. The Chief of
Army Staff of India, General Deepak Kapoor, visited Tokyo
(23-27 August, 2009) for the sixth Pacific Army Chiefs’
Conference. Major outcomes of Shri A. K. Antony,
Defence Minister’s visit in November 2009 included
scheduling of annual meetings of Defence Ministers,
regular meetings of Defence Secretary/Vice Minister and
exchange of visits by Service Chiefs. High-level Meeting
between the two Coast Guards was held in January 2010.

President Lee Myung-bak of ROK paid a State Visit to
India from 24-27 January, 2010. He was the Chief Guest
at the celebrations on 26 January to mark the Republic
Day of India. During the visit, President Lee held
delegation level talks with the Prime Minister and called
on the President of India. The Vice President of India,
the External Affairs Minister, the Leader of Opposition
in Lok Sabha and the UPA Chairperson called on the
visiting dignitary. A state banquet was hosted by the
President of India Smt. Pratibha Devisingh Patil in honour
of President Lee. A Joint Statement was issued following
the delegation level talks on 25 January, 2009. The
highlight of the visit was the decision to elevate IndiaROK relations to a “Strategic Partnership”. Four
documents – an Agreement on Transfer of Sentenced
Persons, an MoU on Cooperation in Information
Technology and Services, a Programme of Cooperation
in the Fields of Science and Technology for the period
2010-12 and another MoU between the Indian Space
Research Organisation (ISRO) and the Korean Aerospace
Research Institute (KARI) were signed during the visit.
The ROK President was accompanied by a high level
official and business delegation. He addressed an
India-ROK Business Forum that was organized in New
Delhi coinciding with the visit.

The period under review witnessed a number of
developments in India-Japan relations. The regular highlevel interactions on the sidelines of regional and
international gatherings and sustained exchanges in
various fields continued. The two countries have also been
furthering cooperation in regional and multilateral forums
on global issues such as climate change and global financial
situation.

The India-ROK Foreign Office Consultations were held
in New Delhi on 18 November, 2009. The two sides
reviewed the entire range of bilateral cooperation in
various fields and exchanged views on important regional
and international issues of interest to both sides. It was
decided to raise the level of the Foreign Office
Consultations to that of Vice Minister (Secretary).

Republic of Korea
The “Long Term Cooperative Partnership” established
with the Republic of Korea (ROK) during the visit of
President Roh Myun-hwan to India in 2004 is the bedrock
of India-ROK bilateral relations. This partnership has
become appreciably more intense and diversified in the
recent years. A number of high level visits, signing of the
Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement
(CEPA), increasing economic and commercial
interactions and expanding exchanges in the field of art
and culture have been the high points of India-ROK
bilateral ties during the year.

India-ROK cooperation in the field of defence and security
continued apace during the year. The MoU on Defence
Industry and Logistics Cooperation signed in 2005 is the
blue-print of India-ROK Defence Cooperation. Under the
MoU, the two sides have set up a Joint Working Group
on Cooperation, which has met twice. The third meeting
of the Joint Working Group is likely to be held shortly in
Seoul.

India and ROK exchanged a number of high-level visits
during the year. The ROK Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Trade, Mr. Yu Myung-hwan, visited New Delhi on
23 June, 2009, and held wide-ranging discussions with

India and ROK concluded the landmark Comprehensive
Economic Partnership Agreement (CEPA) on
7 August, 2009. The Minister of Commerce and Industry,
31

Annual Report 2009 - 2010

Shri Anand Sharma visited Seoul to sign this important
agreement which is expected to usher in a new era in
India-ROK bilateral relations, particularly in the economic
and commercial field. This is India’s second CEPA and
the first with an OECD country. The CEPA has since
been ratified by the National Assembly of the Republic of
Korea and, after the procedural requirements on the
Indian side are completed, the Agreement is expected to
come into effect from 1 January, 2010.

Mongolia paid a State Visit to India from
13-16 September, 2009. This was the Mongolian leader’s
first foreign visit after assuming the Presidency of
Mongolia. The two sides reviewed and discussed the entire
gamut of bilateral relations and exchanged views on
international and regional issues of mutual interest. During
the visit, the two sides agreed to upgrade the level of
bilateral relations to that of “Comprehensive Partnership”.
Five Agreements/MoUs were signed between the two sides
during the visit, viz. the Agreement on Stabilization Loan
Assistance, MoU on Cooperation in the Field of Statistics,
MoU on Peaceful Use of Radioactive Minerals and
Nuclear Energy, MoU on Cooperation in Health and
Medicine and the Cultural Exchange Programme for
2009-2012. At the request of the Mongolian side, the
Government of India extended US$ 25 million loan
assistance to Mongolia to stabilize its economy in the wake
of the global financial crisis. India also agreed to offer a
project-specific Line of Credit of US$ 20 million to
Mongolia on special soft terms.

In pursuance of an MoU signed in October 2003, the third
meeting of the India-ROK Joint Investment Promotion
Committee (JIPC) was held in Seoul from
2-3 September, 2009. The Indian delegation was led by
Secretary, Department of Industrial Policy & Promotion.
Bilateral trade between India and ROK showed a
39% growth in 2008, touching US$ 15.56 billion, thus
surpassing the target of US$ 10 billion set by the two
countries to be achieved by the year 2010. Despite some
setback due to the global financial crisis, it is expected
that the growth of bilateral trade between the two
countries during the year would continue to maintain the
momentum.

The Second Meeting of the India-Mongolia Joint
Committee on Cooperation (JCC) was held in New Delhi
on 11 January, 2010. Smt. Preneet Kaur, Minister of State
for External Affairs co-chaired the meeting on the Indian
side, while the Mongolian side was chaired by
Mr. Yondongiin Otgonbayar, Minister of Education,
Culture and Science of Mongolia. The JCC reviewed the
follow up measures taken by the two sides on the visit of
President Elbegdorj of Mongolia to India in
September 2009. It also discussed and identified further
areas of cooperation such as agriculture, animal husbandry,
mining, information technology, education, training of
Mongolian teachers, etc. The Mongolian side presented
broad outline of a proposal to establish an India-Mongolia
Joint Information Technology Education and Outsourcing
Centre utilizing the US$ 20 million Line of Credit offered
by India to Mongolia.

The seventh meeting of the Joint Committee on Culture
was held in Seoul from 1-3 September, 2009. During the
meeting the two sides signed the Cultural Exchange
Programme for 2009-2012. Under the Agreement on
Youth Exchange Programme signed in April 2005, the two
countries have been regularly exchanging youth
delegations. A 20-member Indian youth delegation visited
ROK from 24 August-2 September 2009 and a 20-member
Korean youth delegation also visited India from
17-26 September, 2009.

Mongolia
India’s centuries old friendly and cordial relationship with
Mongolia, which was raised to the level of “Partnership”
during the visit of the Mongolian Prime Minister in 2004,
continued to develop and diversify further during the year
to cover a wide range of areas for bilateral cooperation,
including exchanges and cooperation in the fields of
defence and security, economy, education and culture.

During the year there was significant progress in IndiaMongolia cooperation in the field of defence. The fifth
India-Mongolia Joint Military Exercise was held in
Mongolia from 14-27 September, 2009. India also
participated in the multinational peace keeping exercise
“Khan Quest” held in Mongolia from 3-31 August, 2009.
At the Mongolian request, India has deputed a team of
four Army officers to Mongolia for a period of one year to
train Mongolian troops in IT and English language.

The two sides exchanged a number of high level visits
during the year. Smt. Preneet Kaur, Minister of State for
External Affairs, visited Mongolia from 17-19 June, 2009
to represent Government of India at the swearing-in
ceremony of the new Mongolian President,
Mr. Ts. Elbegdorj.

The regular interaction between the National Security
Councils (NSCs) of India and Mongolia continued during
the year. A Mongolian National Security Council
delegation, led by its Executive Secretary

Bilateral relations between India and Mongolia received
a further fillip when the newly elected President of
32

Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh with the President of the Republic of Korea, Mr. Lee Myung-bak at
the delegation level talks in New Delhi on 25 January, 2010.

President of Korea, Mr. Lee Myung Bak, the Vice President, Shri Mohd. Hamid Ansari,
the Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh, on the occasion of the `At Home` ceremony, at
Rashtrapati Bhavan, in New Delhi on 26 January, 2010.
Ms. Kim Yoon Ok, Dr. Devisingh Ramsingh Shekhawat and Smt. Gursharan Kaur are also seen.

33

Annual Report 2009 - 2010

diplomat annually in its Professional Course for Foreign
Diplomats. It has been decided to increase the number of
slots to three with effect from the financial year
2009-2010.

Mr. Ts. Enkhtuvshin visited India from
31 August-2 September 2009 for the annual dialogue
between the two NSCs.
Border protection forces of India and Mongolia also
continued their regular exchange of visits and programme of
cooperation. At the request of the Mongolian side BSF
organized the second training programme for Mongolian
border officials in India from 7 September-14 December 2009.

Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
Relations between India and Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea (DPRK) continue to be cordial with a
focus on humanitarian and human resource development
assistance. Exchanges in the area of culture, sports and
education continued to make progress during the year.

During the year, the two sides agreed to cooperate in the
field of peaceful use of radioactive minerals and nuclear
energy. Visits were exchanged between the Department
of Atomic Energy and MONATOM, the Mongolian
Government entity engaged in exploration and mining of
uranium in Mongolia. The signing of the intergovernmental agreement on civil nuclear cooperation in
September 2009 during the Presidential visit from
Mongolia, has charted out the roadmap for cooperation
between the two countries in this area.

The two sides continued their bilateral exchanges with
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s Vice Foreign
Minister Kim Young II visiting India in August 2009 for
the sixth Round of Foreign Office Consultations.
Discussions involved reviewing bilateral relations,
exchange of opinion on international issues of mutual
interest, the Six Party Talks process, and steps for future
cooperation.

Mongolia has emerged as one of the major beneficiaries
under the Indian Technical and Economic Cooperation
(ITEC) Training Programme. During President
Elebegdorj’s visit to India in September 2009,
Prime Minister announced doubling of the number of
ITEC slots for Mongolia from 60 to 120. The Foreign
Service Institute has been training one Mongolian

Indian assistance for development of human resources in
DPRK continues. DPR Korea was allotted 18 slots under
the Indian Technical and Economic Cooperation (ITEC)
Training Programme for the Year 2009-2010. Two
additional ITEC slots were also offered to DPRK for
English language training courses in Defence Institute
(AEC Training Institute) in India.

34

Eurasia

4

Cultural Exchanges between the Government of the
Republic of India and the Government of the Russian
Federation for the Years 2010-12, and (vi) A Dollar
Agreement for extension of a Line of Credit of
US$ 100 million by Exim Bank to Vnesheconombank for
boosting export of Indian goods and technology products
to Russia. A Joint Declaration on “Deepening the Strategic
Partnership to meet Global Challenges” was also adopted at
the end of the Summit. Separately, an agreement was
inked between ONGC Videsh Ltd. and Sistema for joint
bid for hydrocarbon blocks exploration in Russia and CIS
countries.

Russian Federation

T

he year witnessed intensive engagement between
India and Russia at all levels, aimed at further
diversification and consolidation of the bilateral strategic
partnership and on-going multi-faceted cooperation in
areas such as political dialogue, trade and investments,
energy security including hydrocarbons and atomic energy,
science & technology, space research, and culture.
Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh visited Moscow from
6-8 December, 2009 for the Annual India-Russia Summit;
these summits have been held regularly since the bilateral
relationship was re-energised with the declaration of
Strategic Partnership in 2000. Prime Minister met both
President Mr. Dmitry Medvedev and Prime Minister
Mr. Vladimir Putin. During the meetings, the entire gamut
of bilateral relations was discussed and there was exchange
of views on major global and regional issues of mutual
interest. The two Prime Ministers addressed a meeting of
the India-Russia CEOs’ Council (the two Co-Chairs of
the India-Russia CEOs’ Council are Shri Mukesh Ambani
of Reliance Industries Ltd. from the Indian side and
Mr. Vladimir Evtushenkov from the Russian side).
Separately, Prime Minister had interactions with
prominent Russian scholars and Indologists. The following
bilateral agreements were signed during Prime Minister’s
visit in the presence of the Indian Prime Minister and the
Russian President: (i) Agreement between the
Government of the Republic of India and the Government
of the Russian Federation on the Programme for Military
and Technical Cooperation (MTC) during the period
2011-2020; (ii) Agreement between the Government of
the Republic of India and the Government of the Russian
Federation on After Sales Support for the Russian Arms
and Military Equipment supplied to the Republic of India;
(iii) Protocol to the Agreement of the Government of
the Republic of India and the Government of Russian
Federation on Cooperation in Development and
Production of Multi-Role Transport Aircraft on
12 November, 2007; (iv) Agreement between the
Government of the Republic of India and the Government
of the Russian Federation on Cooperation in Peaceful Uses
of Atomic Energy (initialed); and (v) Programme of

President Smt. Pratibha Devisingh Patil visited Russia from
2-6 September, 2009, during which she met President of
the Russian Federation Mr. Dmitry Medvedev,
Prime Minister Mr. Vladimir Putin, Chairman of the
Federation Council Mr. Sergei Mironov and Chairman of
the State Duma Mr. Boris Gryzlov and other dignitaries.
In addition to the above, following important bilateral
visits took place during the year:
Secretary of the Russian Security Council
Mr. Nikolai Patrushev visited New Delhi from
14-17 May, 2009 and held bilateral security dialogue
with National Security Advisor Shri M. K. Narayanan.
Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh visited
Yekaterinburg for the Brazil-Russia-India-China
(BRIC) and Shanghai cooperation Organisation
(SCO) Summit meetings from 15-16 June, 2009. On
the sidelines, Prime Minister met the Russian
President Mr. Dmitry Medvedev for bilateral
discussions.
Minister of Petroleum & Natural Gas
Shri Murli Deora, who accompanied
President during her State Visit to Russia from
2-6 September, 2009, held discussions with Russian
authorities on further enhancement of cooperation
in the hydrocarbon sector. Furthermore, he visited
the Tomsk region where ONGC Videsh Ltd. has
acquired oil blocks from Imperial Energy.
Commerce& Industry Minister Shri Anand Sharma
visited Russia for the third meeting of the India35

Annual Report 2009 - 2010

Russia
Trade
&
Investment
Forum
from 29 September-3 October 2009. He met
the Minister of Economic Development
Ms. Elvira Sakhipzadovna Nabiullina. Commerce
& Industry Minister also held bilateral meetings with
Prime Minister Putin and the Minister of Industry
& Trade Mr. Viktor Borisovich Khristenko. During
the visit, Commerce & Industry Minister also
inaugurated an India Show organized by Indian
Trade Promotion Organisation, New Delhi in
St. Petersburg with the participation of over
150 business entities, as a part of the “Year of India
in Russia” celebrations.

Russian First Deputy Foreign Minister
Mr. Andrei A. Denisov visited New Delhi on
10 November, 2009 for holding Foreign Office
Consultations
with
Foreign
Secretary
Smt. Nirupama Rao. Both sides reviewed bilateral
issues and exchanged views on key regional and
global issues of mutual concern. In addition, the two
Foreign Offices held consultations on the following
subjects during the year: (i) Issues related to the UN
and Cooperation within other international
organizations (Moscow, August 2009); (ii) China
and East Asia (New Delhi, March 2009); (iii) Iran
& Afghanistan (New Delhi, November 2009); South
Asia (Moscow, October 2009); (iv) Consular Issues
(Moscow, 12-13 November, 2009); and (v) Middle
East and Iraq (Moscow, 22 January, 2010).

Defence Minister Shri A. K. Antony visited Moscow
from 14-15 October, 2009 for the ninth session of
the India-Russia Inter-Governmental Commission
on Military Technical Cooperation. During the visit,
he discussed various aspects of defence and military
cooperation with his Russian counterpart
Mr. Anatoly Eduardovich Serdyukov.

Russian Deputy Prime Minister Mr. Sergei Sobyanin,
during his maiden visit to India from
9-12 November, 2009, called on Prime Minister
Dr. Manmohan Singh, and held meetings with
External Affairs Minister Shri S. M. Krishna;
Minister
of
Commerce
&
Industry
Shri Anand Sharma; and Minister of Petroleum &
Natural Gas Shri Murli Deora. Besides, he
participated in the CII-organized India Economic
Summit, and visited Infosys in Bangalore and the
civilian nuclear facilities under construction at
Kudankulam, being built with Russian help.

External Affairs Minister Shri S. M. Krishna visited
Moscow from 20-22 October, 2009 for co-chairing
the 15 th session of the India-Russia
Inter-Governmental Commission on Trade,
Economic, Scientific, Technological and Cultural
Cooperation (IRIGC-TEC) with Russian Deputy
Prime Minister Mr. Sergei S. Sobyanin. A protocol
reflecting the discussions arrived at during the
meeting was signed at the conclusion of the talks.
On the sidelines, External Affairs Minister held
bilateral discussions with his Russian counterpart
Mr. Sergei Lavrov, and also called on President
Mr. Dmitry Medvedev. The IRIGC-TEC meeting
was preceded by the meetings of the various Working
Groups under the Inter-Governmental Commission,
which are headed by senior officials from concerned
Ministries in both countries. These include the
Working Group on Trade & Economy (Moscow,
28 September, 2009); Working Group on Metallurgy
and Mining (Moscow, 8-9 October, 2009); Sub
Group on Banking & Financial Matters (Hyderabad,
5-7 October, 2009); Working Group on Information
& Communications Technology (New Delhi,
13 October, 2009); and Working Group Science &
Technology (Moscow, 20 October, 2009). The
Working Group on Energy met in Moscow from
23-24 November, 2009.

Russian Deputy Prime Minister Mr. Sergei Sobyanin
paid his second visit to India from
15-17 February, 2010 to prepare for the visit of Russian
Prime Minister Mr. Vladimir Putin, scheduled for
middle of March 2010. As the co-chair of the IRIGCTEC, he met his Indian counterpart, External Affairs
Minister Shri S. M. Krishna and reviewed bilateral
economic and commercial relations.
The Year 2009 was celebrated as the “Year of India in Russia”
with the organisation of more than 150 events showcasing
Indian art & culture, paintings and artifacts, achievements
in the field of science & technology etc. in Russia.
President Smt. Pratibha Devisingh Patil and her Russian
counterpart Mr. Dmitry Medvedev witnessed a glittering
cultural programme at the new stage of Bolshoi Theatre
in Moscow during the former’s visit to Russia. The Closing
Ceremony of the year of India in Russia, which was
scheduled on 7 December, 2009 and was expected to be
attended by Prime Ministers of India and Russia, was called
off as a mark of respect to the victims of a fire tragedy in
the Russian city of Perm.

Russian Foreign Minister Mr. Sergei Lavrov visited
Bengaluru from 26-27 October, 2009 for the ninth
India-Russia-China Trilateral Foreign Ministers’
Meeting. There were no bilateral discussions
between India and Russia.

Bilateral trade, which, according to Russian figures, stood
at close to US$ 7 billion in 2008, has been growing steadily.
36

Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh meeting the
Russian President, Mr. Dmitry Anatolyevich Medvedev
on the sidelines of the BRIC and SCO Summits,
hosted by Russia, in Yekaterinburg, on 16 June, 2009.

Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh and the President of the Russian Federation, Mr. Dmitry Anatolyevich Medvedev
at the delegation level talks, in Moscow, Russia on 7 December, 2009.

37

Annual Report 2009 - 2010

the arrival of Ms. Anita Verma, Hindi Teacher on
12 January, 2010. Earlier an ICCR-sponsored cultural
troupe visited Armenia in April 2009.

Preliminary estimates indicate at an 8% growth in bilateral
trade during the year 2009. During the 15th session of the
IRIGC-TEC meeting held in Moscow in October 2009, it
was decided to revise the bilateral trade turnover target
upwards from US$ 10 billion by 2010 to US$ 20 billion by
2015. This is intended to be achieved through a series of
sustained measures such as diversification of the trade basket
and increased focus on untapped areas with large potential
such as IT, high-technology, rough diamonds and
pharmaceuticals. Further, the CEO’s Council (headed by
Shri Mukesh Ambani, Chairman of Reliance Industries and
Mr. Vladimir Evtushenkov, Chairman, Sistema), held its first
full fledged meeting in Moscow on 7 December, 2009 and
identified telecom, infrastructure investments (in India) and
pharmaceuticals as areas of promise.

Azerbaijan
India further developed friendly and cordial relations with
Azerbaijan during this period.
The first meeting of Inter-Governmental Commission on
Trade, Economic, Scientific and Technological
Cooperation was held on 26 November, 2009 in New
Delhi. While the Indian side was co-chaired by
Minister of State for Commerce & Industry,
Mr. Jyotiraditya M. Scindia, Azerbaijan was represented
by Mr. Huseyngulu Bagirov, Minister of Ecology and
Natural Resources. A draft protocol was signed to further
fructify bilateral relations in different fields. There were
several commercial delegations visiting from both sides.
Notable among them were an 11-member Azeri trade
delegation consisting of prominent businessmen in the
field of gem & jewellery for participation in the IIJS
Signature 2009 held in Goa from 20-23 February, 2009, a
two member delegation in the CAPEXIL-sponsored
exhibition in New Delhi from 25-26 February, 2009 and
one member participation in the INDIASOFT-2009
sponsored by Electronic and Computer Software Export
Promotion Council of India (ESC).

Armenia
Relations between India and Armenia continued to
remain cordial, marked by understanding at various levels.
Foreign Office Consultations held in Yerevan in May 2009
provided an excellent opportunity for review of ongoing
bilateral cooperation and also for identifying new areas
for possible collaboration.
India continued its commitment to contribute towards
Armenia’s developmental efforts. In this context, an MoU
was signed on 19 May, 2009 for India’s assistance of
US$ 2,15,000 for a rural development project in Armenia;
another MoU was signed on 26 June, 2009 for the
establishment of India-Armenia Centre for Excellence in
Information and Communication Technology at a cost of
Rs. 7.6 crores with the objective of supporting
development of information and communication
technology in Armenia. Thereafter, a four member team
of experts from the Centre for Development of Advanced
Computing (C-DAC) visited Yerevan and had an
extensive and productive interaction with their
counterparts in Armenia towards the timely
implementation of the project.

There were a number of bilateral cultural activities during
this period. Prominent among them was an ICCRsponsored contemporary dance troupe led by Tanusree
Shankar which gave its maiden performance in September
2009, and a seminar on the theme “The Relevance of
Gandhi and Values” chaired by the Rector of Azerbaijan
University of Languages in October 2009.

Belarus
India’s relations with Belarus developed and diversified
further in 2009-10.
External Affairs Minister Shri S. M. Krishna visited Minsk
from 16-17 September, 2009 marking the first ever visit
by an External Affairs Minister of India to Belarus.
EAM had meetings with his Belarusian counterpart,
Mr. Sergei Martynov, Foreign Minister and also called on
Mr. Aleksander Lukashenko, President of Belarus. Two
Agreements were signed during this visit – (i) Agreement
on Cooperation in the field of Physical Training & Sports;
and (ii) MoU on establishment of a Digital Learning
Centre at HT Park, Minsk. Minster of State for Defence
Shri M. M. Pallam Raju visited Belarus from
25-28 October, 2009. The RRM, apart from meetings with
Colonel General Leonid S. Maltsev, Defence Minister of
Belarus, also called on Mr. Alexander Lukashenko,

Significant headway was made in bilateral cooperation in
the field of horticulture; a delegation from National
Horticulture Board of India visited Yerevan in November
2009 to procure Armenian varieties of Apricot plants with
the objective of conducting trials for Apricot farming in
selected areas of Jammu & Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh
and Uttaranchal.
Responding to the interest and aspirations of Armenian
people in Hindi language and culture in Armenia, India
signed an MoU on 11 November, 2009 with the Yerevan
State Linguistic University “Brusov” for the establishment
of a Chair of Hindi language and culture. The Chair for
Hindi language and literature became operational with
38

Eurasia

diverse areas. Despite the setback to the Georgian
economy as a result of the global financial crisis and the
fallout of the Georgia-Russia tension in August 2008, the
confidence of Indian investors did not diminish; significant
investments into Georgia from India were made in the
steel, oil and gas sectors.

President of Belarus. Chief Justice of India
Shri K. G. Balakrishnan visited Belarus in March 2009.
Chairman of the State Military and Industrial Committee
of Belarus Mr. N. I. Azamatov visited India for the
‘AeroIndia’ exposition in February 2009. These high level
visits helped in maintaining a good momentum in bilateral
relations with Belarus.

Georgia is likely to open its Resident Mission in New Delhi
in 2010.

India-Belarus Joint Commission on Military Technical
Cooperation met in its second meeting in New Delhi in
May 2009. The sixth meeting of the India-Belarus Joint
Business Council (JBC) was held in Minsk in
October 2009.

The second round of Foreign Office Consultations will
be held in New Delhi from 29-30 March, 2010. The Indian
side will be headed by Joint Secretary (Eurasia) while the
Director of Asia, Africa, Australia and Pacific Rim
Department in the Georgian Foreign Office led the
Georgian side.

Economic and commercial relations with Belarus were
on the upswing during the year under report. Belarus
organized a focused trade exhibition in Mumbai in
May 2009. Indian company, Bharat Heavy Electricals
Limited (BHEL) bagged a contract for Grodno-II Power
Project worth US$ 55 million. It was the first ever contract
in Belarus awarded to an Indian company. The contract
for the project was signed during the visit of External
Affairs Minister to Minsk in September 2009. Government
of India offered a credit line of US$ 60 million for the
project. Government of India is setting up a Digital
Learning Centre at the High Technology Park in Minsk
for which the MoU was signed during the visit of External
Affairs Minister to Minsk as mentioned above. Belarusian
business/media persons, on sponsorship by the concerned
Indian Export Promotion Councils, visited India to
participate in India International Garments Fair in July
2009, Indian Handicrafts & Gifts Fair in October 2009
and Delhi International Leather Fair in October 2009.

Kazakhstan
Prime Minister had a meeting with President Nursultan
Nazarbayev of Kazakhstan on 16 June, 2009, on the
sidelines of SCO Summit in Yekaterinburg. During the
meeting, the two leaders expressed satisfaction on the way
the bilateral relations were shaping and reviewed the
decisions taken and reflected in the Joint Declaration
issued during the State Visit of Kazakh President to India
in January 2009. The two leaders directed that the Foreign
Minister of India and Kazakhstan should meet in the near
future and finalise a roadmap of bilateral areas of
engagement and this would need to be closely pursued by
the two sides.
Foreign Office Consultations with Kazakhstan were held
on 22 September, 2009 in Astana. Shri N. Ravi, Secretary
(East) led the delegation and held the consultations with
his Kazakh counterpart.

Cultural and educational cooperation with Belarus was
also strengthened. A leading literary magazine of Belarus,
‘Neman’ published a special number, in conjunction with
the Independence Day of India, in September 2009 with
special focus on the writings on India of Belarusian
academician Prof. Mikhail I. Mihailov. Embassy of India
in Minsk continued hosting of classes for classical and
modern Indian dances conducted by ICCR alumni in
cooperation and sponsorship of the ICCR. The Belarusian
nominees continued availing of ICCR cultural
scholarships for learning Indian classical dances. India’s
Directorate of Film Festivals also participated in the
non-competition section of the Minsk International Film
Festival “Listapad” in November 2009.

The External Affairs Minister met with his Kazakh
counterpart, Mr. Kanat Saudabayev, in January 2010 in
London on the sidelines of the London Conference on
Afghanistan. They exchanged views on bilateral issues.

Kyrgyz Republic
The Inter Governmental Commission on Trade, Economic,
Scientific & Technological Cooperation is likely to be held
on 2 March, 2010 in New Delhi. The Commission will be
co-chaired by Shri Jyotiraditya Scindia, MoS (Commerce
and Industry) and representative of the Kyrgyz Republic.
Foreign Office Consultations with the Kyrgyz Republic were
held on 26 June, 2009 in Bishkek. A Joint Protocol was signed
on the conclusion of the meeting of the Inter Governmental
Commission. Shri N. Ravi, Secretary (East) led the
Indian delegation. The Kyrgyz delegation was led by
Mr. Ibraimov Emrek Sultanovich, Deputy Foreign
Minister.

Georgia
Relations with Georgia during the year remained cordial.
India’s Ambassador to Georgia (with residence in Yerevan)
maintained a sustained dialogue with the Georgian
authorities for the promotion of bilateral cooperation in
39

Annual Report 2009 - 2010

Tajikistan

cooperation in the gas and oil sector. The TAPI
(Turkmenistan-Afghanistan-Pakistan-India gas pipeline)
project was also discussed in detail with the President,
Minister of Foreign Affairs and Deputy PM in-Charge of
Oil and Gas of Turkmenistan.

President Smt. Pratibha Devisingh Patil was on a State Visit
to Tajikistan from 6-8 September, 2009. This was the first
ever visit by an Indian Head of State to the Central Asian
Region. The engagements of President included a call on
President Rahmon of Tajikistan followed by delegation level
talks. The Prime Minister, Foreign Minister and Defence
Minister of Tajikistan called on President. She also had a
meeting with Chairman and Members of the Lower House
of Tajik Parliament. President also visited the mausoleum
of sufi saint Syed Hamadoni in Kulyab. The Saint is credited
to have brought Islam to Jammu and Kashmir and the
mausoleum is frequented by pilgrims from the state. The
State Visit provided an opportunity for the inauguration of
the India-Tajikistan Joint Business Forum which was jointly
addressed by President with President Rahmon. President
also attended the National Day celebrations of Tajikistan
as Guest of Honour. This was the first time that a foreign
dignitary was accorded the honour. President also attended
a reception hosted by our Ambassador for the Indian
community. The visit provided an opportunity to reaffirm
bilateral ties at the highest political level and to
exchange views on regional and global issues of mutual
interest.

Smt. Preneet Kaur, Minister of State (External Affairs)
will be co-chairing the Third Session of the InterGovernmental Commission to be held at Ashgabat from
8-9 February, 2010. The co-chair from Turkmen side will
be Mr. Rashid Meredov, Deputy Prime Minister and
Foreign Minister. A Joint Protocol is to be signed on
conclusion of the Meeting.

Ukraine
Bilateral relations between India and Ukraine continued
to remain close and friendly. Both the countries remained
engaged in sustaining cooperation in different sectors of
development.
India and Ukraine entered into a contract for life
extension and modernization of the Indian Air Force’s
AN-32 military transport aircraft, which gave a fillip to
the defence relations between the two countries. This was
followed by a visit (31 August-5 September) to Ukraine
by the Chief of the Indian Air Force, Air Chief Marshal
P. V. Naik at the invitation of the Chief of the Ukrainian
Air Force. The delegation had useful meetings with the
Ukrainian Defence and Industrial Policy Ministers, and
held discussions spanning several aspects of defence
cooperation between the two countries. The delegation
visited the National Defence Academy and some other
areas of military interest.

Turkmenistan
External Affairs Minister Shri S. M. Krishna, accompanied
by a high-level delegation paid an official visit to
Turkmenistan from 18-19 September, 2009, during which
a Programme of Cooperation was signed between the two
Foreign Offices by EAM and his Turkmen counterpart.
EAM called on the Turkmen President Mr. Gurbanguly
Berdymuhammedov and during the meeting they discussed
various issues of bilateral interest and regional importance.

Growth in trade and economic relations were sustained
as both the countries made concerted efforts including
trade promotion mechanisms such as buyer seller meets
and exhibitions. A buyer-seller meet was held in Kiev by
the Engineering Export Promotion Council India and
another by the Chemicals and Allied Products Export
Promotion Council. Indian companies participated in
several international exhibitions covering various
segments of economy such as technical, agro-industrial,
tourism and food processing, held in Ukraine.

During official talks between External Affairs Minister and
his Turkmen Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign Minister
Mr. Rashid Meredov, issues discussed included bilateral
agreements between the two countries on trade &
economic cooperation, educational and cultural exchange
programs, science and technology and relaxation in visa
policy. EAM also handed over an MoU to the Turkmen
side for the establishment of a ‘India-Turkmenistan Centre
for Information Technology’, in Ashgabat, by Government of
India. Both the Ministers expressed satisfaction on growing
relations and cooperation between the two countries. The
Turkmen side also emphasized the need to further explore
cultural exchange programs through visits by cultural
troupes from both sides.

Culture was another area which witnessed a positive
development in bilateral relations. A number of cultural
events like a concert by Pandit Hariprasad Chaurasia,
renowned exponent of the Flute, and tabla maestro
Pandit Vijay Ghate and photo and painting exhibitions
by Ukrainian artists inspired by their visits to India, were
organized by Ukrainian cultural organizations with the
cooperation of the Mission. A Roundtable on Indology
was organized by the All Ukrainian Association of
Indologists.

The delegation led by External Affairs Minister, also had
detailed discussions with the Turkmen Deputy Prime
Minister, in-Charge of Oil and Gas sectors, for enhancing
40

Eurasia

The Government of India extended a helping hand to
Ukraine by announcing humanitarian assistance in the
form of a donation of medicines worth one million
US$ in response to an appeal by the Ukrainian
government, following a break out of influenza epidemic
in certain parts of the country. The Indian pharmaceutical
companies, which have their operations in Ukraine,
separately donated medicines worth about US$ 600,000
to Ukraine to help combat the epidemic. The
humanitarian assistance was a manifestation of the
Government of India’s commitment to strengthen the
close and friendly bilateral relations existing between the
two countries.

Centre in Uzbekistan. EAM also inaugurated the India
Centre at the Al-Beruni Institute of Oriental
Studies.
During the visit, External Affairs Minister placed a
wreath at the memorial of former Prime Minister
Late Shri Lal Bahadur Shastri in Tashkent, where he had
breathed his last in 1966.

India-Russia-China Trilateral Cooperation
The Ninth Trilateral Meeting of Foreign Ministers of
India-Russia-China was held in Bengaluru on
27 October, 2009. The meeting provided an opportunity
for an exchange of views between the Indian, Russian and
Chinese leadership on important global and regional issues
including on climate change, global financial architecture,
UN reforms, developments in Afghanistan and the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization. The three sides also
looked at ways of further strengthening trilateral
cooperation. The trilateral cooperation in specific sectors,
i.e. disaster mitigation and relief, cooperation in
agriculture, and cooperation in health and medicine is
proceeding since the last couple of years. The second
expert-level meeting on Disaster Mitigation was held in
Sanya, China in November 2009. The second Trilateral
Business Conference was held in Changchun, China from
17-19 September, 2009 between the business chambers
of the three countries. The themes under discussion were
pharmaceuticals, infrastructure, IT and energy.

Uzbekistan
External Affairs Minister Shri S. M. Krishna paid an official
visit to Uzbekistan from 22-23 October, 2009. EAM called
on the President of Uzbekistan Mr. Islam Karimov on
23 October, 2009. Status of bilateral relations, after the
successful visit of Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh to
Tashkent in April 2006, was reviewed. It was noted with
satisfaction that two meetings of the Inter-Governmental
Commission had since been held, steering the bilateral
relations forward. It was decided to give further impetus to
agreed sectors of bilateral cooperation, including
hydrocarbons and mining, as well as explore new areas of
cooperation like health, IT and agriculture. It was noted
that relations between India and Uzbekistan rested on
strong historical and cultural foundations, and had
developed into vibrant and mutually rewarding bilateral
relations since 1991.

Shanghai Cooperation Organisation
(SCO)

During talks between External Affairs Minister and
Mr. Vladimir Norov, Foreign Minister of Uzbekistan, issues
discussed included trade & economic cooperation,
educational and cultural exchange programmes, science
and technology and relaxation in visa policy. Both
Ministers expressed satisfaction over growing bilateral
cooperation, and discussed regional and global issues.
Uzbekistan reiterated its support for India’s candidature
for permanent membership of the UNSC. The Uzbek side
accepted the Indian side’s proposal to setup an IndiaUzbekistan Round Table with government and nongovernmental representatives, with a mandate to discuss
new ideas to enhance bilateral relations. The Uzbek side
welcomed the Indian proposal for gifting of medical
equipments and supplies worth US$ 1 million for hospitals
in Uzbekistan. EAM offered additional developmental
assistance to upgrade the Jawaharlal Nehru Centre for
Information Technology established in Tashkent in 2006.
EAM reiterated our commitment to provide assistance
for establishing an Entrepreneurship Development

Prime Minister attended the SCO Summit (Heads of State
Council) Meeting held in Yekaterinburg, Russia on
16 June, 2009. India is an Observer state in the SCO and
this was the first time that India was represented at PM’s
level in the SCO. PM attended the restricted meeting of
the leaders of SCO countries and addressed the plenary
session in a wider format.
India was represented by Shri Murli Deora, Minister of
Petroleum and Natural Gas at the Heads of Government
Council Meeting of SCO in Beijing on 14 October, 2009.
The Minister made a statement at the plenary session.
Invitations to Trade, Culture, Transport and Disaster
Management Ministers meeting were received and
attended by the representatives of respective Ministries
or the concerned Embassy. Under the aegis of the SCO,
the Russian Federation organized a meeting in May 2009
on Afghanistan which was attended by Special Envoy of
Prime Minister, Shri Satinder Lambah.
41

5

The Gulf, West Asia and North Africa

The Gulf

Baloushi among others and had substantive discussions
with them on bilateral, regional and international issues
of mutual interests.

I

ndia maintained its historical and traditionally cordial
relations and cooperation with the Gulf region
countries. In parallel with increasing imports of oil and
gas, growing trade and investment opportunities, active
steps were taken in cooperation with the countries of the
region in 2008 to strengthen this relationship and to
diversify in new areas. The year witnessed several high
level visits bilaterally manifesting the importance of the
region in our relationship.

Iran
High Level Visits
Iranian Foreign Minister Manouchehr Mottaki led a high
level delegation to India from 16-17 November, 2009. This
was the first high-level visit from Iran to India after the
re-election of President Ahmadinejad in June 2009.
During the visit, Mottaki called on the President and Vice
President of India and met External Affairs Minister.
Discussions covered issues such as common concerns
about terrorism emanating from Pakistan, energy security
with emphasis on the IPI gas pipeline project, expansion
of bilateral trade, the Chabahar port and railway link to
Afghanistan, the North-South Corridor and regional
issues such as the situation in Pakistan and Afghanistan.

The Gulf region is a major trading partner of India. During
2006-2007 the total two-way trade was US$ 47 billion
and in the year 2007-08 it reached more than
US$ 76 billion. Gulf countries together provide 70% of
our total crude requirement and play a key role in our
energy security. About 4.5 million Indians live and work
in the Gulf region. They are a vital support to our economy
and remit more than US$ 30 billion annually.

Mr. Seifolloah Jashnsaz, Deputy Minister of Oil of Iran and
President of National Iranian Oil Company (NIOC) led a
delegation to India from 30 November-3 December 2009.
The delegation held talks with representatives of Ministry
of Petroleum and Natural Gas, Government of India, and
oil companies. Iranian Deputy Minister of Justice
Mr. Abdol Ali Mirkoei visited India from 7-10 December, 2010
to discuss cooperation in the judicial field.

Bahrain
India and Bahrain continued with historical and friendly
bilateral relations. Indian nationals numbering around
3,13,000 constitute the largest expatriate community out
of a total of 1.04 million residents of Bahrain. Bahraini
leadership understands India’s growing strength in several
areas and endeavours for closer strategic ties with India.
Bahrain is a member of Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC)
with high strategic value.

Bilateral Trade and Commerce
Bilateral trade between India and Iran: Trade between India
and Iran continued its growth. Bilateral trade grew from
US$ 12833.48 (exports from India US$ 1943.91 million and
imports by India US$ 10889.57 million) in 2007-2008 to
US$ 13146.9 million (exports from India US$ 2253.06 million
and imports by India US$ 10893.84 million) in 2008-2009,
registering an increase of 30.04%. (Source: DGCIS, Kolkata).

The stream of bilateral visits continued in 2009 and
includes Minister of Overseas Indian Affairs in July 2009,
and National Security Adviser participating in Manama
Dialogue in December 2009 etc. Bilateral relations
received great impetus with the recent
visit (4-5 October, 2009) of Minister of State for External
Affairs Dr. Shashi Tharoor to Bahrain which was his first
official visit to a GCC country. He called on the Prime
Minister of Bahrain Shaikh Khalifa bin Salamn Al-Khalifa,
the Foreign Minister Shaikh Khalid bin Ahmad Al-Khalifa
and met his counterpart Dr. Nizar Al-Bahrana, the
Industry Minister Mr. Hasan Abdullah Fakhro,
Labour Minister Dr. Majeed Muhsin Al-Alawi and
Social Development Minister Dr. Fatima Mohammed Al-

Visits of Business Delegations from India: Development
of economic and commercial relations continued with the
exchange of several business delegations between the two
countries. Business delegations from India to Iran included
those from the South Asia Gas Enterprises Pvt. Ltd.
(24-27 May, 2009), Tea Board of India (24-27 May, 2009),
Spices Board of India (24-27 May, 2009), Burhaniah
42

The Gulf, West Asia and North Africa

Business Counselling Centre (BBCC), Mumbai
(29 May-1 June 2009), Oil and Natural Gas Corporation
(ONGC) Videsh Limited, Indian Oil Corporation Ltd. and
Oil India Ltd. (24-29 July, 2009), Council for Leather Exports
(9-10 August, 2009), Confederation of Indian
Industry (5-8 October, 2009), Electrical & Electronics
Manufacturers Association (28 October-1 November 2009),
Automotive Components Manufacturing Association
( 11-14 November, 2009), and South Asia Gas Enterprises
Pvt. Ltd. (29 November-1 December 2009).

from friendly foreign countries. During this visit, Cadet
Officers of the Indian Navy interacted with their
counterparts from the Iranian Navy and participated in
sports and other adventure activities.
Foreign Secretary, Smt. Nirupama Rao visited Iran
for Foreign Office Consultations (FOC) from
2-3 February, 2010 at the invitation of
Dr. Mohammad Ali Fathollahi, Deputy Foreign Minister
for Asia and Oceania. The then Iranian Deputy Foreign
Minister for Asia and Oceania Mohammad
Mehdi Akhoundzadeh had visited New Delhi on
17 December, 2008 for the last round of the FOC. The
current round of the FOC is expected to cover the entire
range of bilateral issues as well as regional and
international issues of common concern.

Visits of Business Delegations to India: Business delegations
from Iran included those from the National Iranian Oil
Company (10-13 August, 2009), Iran Mines and Mining
Industries Development and Renovation Organization
(27 September-3 October 2009), Central Bank of Iran
(3-5 November, 2009), and National Iranian Oil Company,
headed by Deputy Oil Minister and MD, NIOC,
Mr. Seifollah Jashnsaaz (30 November-3 December 2009).
In addition, a 25-member delegation led by Dr. Mohammad
Nahavandian, President, Iran Chamber of Commerce,
Industries and Mines (ICCIM) visited New Delhi from
8-15 November, 2009 to attend the 10th India-Iran Joint
Business Council meeting and participate in the
29th India International Trade Fair.

Kuwait
India and Kuwait enjoy traditionally friendly relations.
Geographic proximity, historical trade links, cultural
affinities and presence of a large number of Indian
expatriates continue to sustain and nurture this longstanding relationship. India has been a natural trading
partner and a destination for higher learning.
The hallmark of friendly relations was represented by
the visit of Shri M. Hamid Ansari, Vice President of
India to Kuwait in April 2009 at the invitation of
Sheikh Nawaf Al-Ahmed Al-Jaber Al-Sabah, the Crown
Prince of the State of Kuwait. During the visit he called on
Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmed Al-Jaber Al-Sabah, the Amir of
the State of Kuwait and the Crown Prince. Acting
Prime Minister and First Deputy PM/Defence Minister
Sheikh Jaber Mubarak Al-Hamad Al-Sabah, DPM/
Foreign Minister Sheikh (Dr.) Mohammed Sabah Al-Salem
Al-Sabah, Minister of Oil Sheikh Ahmed Abdullah
Al-Ahmed Al-Sabah, Minister of Finance Mr. Mustafa
Jassim Al-Shimali called on the VP. Three agreements were
signed during the visit namely Education Exchange
Programme 2009-2011, Agreement on Cooperation in
Science & Technology and Cultural Exchange Programme
2009-2011.

Miscellaneous
Sixth Round Table between IDSA and IPIS: The Sixth
Round Table between Institute for Defence Studies and
Analyses (IDSA) and Institute for Political and
International Studies (IPIS) was held in Tehran from
12-13 July, 2009. A four member IDSA delegation led by
its Director General Dr. N. S. Sisodia visited Tehran to
attend the round table. The round table discussed issues
pertaining to the global financial crisis, energy, transport,
security in the region and bilateral relations.
Visit of Indian academics, culture & sports delegations
to Iran: Indian delegations from the fields of academics,
culture and sports also visited Iran. They included a Sports
Authority of India team (5-8 May, 2009), Indian volleyball
team (23-28 May, 2009), a theatre group from West Bengal
(30 July-7 August 2009) and a five member Indian team
for the Third International Olympiad on Astronomy and
Astrophysics (18-26 October, 2009).

External Affairs Minister Shri S. M. Krishna will be visiting
Kuwait from 3-5 February, 2010.

First Training Squadron of the Indian Navy visited Iran:
Three ships of the First Training Squadron of the Indian
Navy, namely INS Tir, INS Krishna and ICGS (Integrated
Coast Guard Systems) Veera visited Bandar Abbas from
4-7 April, 2009 as part of a good will visit. These ships
were Cadet Training Ships who provide Afloat Training
to junior officers of the Indian Navy and also to officers

Special Kuwait Cell
In 2005 United Nations Compensation Commission
(UNCC) sent a list of 8615 Untraced Indian Claimants
whose compensation money had been returned to UNCC
as undisbursed funds within the period stipulated for this
purpose determined by UNCC. This was the last chance
given by UNCC to all countries to pay their nationals
43

Annual Report 2009 - 2010

who could not be paid when the money was sent earlier.
Undisbursed funds were to be returned to UNCC once
this exercise was over, and would lapse to UNCC with no
further chance of getting this money. The work of locating
the Indian claimants started in October 2005. The list of
8615 claimants was advertised in the print media and also
put on Ministry of External Affairs’ website for easy access.
Help of state governments was also taken The work of
locating the Indian claimants ended in October 2006 as
UNCC refused to accept any further lists of claimants
who were traced after 30 October, 2006. UNCC sent
money between January 2007-July 2007. This money had
to be disbursed within six months which was later reduced
to four months and the undisbursed money returned to
UNCC at the end of this period which was calculated
from the date of transfer of funds by UNCC to India The
last undisbursed money was returned in January 2008.
UNCC made it clear that they would not entertain any
further requests whatever the justification and pleadings
that may be put forward by the claimants or their
Governments and would not respond to any
representation and advised that governments therefore
should desist from sending any representations to UNCC.

The Minister of Oil & Gas of Oman,
Dr. Mohammed Hamad Al-Rumhi visited India in
May 2009; a nine member delegation led by
Maqbool Ali Sultan, Industries and Commerce Minister
of Oman, visited Gujarat in September 2009 to discuss
ways to increase partnership between Gujarat and Oman
in trade and commerce. The period saw cooperation in
technical and higher education, defence cooperation,
visits of Indian Naval Ships to Oman and bilateral air
exercise in October and November 2009. The Sultanate
of Oman continued to support the Anti-Piracy Operations
of the Indian Navy in Gulf of Aden.
Dr. Farooq Abdullah, Minister for New and Renewable
Energy visited Oman from 18-22 January, 2010.
Shri Murli Deora, Minister for Petroleum & Natural
Gas visited Oman from 29-30 January, 2010.
Dr. Shashi Tharoor, Minister of State for External Affairs
will be visiting Oman from 5-7 February, 2010.

Qatar
India has a long history of friendly relations with Qatar
marked by commercial ties and people-to-people contacts.
The large Indian community of 450,000 acts as a catalyst
for enhanced ties. The visit of Prime Minister
Dr. Manmohan Singh to Qatar in November 2008 set
the tone for significant up-gradation of bilateral ties when
it was also agreed that a High Level Monitoring
Mechanism will be established to ensure progress and
follow up on the visit. Its first meeting was held in
February 2009 in New Delhi and the second meeting was
held in Doha in November 2009. During the meeting held
in November 2009 at Doha, an MoU between India and
Qatar to attract Qatari investment into India to the tune
of US$ 5 billion was signed.

This division has attended to 11 RTI cases from
1 April 2009-December 2009 regarding queries from the
claimants of United Nations Compensation. In addition
three court cases are pending. The Government of India’s
position is that the compensation was being paid by UNCC
and that the Government of India is not liable to pay this
compensation in cases where a Kuwait returnee of the
1990-1991 Gulf War, for which UNCC was paying
compensation, could not be paid this compensation by
UNCC for whatever reasons.

Oman

A delegation led by Shri Murli Deora paid a brief visit to
Doha on 16 December, 2009. The Indian side projected
to the Qatari side our immediate and medium term
requirement of Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG). The visit
also underscored the importance of personal interaction
between the concerned Ministers of both countries.

India’s friendly relations with Oman were further
consolidated in 2009 building upon the visit of the
Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh to Oman last
year. Deputy Chairman, Planning Commission,
Dr. Montek Singh Ahluwalia led a delegation for the
second India-Oman Joint Working Group meeting which
was held in Muscat in April 2009. The Omani delegation
was led by Mohammed bin Al Zubair advisor to the Sultan
for Economic Planning. The Working group identified
areas where the two countries could make quick progress.
Further progress was made in the India-Oman Fund which
will have a seed capital of US$ 100 million, to be raised
up to US$ 1.5 billion to be utilized for joint investments
in infrastructure. In the year 2008 bilateral trade (both
oil and non-oil) reached nearly US$ 2.0 billion.

Saudi Arabia
Indo-Saudi relations are historic and have been further
strengthened since the visit by King Abdullah bin Abdul
Aziz to India in January 2006. Bilateral ties were also
encouraged by economic forces, with energy and
information technology constituting the most robust
elements in this regard. These relations are enhanced by
the presence of the resident Indian community of about
1.78 million. The strong bilateral economic relations were
44

The Gulf, West Asia and North Africa

visiting the UAE in October. He met Crown Prince of
Dubai, Minister for Cabinet Affairs on boosting economic
cooperation and investments among others. Indian Naval
Ships Tir, Krishna and ICGS Veera visited Abu Dhabi in
March 2009. From UAE side Foreign Minister
Sheikh Abdullah bin Zayed Al Nahyan visited India in
June and met Vice-President, External Affairs Minister
and Minister of New and Renewable Energy.

reflected in the steady growth of bilateral trade, reaching
US$ 23 billion, and the visit of several business delegations
during the year. Indian investment in the Kingdom crossed
US$ 2 billion in 560 projects
The Eighth meeting of the Indo-Saudi Joint Commission
was held in Riyadh from 27-30 October, 2009 and
discussed whole gamut of bilateral cooperation. The
Indian side was co-chaired by Shri Pranab Mukherjee,
Finance Minister. During the visit, Finance Minister had
an audience with King Abdullah Bin Abdulaziz, on
31 October, 2009.

Dr. Farooq Abdullah, Minister for New and Renewable
Energy will be visiting UAE from 18-22 January, 2010.
Dr. Shashi Tharoor, Minister of State for External
Affairs is likely to visit Abu Dhabi (UAE) from
28 February-2 March 2010 for the Intellectual Property
Act Copyright Symposium and Abu Dhabi International
Book Fair. Sheikha Lubna Al Qasimi, Minister for Foreign
Trade, UAE will be visiting India from 7-12 February, 2010.

Other important events in 2009 include, MoS for Tourism
Sultan Ahmed, participating in the “India Tourism Road
Show” in Riyadh in October 2009 to enhance cooperation
in the field of tourism. The visits from Saudi side included
the visit of Saudi Commerce & Industry Minister
Abdullah Ahmad Zainal Alireja in August 2009 as Special
Envoy of King Abdullah. He called on Prime Minister
and held meetings with External Affairs Minister, Finance
Minister, and Commerce and Industry Minister.

Yemen
Minister of State for External Affairs Dr. Shashi Tharoor,
visited Sana’a in June 2009 as Leader of the Indian
delegation to attend the Indian Ocean Rim-Association
of Regional Cooperation (IOR-ARC) Conference. During
his visit, he called on the Yemeni President and handed
over a letter from our President to the Yemeni President.
MoS also had meetings with minister of Foreign Affairs,
as well as Minister of Oil & Minerals of Yemen.

Indian naval ships, INS Delhi and INS Aditya, paid a
three-day goodwill visit to Jeddah in May 2009 and
participated in naval exercise with the Royal Saudi Navy
in the Red Sea.
Prime Minister may visit Saudi Arabia in February end/
early March 2010. The contours of the visit are under
consideration.

In January 2009, a 13-member delegation from the Sana’a
Chamber of Commerce & Industry visited India at the
invitation of Associated Chambers of Commerce and
Industry of India [ASSOCHAM] and held meetings with
their counterparts. Indian companies are now in the
process of exploration of the oil blocks they were allotted
last year.

United Arab Emirates (UAE)
The relations between India and UAE have been
traditionally close and friendly. India has been a natural
trading partner and a destination for higher learning for
the UAE. Large Indian expatriate community resides and
engages in the UAE in various economically productive
activities. According to the latest figures of the studies
conducted by the UAE authorities, the size of the Indian
community is estimated at 1.7 million in the UAE. The
UAE has become the largest non-oil merchandise trade
partner of India in 2008-09, accounting for about half of
India’s total trade with the Cooperation Council for the
Arab States of the Gulf (CCASG; also known as the Gulf
Cooperation Council GCC) region. India is also the largest
export destination of UAE exports. UAE emerged as
largest trading partner of India with bilateral trade
exceeding US$ 44 billion. During the period India and
UAE discussed, finalized and initialed the ‘Agreement on
Security Cooperation’.

Iraq
India and Iraq have enduring political, economic and
cultural ties. The resolution passed by Indian Parliament
on 8 April, 2003, provides direction to our policy on Iraq.
India stands for an early restoration of sovereignty to the
Iraqi people and the right of Iraqi people to freely
determine their political future and control their natural
resources. For the stability of the region, India has always
been for peace and stability of Iraq and stands for absolute
sovereignty of Iraq and the right of Iraqi people to freely
determine their political future and control its natural
resources. India offered its support towards Iraq’s political
process, development of constitution, electoral process,
census and voter registration.
In response to UN Secretary-General’s cash appeal, India
committed US$ 20 million for assistance to the Iraqi

During the period several visits took place which includes
that of MoS for External Affairs Dr. Shashi Tharoor
45

Annual Report 2009 - 2010

people. India has contributed a total of US$ 10 million
towards the International Reconstruction Fund Facility
for Iraq (IRFFI) for investments, reconstruction and
development in Iraq. India currently provides 100 slots
to Iraq under Indian Technical and Economic Cooperation
(ITEC) programme and 50 Indian Council for Cultural
Relations (ICCR) scholarships for higher education under
Cultural Exchange Programme Scholarship Scheme
(CEP) and General Cultural Scholarship Scheme (GCSS)
each year.

from Arab countries are expected to participate. This
conclave is aimed to highlight the investment potential
in India in the framework of India growth story and to
realize partnership in various projects.

West Asia and North Africa
Our relations with all countries in the West Asia and
North Africa region were strengthened further in several
areas including through cooperation in the energy, trade,
and investment sectors

Indian Oil Corporation Limited (IOC) has been providing
training in India to the Iraqi oil officials on various subjects
related with downstream oil sector. India has annually
been providing at least 100 slots to Iraq under Indian
Technical and Economic Cooperation (ITEC) programme
to train Government of Iraq officials. India has been
offering 50 slots every year to Iraq for nominating its
students for higher studies in India under the ‘Cultural
Exchange Programme Scholarship Scheme’ (CEP) and the
‘General Cultural Scholarship Scheme’ (GCSS) organized
by the Indian Council for Cultural Relations.

Algeria
In October 2009, three Indian companies were awarded
new projects in power transmission lines. 15 Indian
companies participated in the 42nd Algiers International
Trade Fair from 30 May-4 June 2009, held under the aegis
of the India Trade Promotion Organization. INS Beas
called at Port Algiers from 17-20 May, 2009, as part of
overseas deployment of Western Fleet ships. ICCR’s
painting exhibition “Women by Women” was held in Algiers
and several other Algerian cities in March 2009. Indian
miniature painter, Shri Shakir Ali, participated in the
International Illumination & Miniature Festival held in
Algiers on 14 October, 2009, at the invitation of the
Algerian government. A 12-member Indian folk dance
troupe “Meera Kala Mandir” participated in the Fourth
Deserts People Festival in Timimoun, Algiers, from
18-20 December, 2009.

India – Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC)
The India-GCC relations remained friendly and witnessed
further strengthening in 2009. The fifth round of
India GCC dialogue took place in September 2009 at
New York cementing the institutionalization of the
consultative mechanism. Minister of External Affairs
Shri S. M. Krishna led the Indian delegation. They
discussed issues of mutual concern and ways to strengthen
and promote India-GCC relations.

Djibouti
INS Betwa, INS Beas, INS Godavari, INS Mumbai and
INS Trishul, on anti-piracy patrol off the coast of Somalia,
made calls at the port of Djibouti between March and
October 2009.

India-GCC Free Trade Agreement negotiating mechanism
was active during the year and the two sides considered
ways to speed up the negotiations. India has agreed to
examine a wide range of issues of interest proposed by
GCC. Two sides have also agreed to hold the Fourth
Industrial Conference in February 2010.

Egypt
During his visit to Sharm-el-Sheikh to attend the
15 th Non Aligned Movement (NAM) Summit from
14-16 July, 2009, the Prime Minister met Egyptian
President Mr. Mohammad Hosni Mubarak. The Summit
was preceded by a NAM Ministerial Meeting (13-14 July),
which was attended by External Affairs Minister
Shri S. M. Krishna. The External Affairs Minister also
had a bilateral meeting with Egyptian Foreign Minister
Mr. Ahmed Aboul Gheit. The Minister for New &
Renewable Energy Dr. Farooq Abdullah visited Egypt to
attend the second session of the Preparatory Commission
of the International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA)
from 29-30 June, 2009 at Sharm-el-Sheikh. During the
visit, he had discussions with the Egyptian Minister for
Electricity and Energy, Dr. Hassan Ahmed Younis on

Haj
Nearly 165,000 Indian pilgrims performed Haj in
December 2009. 120,121 Indian pilgrims visited Saudi
Arabia through the Haj Committee of India, and
remaining through the private tour operators.
Shri Saifuddin Soz, led the Indian Haj Goodwill
Delegation to Saudi Arabia.
Indo-Arab Investment Conclave
Second Indo-Arab Investment Conclave is taking place
in New Delhi from 8-9 February, 2010 in which about
200 eminent persons and some Ministerial delegations
46

Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh with the Haj Goodwill Delegation led by Prof. Saifuddin Soz,
in New Delhi on 21 November, 2009. Minister of State, Prime Minister’s Office and
Personnel, Public Grievances & Pensions and Parliamentary Affairs, Shri Prithviraj Chavan is also seen.

47

Annual Report 2009 - 2010

cooperation in solar and wind energy. Dr. Abdullah also
met the Grand Sheikh of Al Azhar and the Grand Mufti
of Egypt.

Minister of State for Administrative Development
Dr. Ahmed Darwish and Egyptian Minister of Higher
Education and Research Dr. Hany Mahfouz Helal. A
goodwill delegation of Parliamentarians led by Minister
of Parliamentary Affairs and Water Resources
Shri Pawan Kumar Bansal visited Egypt from
15-18 January, 2010. During the visit, the delegation had
meetings with Dr. Ahmed Fathi Sorour, Speaker of the
People’s Assembly and Dr. Moufid Mahmoud Shehab,
Minister of State for Parliamentary Affairs.

The Egyptian Minister of Trade & Industry Mr. Rachid
Mohamed Rachid visited India from 2-4 September, 2009
to attend an Informal Ministerial Meeting on the Doha
Round of World Trade Organization negotiations. He also
met Commerce & Industry Minister Shri Anand Sharma
and discussed ways and means of improving bilateral
economic and commercial relations.

India was invited to be the guest of honour at Cairo
International Film Festival CIFF 2009 (10-20 November).
Many eminent film personalities from India including
director Adoor Gopalakrishan (Chairperson of the
International Jury) participated in the Festival. 23 Indian
films were screened at CIFF 2009. ‘Anart’ – an art group
led by Ms. Ishira Parikh, sponsored by Indian Council for
Cultural Relations, performed at the opening session of
the Festival. Panthi group and Desert Symphony
group, sponsored by ICCR, visited Egypt from
5-12 September, 2009.

Commerce & Industry Minister Shri Anand Sharma
visited Egypt from 28-30 October, 2009 to participate in
an Informal African WTO Trade Ministerial
Brainstorming Session on “Consolidating the
Development Dimension”. He had bilateral meetings with
Prime Minister Dr. Ahmed Nazif and Minister of Trade
& Industry Mr. Rachid Mohamed Rachid. A Joint Action
Plan (JAP) for cooperation between the Egyptian Ministry
of Trade and Industry and the Indian Ministry of Micro,
Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs) was signed
during the visit. Coinciding with the Commerce and
Industry Minister’s visit to Cairo in October 2009, a
Confederation of Indian Industry [CII] business delegation
visited Egypt from 27-31 October, 2009 for discussions
with different business associations of Egypt. A joint
Business Forum was organized on the occasion by the
Egyptian Trade & Industry Ministry. A delegation from
Council of Leather Exports also visited Egypt from
28-31 October, 2009 on a leather sourcing mission.

Air Chief Marshal FH Major, Chief of Air Staff and
Lt. Gen. D. S. Bartwal, Director General Military
Intelligence visited Egypt from 26-29 April, 2009 and from
15-18 May, 2009 respectively.

Israel
The Second Meeting of the India-Israel Forum was held
in Tel Aviv from 8-10 September, 2009. A 19-member
CII delegation and 34 Israeli businessmen, academics and
officials participated in the Forum. The Governor of Bank
of Israel and the Israeli Ministers of Infrastructure and
Finance also addressed the participants. The Forum
deliberated on ways to increase cooperation between India
and Israel in infrastructure, real estate, investment and
financial resources, technology, industry and agriculture,
renewable energy and water technology.

Egyptian Minister of Electricity & Energy Dr. Hassan Younis
visited India from 16-19 November, 2009 and had bilateral
meetings with Minister for New and Renewable Energy
Dr. Farooq Abdullah and Minister of State for Power
Shri Bharatsinh Solanki. Dr. Younis had a business meeting
with Indian PSUs in the power sector, a separate meeting
with a group of businessmen/investors and visited solar and
wind energy manufacturing units in the country.

Gen Deepak Kapoor, Chairman Chief of Staffs Committee
and Chief Of Army Staff visited Israel from
8-11 November, 2009. The Chief Ministers of Himachal
Pradesh and Punjab were among Indian participants in
the Second International Conference and Exhibition on
Water Technologies, WATEC 2009, in Tel Aviv from
17-19 November, 2009. Israeli Chief of Defence Staff
Lt. Gen. Gabi Ashkenazi visited India from
8-10 December, 2009. Head of the Israeli National
Security Council, Dr. Uzi Arad visited India on
4 January, 2010. Israeli Minister of Industry, Trade &
Labour Mr. Benjamin Ben Eliezer visited India from
8-14 January, 2010 and called on External Affairs Minister

Two State Government delegations, one led by
Chief Minister of Punjab (18-19 November, 2009)
and another one led by Kerala Industry Minister
(25-27 September, 2009) visited Egypt for discussions in
agriculture and industrial sectors. Two Egyptian officials
participated in Indo-Africa Pharmaceutical Business Meet
organized by PHARMEXCIL in Hyderabad in September
2009. There were also two Egyptian participants at CAPEXCIL
Buyer-Seller-Meet in New Delhi in September 2009.
Minister of State for Personnel, Public Grievances and
Pensions Shri Prithviraj Chavan visited Egypt from
10-13 January, 2010. During the visit, he met Egyptian
48

The Gulf, West Asia and North Africa

Shri S. M. Krishna, Commerce & Industry Minister
Shri Anand Sharma, Agriculture, Food Distribution
and Consumer Affairs Minister Shri Sharad Pawar
and Deputy Chairman, Planning Commission
Dr. Montek Singh Ahluwalia. The Israeli Chief of Naval
Staff Vice Admiral Eliezer Maroom visited India from
18-22 January, 2010.

2-12 April, 2009. INS Aditya called at Tripoli Port, Libya,
from 7-10 June, 2009.
The 59 th Session of the Executive Committee of
Afro-Asian Rural Development Organization (AARDO),
held in Tripoli from 12-14 November, 2009, was
chaired by Secretary, Ministry of Rural Development,
Dr. Rita Sharma. A 12-member ICCR-sponsored Kathak
dance troupe, ‘Anart’ performed in Tripoli, Sirte and
Benghazi from 16-22 November, 2009.

An ICCR-sponsored Carnatic vocal group visited Israel
and participated in the Oudh Cultural Festival 2009
from 15-20 November, 2009. An Odissi Dance group led
by Smt. Rajshree Behera and also sponsored by
ICCR, gave cultural performances in Israel from
24-28 November, 2009.

Morocco
Indian companies participated in the International
Agriculture Fair at Meknes from 22-27 April, 2009. India
was represented at the Fez International Festival of Sacred
Music in May 2009 by a group of musicians and a Kuchipudi
dancer.

Jordan
A business delegation from 14 Indian companies under
the aegis of the Engineering Export Promotion Council
participated in the Sixth Rebuild Iraq Exhibition held in
Amman from 4-7 May, 2009. A Federation of Indian
Chambers of Commerce and Industry (FICCI) delegation
visited Jordan in July 2009 and held business to business
meetings with Jordanian business chambers.

Engineering
Export
Promotion
Council
[EEPC] participated in the International Exhibition
of Sub Contracting and Partnership (SISTEP)
engineering exhibition held in Casablanca from
30 September-3 October 2009.
A CAPEXIL (a non-profit making organization to promote
export of Chemical and Allied Products from India)
delegation from 6-8 November, 2009 participated in a
Buyer-Seller meet in Casablanca for export of tyres and
tubes, marble and granite, chemicals and stationery items.

A joint venture project in fertilizers between Jordan
Phosphates Mines Company (JPMC) and Indian Farmers’
Fertilizers Cooperative Ltd. (IFFCO) was inaugurated in
Amman on 4 October, 2009.
A sitar group and a Bharatnatyam troupe, sponsored by
ICCR, participated in the Jordan Festival in July 2009.
Odissi dancer Smt. Rajashri Behera, sponsored by ICCR
performed in Amman on 30 November, 2009.

Palestine
India continued its unwavering support for the legitimate
rights of the Palestinian people for a homeland of their
own. Building of Chancery-cum-Residences of the
Embassy of Palestine in New Delhi, a gift of the
Government and people of India, is nearing completion.
India’s annual contribution to the United Nations Relief
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA)
was enhanced from US$ 20,000 to US$ 1 million.

Lebanon
India welcomed the formation of a new government in
Lebanon on 10 November, 2009. Congratulatory messages
from Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh and External
Affairs Minister Shri S. M. Krishna were sent to the
Lebanese Prime Minister Mr. Saad Rafic Hariri and to
the Minister of Foreign Affairs and Emigrants of Lebanon
Mr. Ali El Chami, respectively. A four member Lebanese
delegation from the Ministry of Agriculture was hosted
by Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export
Development Authority (APEDA) in April 2009.

Somalia
Piracy off the Somali coast continued to affect Indian
flagged ships and merchant sailors during this period.
Dr. Shashi Tharoor, Minister of State for External Affairs
met the Somalia Foreign Minister on the margins
of the African Union Summit at Addis Ababa
(27-30 January, 2010).

Libya
Shri K. Rahman Khan, Deputy Chairman, Rajya Sabha,
represented India at the 40th Anniversary celebrations of
the Great Al-Fatah Revolution held in Tripoli, Libya, on
1 September, 2009. India participated in the annual
Tripoli International Trade Fair held in Tripoli from

Sudan
Minister of Agriculture and Forestry of Sudan
Dr. Abdul Halim Ismail Al-Muttaffie visited India from
13-17 July, 2009. He met Shri Sharad Pawar, Minister of
49

Annual Report 2009 - 2010

Agriculture, Food & Civil Supplies, Consumer Affairs,
and Public Distribution. In August 2009,
Dr. Osama Mohammed, National Coordinator for Sudan
and Eng. Mohmoud Doleeb Mohamed Elamin attended
the two-day workshop on the Pan-African e-Network
Project in New Delhi organized by the
Telecommunications Consultants India Ltd. (TCIL). In
October 2009, a leather sourcing delegation from the
Council for Leather Export of India visited Sudan.

an Agreement for a credit line of US$ 100 million with
Syria, as the first tranche of a US$ 240 million line of
credit that the Government of India is offering to part
finance the 2,200 MW Tishreen power plant expansion
project. A Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited (BHEL)
delegation visited Syria from 28-30 October, 2009 for
signing the contract worth Euros 300 million with Syria
for the 2,200 MW Tishreen power plant expansion project.

In November 2009, a 17-member Confederation of Indian
Industries delegation led by Shri Sanjay Kirloskar,
Chairman & Managing Director, Kirloskar Brothers Ltd.,
visited Sudan to explore business and project partnerships
prospects. The delegation met with the Senior Assistant
to the President and the Ministers of Agriculture and
Forestry, Tourism and Wildlife, Irrigation and Water
Resources, Health, Foreign Trade, Energy and Mining,
Information and Communication, Foreign Affairs, Finance
and National Economy. CII signed an MoU on
cooperation with the Sudanese Chambers of Industries
Association.

A business delegation comprising representatives of
Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited and Tea Board of India
and five companies participated at the Damascus
International Trade Fair 2009 from 14-22 July, 2009. A
19 member Federation of Indian Chamber of Commerce
and Industries (FICCI) business delegation visited Syria
from 18-19 July, 2009 for India-Syria Joint Business Meet,
hosted by the Federation of Syrian Chambers of
Commerce. Syria participated in the 29 th India
International Trade Fair held in New Delhi from
14-27 November, 2009. A Syrian business delegation
participated in the Delhi International Leather Fair held
from 23-25 October, 2009.

Minister of State for Energy and Mining
Ms. Angelina Jany Teny led a Sudanese delegation to the
second India-Africa Hydrocarbons Conference in
New Delhi from 7-8 December, 2009.

Ms. Bouthaina Shaaban, Political & Media Advisor at
the Syrian Presidency visited India from 6-9 January, 2010
and called on External Affairs Minister Shri S. M. Krishna
and Human Resource Development Minister
Shri Kapil Sibal and had a meeting with the Minister of
State for External Affairs Dr. Shashi Tharoor.

Minister of Petroleum & Natural Gas Shri Murli Deora,
visited Sudan from 24-25 January, 2010. Governor of
Khartoum, Sudan, Mr. Abdel Rahman El Khidir,
accompanied by a high level delegation, visited
Mumbai and Delhi from 18-25 January, 2010, at the
invitation of TATA Motors, Mumbai. Minister of
Agriculture and Forestry of the Republic of the Sudan,
Dr. Abdul Halim Ismail Al-Muttaffie, accompanied
by a three member delegation, visited India from
11-15 January, 2010.

An Indian Council for Cultural Relations (ICCR)
sponsored 12-member Indian classical dance troupe
led by Dr. Ananda Shankar Jayant visited Syria from
1-7 August, 2009. An ICCR sponsored 12-member
Rajasthani folk dance troupe led by Shri Dahne Khan
Langa visited Syria from 6-13 August, 2009 to participate
in the Bosra International Festival, 2009. An ICCR
sponsored sitar troupe led by Shri Adip Kumar Ghosh
visited Syria from 8-18 October, 2009 to participate in
the Syria Silk Road Festival, 2009.

Syria
An eight member Indian delegation led by
Shri Sudhir Bhargava, Joint Secretary, Department of
Fertilizers, visited Syria from 10-18 May, 2009. An MoU
for carrying out feasibility study for the development of
the Syrian phosphates sector was signed during the visit.
A 21-member delegation comprising officials of
Metallurgical and Engineering Consultants (MECON),
Rail India Technology and Economical Services (RITES)
and Projects and development India Limited (PDIL)
visited Syria from 6-15 November, 2009 to collect data
and conduct surveys in connection with feasibility study
for the development of the Syrian phosphates sector.

A three member Sahitya Academi delegation
led by President of the Sahitya Academi
Shri Sunil Gangopadhaya visited Syria from
6-13 November, 2009 to renew the Cultural Cooperation
Agreement signed between the Sahitya Academi and the
Arab Writers Union in 2003.

Tunisia
The first meeting of the Joint Working Group (JWG) on
Information & Communication Technology (ICT) was
held in Tunis from 16-17 April, 2009. The Indian
delegation was led by Shri R. Chandrashekhar, Special

The General Manager of Export and Import (EXIM) Bank
of India visited Syria from 6-7 October, 2009 for signing
50

The Gulf, West Asia and North Africa

Secretary, Department of Information Technology and the
Tunisian side was led by Ms. Lamia Chafei Saghaier,
Secretary of State in charge of IT. The Joint Working
Group meeting was inaugurated by Minister of
Communications Technologies Mr. El Hadj Gley. The two
sides identified several areas for cooperation particularly
in the field of internet security, training, standardization
and technical assistance. An MoU between the El Ghazala
Technological Park of Tunisia and the Software
Technological Park of India (STPI) was signed.

group participated in the Fifth Festival of Spiritual Music
organized during Ramadan.

The Second Meeting of the Small and Medium Enterprises
(SME) between India and Tunisia was held in Tunis from
30 September-1 October 2009. The Indian delegation was
led by Shri Dinesh Rai, Secretary, Ministry of Micro, Small,
and Medium Enterprises, and included Dr. H. P. Kumar,
Chairman & MD of the National Small Industries
Corporation (NSIC). The Tunisian side was led by
Mr. Sadok Bejja, Director, Ministry of Industry, Energy,
and SMEs.

A two member delegation from the Tunisian
Ministry of Petroleum & Gas visited Mumbai from
10-14 December, 2009 to participate in an international
seminar on current economic crisis, oil & gas industry
and role of trade union movement organized by the
Petroleum & Gas Workers’ Federation of India. A
six member delegation from the International Association
of Lions Clubs, Tunisia visited Hyderabad to participate
in the 37th India, South Asia, Africa and the Middle East
Forum (ISAAME) from 3-13 December, 2009.

A three member Tunisian pharmaceutical delegation
visited India to attend the India-Africa Pharmaceutical
Business Meet in Hyderabad from 25-27 September, 2009.
A four member Tunisian IT delegation attended the
National Association of Software Services Company
(NASSCOM) Product Enclave held in Bangalore from
25-30 October, 2009.

Several business delegations from India visited Tunisia
during this period, including a six member fertilizer
delegation from a consortia headed by the Rashtriya
Chemicals and Fertilizers (RCF), to study the feasibility of
the US$ 2.5 billion Sra Ourtane Fertilizer Complex Project.

The League of Arab States
External Affairs Minister Shri S. M. Krishna met
the Secretary General of the League of Arab States
Mr. Amre Moussa on the sidelines of the United Nations
General Assembly (UNGA) in September 2009.

A 20 member delegation of manufacturers, dealers and
exporters of the Synthetic & Rayon Textile Export
Promotion Council (SRTEPC) held an exhibition of
Indian textiles, made ups, yarn, etc. in Tunis
from 4-5 February, 2010. An Indian dance troupe
‘Ballet Bollywood’ performed at the 45th International
Festival of Carthage held in July and an Indian musical

To mark the Third International Day of Non-violence on
2 October, 2009, an event was organized in Cairo and the
keynote address was delivered by Secretary General of
the League of Arab States Mr. Amre Moussa. A photoexhibition on Mahatma Gandhi was held on the occasion.

51

6

Africa (South of Sahara)

East and Southern Africa

President of the Oromia Region, Ethiopia (August).

India Africa Forum Summit – Follow-up

Minister of Information and Communication
Technology of Mauritius (August).

F

ollow up actions on India Africa Forum Summit
continued during the year. Discussions with the AU
including formal meetings took place in Addis Ababa in
December 2009. India was represented at the AU Summit
in Sirte in July 2009.

Health Minister of Kenya (September).
Minister of Commerce & Industry of Zimbabwe
(September).
Minister for Medical services of Kenya (September).
Minister of Foreign Affairs, Regional Integration and
International Trade of Mauritius (September).

India hosted the following high level visits from the region
during the year:

Minister for Industry, Trade and Marketing of
Tanzania (September).

President of Namibia Mr. Hifikepunye Pohamba
paid a successful State visit to India from
30 August-3 September 2009.

Minister of Trade and Industry of South Africa
(September).

Prime Minister of Tanzania visited India in
September 2009.

Minister of Safety and Security of Namibia
(October).

From India, Vice President represented India at the
inaugural ceremony of Dr. Jacob Zuma as the President of
South Africa in May 2009.

Minister of Environment and National
Development Unit of Mauritius (October).
Minister of State for Agriculture of Uganda
(October).

Other important visits to India during the year 2009
included:

Minister of State for Agriculture in charge of fisheries
of Uganda (October).

Minister of Defence, Justice and Security of
Botswana (February).

Vice President of Mauritius – on a private visit
(October-November).

Minister in-charge of Presidency, Deputy Attorney
General/Minister of State for Justice &
Constitutional Affairs and Minister of State for
Finance of Uganda, (May).

Minister of International Relations and Cooperation
of South Africa (November).

Minister of State for Internal Affairs of Uganda
(June).

President of Mauritius – on a private visit
(November-December).

Minister of Communications, Science and
Technology of the Kingdom of Lesotho (June).

Minister of Finance and Economic Planning of
Rwanda (January 2010).

State Minister for Transport and Communications
of Ethiopia (July).

Minister of Public Infrastructure, Land Transport
and Shipping and Minister of Education, Culture
and Human Resources of Mauritius (January 2010).

Minister of State for Urban Development of Uganda
(July) .

Vice Prime Minister and Finance Minister of
Mauritius (January 2010).

State Minister for Transport and Communications
of Ethiopia (July).

Minister of Foreign Affairs, Regional Integration and
International Trade of Mauritius (January 2010).

Speaker, Council of Nationalities of the Southern
Nations, Nationalities and Peoples Regional State
of Ethiopia (SNNPRS) of Ethiopia (August).

Finance
Minister
of
South
Mr. Pravin Gordhan (January 2010).
52

Africa

Africa (South of Sahara)

Botswana

Ms. Buyelwa Sonjica, Minister of Water and
Environmental Affairs of South Africa
(January 2010).

Relations between India and Botswana continued to
remain warm and cordial. Minister of Defence, Justice
and Security of Botswana, Brig. (Retd.) Dikgakgamatso
Ndelu Seretse, attended the Seventh International
Aerospace Exposition – AERO India – 2009 held in
Bangalore from 11-14 February, 2009.

Important visits from India include:
Parliamentary delegation led by Deputy Speaker of
Lok Sabha Shri Charanjit Singh Atwal to Mauritius
and South Africa (April).

On 8 March, 2009, High Commissioner Shri Vishnu N. Hade
handed over to the Botswana Ministry of Education and
Skills Development, 731 computers, UPSs and printers
donated by Government of India. The donation was part of
the commitment made in 2006 by Prime Minister
Dr. Manmohan Singh’s during the state visit of former
President of Botswana Mr. Festus Mogae.

Speaker of Himachal Pradesh Vidhan Sabha,
Shri Tulsi Ram visited Mauritius (June).
Commerce
and
Industry
Minister
Shri Anand Sharma visited South Africa (August).
Minister of State (in-charge) for Coal,
Statistics and Programme Implementation
Shri Shriprakash Jaiswal visited Durban (August).

An expert from Hindustan Computers Limited (HCL)
Infosystems was deputed to assist and train officials in
the Botswana Ministry of Education & Skills
Development.

Minister
of
Industries
of
Kerala
Shri Elamaram Kareem visited Johannesburg,
South Africa (September).
Minister of State for Health & Family Welfare
Shri Dinesh Trivedi visited Addis Ababa, Ethiopia
(October).

Major General Chander Prakash, VSM, Additional
Director General, Staff Duties, Ministry of Defence
(Army) visited Botswana from 31 May-1 June 2009 to
discuss various aspects of bilateral defence cooperation
including renewal of Memorandum of Agreement between
Inter Agency Task Team (IATT)/IAFTT and Botswana
Defence Force & supply of civilian defence equipment.

Speaker of Lok Sabha Smt. Meira Kumar visited
Arusha (Tanzania) (28 September-6 October).
Minister of State (in-charge) for Science and
Technology, Parliamentary Affairs, Earth Sciences
and Personnel and Training Shri Prithviraj Chauhan
visited Durban, South Africa (October).

A delegation comprising Shri P. K. Chaudhery, Additional
Secretary, Department of Commerce and Smt. Alka Tyagi,
Chairperson- cum-Managing Director, Hindustan
Diamond Company Private Limited (HDCPL), visited
Botswana from 24-26 June, 2009 and had discussions with
the Minister of Trade and Industry and other officials to
explore the possibility of buying rough diamonds from
Debswana, which is a joint venture of Government of
Botswana and De Beers.

Minister of State for External Affairs
Dr. Shashi Tharoor visited Mauritius (November).
Chief Minister of Chattisgarh Shri Raman Singh
accompanied by an official delegation as well as a
business delegation from the Indian Chamber of
Commerce, visited Johannesburg and Cape Town,
South Africa. (November).

A 19-member delegation led by Pharmaceutical Exports
Promotion Council of India (PHARMEXCIL) visited
Gaborone from 26-29 July, 2009 and held interactive/
Buyer-Seller Meet on 27 July, 2009. The delegation met
the Assistant Minister of Health and held meetings with
officials in Drug Regulatory Unit, Ministry of Health and
pharmaceutical companies.

Minister of Overseas Indian Affairs visited Tanzania
and Kenya (January 2010).
Speaker, Lok Sabha Smt. Meira Kumar visited
Mauritius (January 2010).
Minister of Petroleum and Natural Gas
Shri Murli Deora visited Uganda (January 2010).

The Indian Institute of Foreign Trade (IIFT) in
collaboration with the Ministry of Trade and Industry of
Botswana organized a workshop on “Executive Development
Programme on International Business in Botswana” from
4-14 August, 2009. The workshop was attended by
government officials, public and private sector
representatives, etc.

Minister of State for External Affairs
Dr. Shashi Tharoor visited Addis Ababa, Ethiopia
and participated in the AU Summit (January 2010).
Minister of State for External Affairs
Dr. Shashi Tharoor visited Maputo, Mozambique
(January 2010).
53

Annual Report 2009 - 2010

since 4 June, 1976 with concurrent accreditation to
Madagascar.

Shri Rajiv Dogra, Ambassador (Retd.) visited Botswana
for six weeks from 25 October-5 December 2009, in
connection with the restructuring of Botswana Ministry
of Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation. The visit
was highly successful and appreciated by the local
authorities.

Preparations are underway to set up a Vocational Training
Centre (VTC) in Moroni to impart skills in plumbing,
welding, equipment and electricity, civil works, IT,
Hydrology, civil engineering, telecommunications, analysis
programming, building and public works, geometer
topography to Comorean people. Government of India
have already located a site for the VTC and the
construction is going to commence shortly. The project
would cost an amount of US$ 1 million which would be
met out of Aid-to-Africa budget.

The Vice President Shri M. Hamid Ansari,
accompanied by Smt. Salma Ansari visited Botswana from
9-11 January, 2010. He was accompanied by Minsiter of
State for Labour and Employment Shri Harish Rawat,
three Members of Parliament, senior officers and the
media. The Vice President held discussions with the Vice
President of Botswana as well as the President of Botswana
among other dignitaries. A 30-member Conferderation
of Indian Industry (CII) delegation accompanied
Vice President’s delegation which held discussions with
the Botswana Export Development & Investment
Authority (BEDIA) as well as one-to-one meetings with
various businessmen.

Eritrea
An Indian naval ship INS Brahmaputra paid a
goodwill visit to the Eritrean port of Massawa from
21-24 May, 2009. Government of India’s decision to
provide a Line of Credit of US$ 20 million for financing
purchase of agricultural and educational equipment
was conveyed by Minister for External Affairs
Shri S. M. Krishna to his Eritrean counterpart in vide a
letter dated 17 July, 2009. The Export Import (EXIM)
Bank, Mumbai is the executing agency for this Line of
Credit. During the current year five Indian Technical and
Economic Cooperation (ITEC) training slots were offered
to Eritrea.

Following agreements were signed during the visit:
1.

MoU on Cooperation in the field of Agriculture and
Allied Sectors.

2.

Educational Exchange Programme.

The visit was extensively covered in the local media
highlighting the enhanced cooperation between the two
countries. During the visit, the Vice President of India
extended an invitation to the Vice President of Botswana
and the visit is likely to take place in near future subject
to the convenience of both the Governments.

Ethiopia
Bilaterally, relations between India and Ethiopia
continued to grow from strength to strength. India
remained a role model for Ethiopia for developing in a
democratic and pluralistic set up. Ethiopia endeavours to
institutionalize the relationship with India and raise it to
a strategic partnership.

A high level delegation led by Secretary (Defence, Justice
and Security) and the Commander BDF is likely to attend
the Defence Expo scheduled to be held in New Delhi
from 15-18 February, 2010.

Mr. Getachew Mengiste, State Minister for Transport and
Communications, was in India on a working visit from
24-30 July, 2009, to visit the TATA Motors plants.

The Government of Botswana has been requesting for
holding of a Regional Conclave in Botswana and have
reminded us recently that they should be held in near
future. This may also materialize in the coming months.

The President of the Oromia region visited India from
1-5 August, 2009. During his visit he participated in the
inaugural ceremony of Ethiopian Honorary Consulate in
Kolkata and also held meetings with Indian businessmen
in Delhi.

Burundi
India-Burundi relations entered a new phase in 2009,
when Burundi opened its resident mission in New Delhi
in August. The mission, which is currently headed by a
Charge d’Affaires, is expected to be headed soon by an
Ambassador.

A four member delegation led by the Speaker of the South
Nations, Nationalities and People’s Regional State
(SNNPRS) visited India from 16-24 August, 2009, for a
benchmarking visit. The delegation held meetings at the
Bureau of Parliamentary Studies and Training, New Delhi
from 17-19 August, 2009 and in Chandigarh the
delegation met the Haryana Legislative Assembly from
20-21 August, 2009.

Comoros
India and Comoros have always enjoyed cordial relations.
India has been having its diplomatic presence in Comoros
54

Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh and the President of Republic Namibia, Mr. Hifikepunye Pohamba
at the Joint Press Conference, in New Delhi on 31 August, 2009.

Vice President, Shri Mohd. Hamid Ansari being received by the
Vice President of Botswana, Mr. Mompati Merafhe,
on his arrrival at the Gaborone Sir Sereste Khama International Airport, in Botswana on 9 January, 2010.

55

Annual Report 2009 - 2010

Mr. Tekele Tesema, Member of Ethiopian Parliament
and Chairman of Parliamentary Committee on
Capacity Building and also Chairman of the EthiopiaIndia Parliamentary Group visited India from
23-31 August, 2009.

During the visit the MoS called on Prime Minister of
Ethiopia and Foreign Minister of Ethiopia and discussed
issues of bilateral cooperation.

Kenya
Official level visits from India included the visit of
Dr. S. Y. Quraishi, Election Commissioner from
6-9 July, 2009 to participate in an Induction Workshop
for Kenya’s Interim Independent Electoral Commission
(IIEC) and Interim Independent Boundary Review
Commission (IIBRC). Dr. Mrutyunjay Sarangi, Additional
Secretary from the Election Commission of India also
visited Nairobi from 11-15 August, 2009 to participate in
the National Conference on Electoral Reforms and a
delegation from Directorate of Valuation visited from
23 April-1 May 2009 for software upgradation of Kenya
Revenue Authority.

A ten member delegation consisting of two Members of
Parliament and Secretary Generals of Lok Sabha and Rajya
Sabha and senior officials of Rajya Sabha and Lok Sabha
formed part of the Indian delegation to the 120 th
Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU) Assembly held in Addis
Ababa from 4-10 April, 2009 with the theme “The Role of
Parliaments in Building peace, Democracy and Development
in Times of Crisis”. During its stay in Addis Ababa the
delegation made calls on the Speaker, Prime Minister and
President.
A three member high-level delegation led by
Shri Dinesh Trivedi, Minister of State for Health & Family
Welfare visited Addis Ababa from 25-29 October, 2009
to participate in a high level meeting on Maternal Health
and the 2009 International Parliamentarians Conference
on the Implementation of the International Conference
on Population and Development (ICPD) Programme of
Action. Two Members of Parliament also attended the
ICPD Programme of Action.

The Kenyan Health Minister led a 16-member delegation
to Hyderabad from 14-16 September, 2009 to attend the
Indo-Africa Pharma Meet and the Kenyan Assistant
Minister for Trade led a four member delegation to Goa
on 27 September to attend the reverse Buyer-Seller Meet
organized by CAPEXCIL India.
Mr. Peter Anyang’ Nyong’o, Minister for Medical
services of Republic of Kenya, visited India from
24-28 September, 2009 to attend the Indian Association
of Pharmaceutical Manufacturers Conference in
Hyderabad.

A nine member Indian Army Training Team reached
Ethiopia under the Indian Technical and Economic
Cooperation (ITEC) programme. The team is led by a
Colonel and consists of one Lt. Col, three Majors and
four non-commissioned officers and will be there for three
years at the invitation of the Ethiopian Government.

A six member delegation led by Chairman of the
Independent Interim Electoral Commission of Kenya
visited India from 22-26 October, 2009. The delegation
visited Maharashtra to witness the counting of
Maharashtra Assembly polls and Bharat Electronic
Limited (BEL), Bangalore to familiarize themselves with
Electronic Voting Machine. A Ministry of Public Services
delegation also visited India from 29 June-10 July 2009
to study the training of civil servants in India.

Bilateral trade between the two countries has steadily been
increasing and is heavily in India’s favour. According to
the Ethiopian Customs Authority, India’s exports to
Ethiopia in 2008-09 are worth US$ 450 million while
imports are to the tune of US$ 12 million. Indian
investments in Ethiopia have crossed US$ 4.15 billion in
2009 and India is now the single largest investor in
Ethiopia.

An Agreement of Mutual Cooperation between National
Small Industries Corporation (NSIC) and Kenya Industrial
Estates was signed on 12 May, 2009. The Indian delegation
was led by Shri Dinesh Rai, Secretary, Ministry of Micro,
Small and Medium Enterprises and the Kenyan delegation
was led by Industrialisation Minister Mr. Henry Kosgey.

An Indian Company, M/s Anmol Products Ethiopia Pvt.
Ltd. inaugurated its paper pulp factory at Ginchi, about
80 kms. from Addis Ababa on 2 August, 2009.
A six member Fusion Music Group led by
Shri Abhijit Pohankar and sponsored by Indian Council
for Cultural Relations (ICCR) visited Ethiopia from
16-22 October, 2009. The group gave performances in
Addis Ababa and Dire Dawa.

There has been a steady increase in the bilateral trade
with the volume exceeding US$ 1200 million in the year
2008 with India’s exports amounting to US$ 1094 million.
Major items of exports from India to Kenya include drugs
and pharmaceuticals, chemicals, machinery etc. Major

Dr. Shashi Tharoor, Minister of State for External Affairs,
visited Ethiopia for the African Union (AU) Summit.
56

Africa (South of Sahara)

items imported by India include cashew, leather and
leather products, scrap metal etc.

confirmed its intent to avail of Government of India’s Duty
Free Tariff Preference Scheme (DFTP) for the Least
Developed Countries (LDC) which provides for duty free
and preferential market access to participating countries.

M/s ESSAR Energy Overseas Company acquired
over 50% ownership of Kenya Petroleum Refineries on
31 July, 2009 and an MoU was signed in the presence of
Prime Minister Mr. Raila Odinga, Finance Minister
Mr. Uhuru Kenyatta and Essar Group CEO
Shri Prashant Ruia.

Madagascar
India has a long-standing cordial relationship
with Madagascar. The historical and civilizational ties
between the two countries are being further nourished by
20,000 strong Indian diaspora which is playing a vital
role in the social, economic and cultural life of
Madagascar.

CAPEXIL organized a Buyer-Seller Meet (BSM) for on
3 August, 2009 which was inaugurated by the Assistant
Minister for Trade and attended by a large number of
industrialists/businessmen. The Electronics and Computer
Software Export Promotion Council organized a BSM on
November 30,2009.

In 2009, India approved a Line of Credit of US$ 25 million
for agricultural projects to Madagascar to enhance
productivity of rice with a view to ensure its food security.

Delegation level visits included visit of an India Trade
Promotion Organisation (ITPO) delegation from
5-9 October, 2009 a member delegation from National
Agricultural and Rural Development Bank (NABARD)
from 2 October to inaugurate NABCONS Consultancy
Services by NABARD, and a five member Karnataka
government delegation from 9-15 November, 2009 to
discuss modalities for implementation of tax register with
the Kenya Revenue Authority. An 18-member delegation
from Confederation of Indian Industries (CII) visited
Kenya from 5-6 August, 2009 and met the Health Minister,
Assistant Minister for Energy, Permanent Secretary for
IT and Officials from the Agriculture Ministry.

Government of Madagascar signed an MoU in April 2009
with Telecommunication Consultancy India Limited
(TCIL) for setting up of Pan-African e-network in the
country. TCIL has already forwarded the equipment and
Madagascar will start availing of quality tele-education
and tele-medicine facilities from India’s prominent
universities and super-speciality hospitals in the near
future.
Government of Madagascar has also expressed its intent
and has submitted the necessary documentation to avail
of India’s offer of Duty Free Tariff Preference Scheme for
LDCs.
Taking into account, the huge potential of Madagascar
in mining, infrastructure, agriculture, power, energy, health
and education, a number of Indian prominent companies
including Tatas, Reliance, Birlas, ESSAR, etc. have
evinced their interest in various investment opportunities
in the country. As a result, businessmen from India’s
private sector have been visiting Madagascar and have
been interacting with the private and government
functionaries.

Lesotho
Relations with Lesotho were further expanded and
diversified following the decisions taken at the first
meeting of the bilateral Joint Commission at the Secretary
level held in New Delhi in March 2009. India’s
development cooperation continued with the
announcement of a Line of Credit of US$ 4.7 million for
the establishment of a Vocational Centre in Maseru. A
grant of US$ 1.79 million is also being provided for the
setting up of a full-fledged India-Lesotho Centre for
Advance Education & Information Technology in Maseru;
an MoU in this regard was signed in New Delhi in
December 2009.

Government of Madagascar has recently signed an MoU
with an Indian company Varun Global SARL for
development of agriculture in the country. To start with,
the company has been given 3400 acres of arable land to
grow rice, corn and lentils. The land has been given on a
long lease of 50 years and subsequently extendable for a
further period of 99 years. The company has imported
tractors and skilled manpower from India to commence
its pilot project in Diego Suarez in northern Madagascar.

On the request of the government of Lesotho, it was
decided that the Indian Army Training Team would
continue its support to the Lesotho Defence Force until
2011. Utilisation by Lesotho of all 30 training slots offered
under ITEC Programme, gifting of books to important
institutions in Lesotho as well as a donation of over
1000 footballs and football nets were other aspects of
ongoing bilateral development cooperation. Lesotho has

Malawi
India-Malawi relations continued to be friendly and
cordial. Malawi successfully held the Presidential and
57

Annual Report 2009 - 2010

dimensional engagement with Mauritius. Relations in the
political, economic, defence and security areas besides
cultural cooperation continued apace. Discussions on
bilateral relations and other issues of regional and
international significance took place between Prime
Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh and Dr. Navin Ramgoolam,
Prime Minister of the Republic of Mauritius on the margins
of Commonwealth of Government Meeting (CHOGM)
2009 in Port of Spain in November 2009. Mauritius
continued to be the largest source of Foreign Direct
Investment (FDI) into India. India was the largest import
source for Mauritius. India’s defence and security
cooperation with Mauritius was reinforced through the
visit of naval ships on both goodwill visit and to carry out
hydrographic related activities. The Dhruv Advanced
Light Helicopter was handed over to Mauritius on
3 November, 2009. The agreement for the supply and
installation of Coastal Surveillance Radar System was
signed in November 2009. Mauritius’ students continued
to avail of educational scholarships for further studies in
India. Mauritius also looked towards India for enhanced
cooperation in the field of Information and
Communication Technology and in Science &
Technology.

Parliamentary elections on 19 May, 2009. The incumbent
President Mr. Bingu wa Mutharika secured a decisive
victory in the Presidential election and his party secured
a majority in the Parliamentary elections also. Bilateral
trade is growing at a steady pace at about 30%. India’s
exports to Malawi grew by 29.08% in 2007-2008 compared
to 2006-07 and India’s imports from Malawi showed an
increase of 35.54% in comparison of the previous year. A
US$ 30 million Government of India line of credit
extended to Malawi in 2008 is being well utilized to finance
the projects in areas of irrigation, tobacco threshing and
one village one project. Telecommunication Consultancy
India Limited (TCIL) completed the work of setting up
facilities in March 2009 in Malawi for tele-education,
tele-medicine and tele-conferencing under the Pan
African E-Network project. President of Malawi
Mr. Bingu wa Mutharika, who studied in India, has
expressed his keenness to further develop cooperation with
India particularly in the technological field. Malawi has
been allotted 40 slots under Indian Technical and
Economic Cooperation (ITEC) civilian training
programme for the year 2009-2010. Most of the slots have
been utilized.
The Vice President Shri M. Hamid Ansari accompanied
by his spouse Smt. Salma Ansari paid an official visit to
Malawi from 7-9 January, 2010. He was accompanied
by Minsiter of State for Labour and Employment
Shri Harish Rawat, three Members of Parliament, senior
officers and media. A business delegation separately
accompanied the Vice President’s delegation. Malawi has
utilized US$ 30 million line of credit extended in 2008.
The Vice President announced a new line of credit of
US$ 50 million to Malawi for its developmental projects.
He also announced a grant of US$ 1 million as relief for
earthquake which recently hit some parts of Malawi.

Shri Tulsi Ram, Speaker of the Himachal Pradesh Vidhan
Sabha, accompanied by Shri Goverdhan Singh, Secretary,
Himachal Pradesh Vidhan Sabha visited Mauritius from
21-25 June, 2009 to study the procedure and functioning
of the National Assembly of Mauritius. The visit formed
a part of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association
Study Tour. The Himachal delegation called on the
Speaker of the National Assembly of Mauritius.
The Chairman of University Grants Commission
Prof. Sukhadeo Thorat was conferred the Doctor Honoris
Causa in Science (Economics) by the University of
Technology, Mauritius on 1 August, 2009.

The following agreements were signed during the visit:
1.

MoU on Cooperation in the field of Agriculture and
Allied Sectors.

2.

Protocol for Consultations between Ministry of
Foreign Affairs of Malawi and Ministry of External
Affairs of India.

A delegation led by Mr. Mohammed Asraf Ally Dulull,
Minister of Information and Communication Technology
of Mauritius visited Hyderabad from 12-14 August, 2009.
During the visit, an MoU for sharing of Andhra Pradesh’s
e-procurement platform was signed on 13 August, 2009.

3.

National Small Industries Corporation of India and
One Village One Product of Malawi for mutual
cooperation for the development of small enterprises
in Malawi.

Dr. Arvin Boolell, the Minister of Foreign Affairs, Regional
Integration and International Trade of Mauritius attended
the Informal Ministerial Meeting of the World Trade
Organization in New Delhi from 3-4 September, 2009.

Mauritius

Mr. Angidi Veeriah Chettiar, Vice President of
Mauritius was on a private visit to India from
20 October-3 November 2009.

Relations between India and Mauritius are historical and
long-standing. During the year, India continued its multi58

Africa (South of Sahara)

Mr. Lormus Bundhoo, Minister of Environment and
National Development Unit of Mauritius participated in
the “Climate Change: Technology Development and Transfer”
Conference in New Delhi from 22-23 October, 2009.

A joint venture of the Apollo Group of Hospitals, Apollo
Bramwell Hospital was officially inaugurated by Prime
Minister Dr. Navin Ramgoolam on 19 August, 2009.
Telecommunication Consultants India Ltd. (TCIL)
completed the work in Mauritius relating to all the three
nodes – tele-education, tele-medicine, and the VVIP node
– of the Pan-African e-Network Project. Mauritius was
selected to host a Super Speciality Regional Hospital in
the Eastern Africa Region in addition to the existing
tele-medicine centre of the Pan-African e-Network
Project.

Shri K. Mohandas, Secretary, Ministry of Overseas Indian
Affairs visited Mauritius from 27-28 October, 2009 in
connection with the Pravasi Bharatiya Divas Convention
2010.
Dr. Shashi Tharoor, Minister of State for External Affairs
visited Mauritius from 1-3 November, 2009 as the Chief
Guest in the celebrations commemorating the
175th Anniversary of the Arrival of Indentured Labourers
from India to Mauritius. Dr. Tharoor called on
Sir Anerood Jugnauth, President of the Republic of
Mauritius and Dr. Navinchandra Ramgoolam,
Prime Minister of the Republic of Mauritius. He had
interactions with several Ministers of Mauritius. During
the visit he handed over the ‘Dhruv’ Advanced Light
Helicopter on 3 October, 2009 to Prime Minister
Dr. Navinchandra Ramgoolam. An India-Mauritius
Inter-Governmental MoU for the supply of the Coastal
Surveillance Radar System from India to Mauritius was
signed on 3 November, 2009. Dr. Tharoor addressed the
University of Mauritius on the theme “India-Africa:
Partners in Development”. He visited the Secretariat of the
Indian Ocean Rim – Association for Regional
Co-operation (IOR-ARC).

According to the provisional figures of the Directorate
General of Commercial Intelligence and Statistics for the
financial year 2009-10, exports from India to Mauritius
are projected at US$ 956. 25 million (Rs. 4,398.13 crores)
and imports from Mauritius to India at US$ 13.93 million
(Rs. 64.05 crores).
According to the Department of Industrial Policy and
Promotion Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) inflows from
Mauritius to India during the period April 2000 to August
2009 amounted to US$ 43.14 billion, providing for
44% of the total FDI into India over this period. During
financial year 2008-09, FDI inflows from Mauritius to
India amounted to US$ 11.2 billion. Mauritius remained
the single largest source of FDI into India. According to
Reserve Bank of India, India’s outward FDI (cleared
proposals) to Mauritius amounted to US$ 2049 million,
approximately 10 % of the total outward FDI in financial
year 2008-09. Mauritius ranked sixth among the list of
destinations for India’s outward FDI.

Sir Anerood Jugnauth, President of Mauritius was on a
private visit to India from 29 November-18 December 2009.
The Indian Naval Survey Ship INS Nirdeshak carried
out hydrographic survey of Mauritian waters from
10 March-17 April 2009. The navigational charts of the
Port Louis Harbour, Port Mathurin, Agalega and survey
sheets of the Saya de Malha banks along with its
digitised data and fair sheet of the survey of the central
part of the St. Brandon Island were handed over to
Dr. Abu Twalib Kasenally, Minister of Lands and Housing
of Mauritius. Indian Naval Sailing Vessel INSV Mhadei
visited Mauritius from 30 May-9 June 2009 on her maiden
long distance voyage. The voyage was undertaken as
preparatory training for “Sagar Parikrama”, Indian Navy’s
first solo circumnavigation expedition. Indian Naval Ship
INS Shardul and Indian Coast Guard Ship INCG Varuna
visited Mauritius from 17-21 October, 2009. The visiting
ships imparted harbour training to the National Coast
Guard of Mauritius (NCG) on topics which included inter
alia fire fighting, damage control, search and rescue
operations, and anti-piracy operations. The NCG
Commando team interacted with the Marine Commando
Team onboard the ships.

Dr. Arvin Boolell, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Regional
Integration and International Trade handed over on
9 July, 2009 a demand draft for US$ 500,000 (US Dollars
five hundred thousand only - equivalent to Indian Rupees
two crore forty three lakh seventeen thousand nine
hundred forty six only) as a further contribution of the
Government and the people of the Republic of Mauritius
to the Prime Minister’s National Relief Fund. This was in
response to the devastating floods in Bihar in 2008.
Various cultural troupes continued to be sent to Mauritius
by India under the Cultural Exchange Programme.
An India-Mauritius Protocol on Sale of Navigational
Charts was signed on 2 April, 2009.
An India-Mauritius Inter-Governmental Agreement for
the establishment of a telemetry, tracking and
telecommand station for satellites and launch vehicles
and cooperation in the fields of space research, science
and applications was signed in Port Louis on 29 July, 2009.
59

Annual Report 2009 - 2010

An MoU on Plant Health Cooperation between the
Department of Agriculture and Cooperation, Ministry of
Agriculture of India and the National Plant Protection
Office, Ministry of Agro Industry, Food Production and
Security of Mauritius was signed on 13 October, 2009.

A 30-member delegation of Indian drugs manufacturers
and exporters under the auspices of PHARMEXCIL
visited Maputo from 29 July-1 August 2009. During their
stay, a Buyer Seller Meet was held on 30 July, 2009. They
also held discussions with the Vice Minister of Health of
Mozambican Government and discussed various issues
relating to export of Indian drugs to Mozambique.

Smt. Meira Kumar, Speaker, Lok Sabha visited Mauritius
from 17-22 January 2010 at the invitation of Speaker of
the National Assembly of Mauritius. During the visit,
Speaker, Lok Sabha called on President and Prime
Minister of Mauritius, as well as held meetings with the
Speaker of National Assembly of Mauritius, Foreign
Minister of Mauritius as well as Leader of Opposition.

Coal India Ltd. finalized the formalities relating to grant
of prospecting license from the Mozambican Government
with regard to the mining concessions which they won
for the two coal mining blocks at Moatize in Tete Province.
They also formed an international subsidiary called Coal
India Africana Limitada.

Mr. Anil Kumar Bachho, Minister of Public Infrastructure,
Land Transport and Shipping of Mauritius, and
Mr. Vasant Kumar Bunwaree, Minister of Education,
Culture and Human Resources of Mauritius, visited New
Delhi to attend the Pravasi Bhartiya Divas from
6-8 January, 2010.

India extended a Line of Credit for US$ 30 million for
rural electrification in the Mozambican provinces of
Nampula, Zambezia, Inhambane and Gaza and a Credit
Agreement in this regard was signed in April 2009.
Under Indian Technical and Economic Cooperation
programme (ITEC) Programme, 30 training slots for
Mozambique were sanctioned in 2009-10. In addition,
15 scholarships under ICCR’s General Cultural
Scholarship Scheme (GCSS) and another 12 Ayush
scholarships are sanctioned in 2009-10.

Dr. R. Sithanen, Vice Prime Minister and Finance Minister
of Mauritius visited India from 18-21 January, 2010 on an
investment mission. He met with Minister of Finance and
Deputy Chairman, Planning Commission.
Dr. Arvin Boolell, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Regional
Integration and International Trade of Mauritius visited
Chennai to participate in the CII India-Africa Business
Conclave from 21-23 January, 2010.

The Bilateral Investment Promotion and Protection
Agreement (BIPA) between India and Mozambique
became effective from October 2009. The Agreement
envisages creation of favourable conditions for fostering
greater investment opportunities in both countries by
encouraging and reciprocal protection of such
investments. The bilateral trade between India and
Mozambique in 2008 was US$ 172.775 million, which
was approximately 14% higher than US$ 152.575 million
in 2007. Mozambique’s import from India increased from
US$ 135.858 million in 2007 to US$ 144.374 million and
its export to India also increased from US$ 16.71 million
in 2007 to US$ 28.40 million in 2008.

Mozambique
India’s relations with Mozambique continued to be warm,
friendly and mutually beneficial. The second IndiaMozambique Joint Commission Meeting held on
19 February, 2009 in New Delhi and the second IndiaMozambique Joint Working Group on Coal held in
New Delhi on 30 March, 2009 added further momentum
to bilateral cooperation.
A six member delegation of International Coal Ventures
(Consortium of Steel Authority of India Ltd., Coal India
Ltd., RINL, NMDC and NTPC) visited Maputo from
23-25 April, 2009. The team also visited the coal mining
sites in Moatize, Tete province and the Beira Port. The
delegation also met the Vice Minister of Mineral
Resources.

Mr. Paulino Gregario, Manager (Operations), National
Hydrocarbon Company (ENH), Mozambique visited India
to participate in the second India-Africa Hydrocarbon
Conference held in New Delhi from 7-8 December, 2009.
Dr. Shashi Tharoor, Minister of State for External Affairs
accompanied by Joint Secretary (East & South Africa)
Shri Gurjit Singh visited Maputo from 13-14 January, 2010
to attend inauguration ceremony of President Guebuza’s
second term. During his stay in Maputo, he called on
President Guebuza and also had meetings with Ministers
of Science & Technology, Interior and Foreign Affairs.

On 10 June, 2009 Mozambican President Armando
Guebuza inaugurated the first phase of the rural
electrification Project by commissioning the 33 KV Power
station in Gaza province. The station was set up by the
Overseas Infrastructure (India) Pvt. Ltd., as part of the
US$ 20 million line of credit granted by India to
Mozambique.
60

Africa (South of Sahara)

Namibia

Dr. Sam Nujoma and Minister of Mines and Energy
Mr. Erkki Nghimtina & visited mines in Okurusu and
Swakopmund. The Indian delegation also met a number
of Namibian Exclusive Prospecting License holders for
JV cooperation.

Indo-Namibian bilateral ties were further consolidated
and strengthened in 2009. Namibia continued to support
India’s candidature for permanent membership to
expanded United Nations Security Council (UNSC) and
also for India’s candidature to a non-permanent seat for
2011-12.

A 21-member delegation from the Electoral Commission
of Namibia that included four MPs, representatives of
various political parties and officials of the Electoral
Commission visited Bengaluru on 15 April, 2009 to
witness the use of Electronic Voting Machines (EVMs)
during General Elections in India. The delegation
witnessed the election process in Bangaluru and visited
the Bharat Electronics Limited (BEL) Plant to observe
the manufacturing of EVMs.

President of Namibia Mr. Hifikepunye Pohamba
paid a successful state visit to India from
30 August-3 September 2009. He was accompanied by
high-level delegation consisting of five ministers viz. Trade
and Industry, Foreign Affairs, Water and Forestry, Mines
and Energy, Defence and Director General of the National
Planning Commission, senior officials and a strong
business contingent. During the visit, five MoUs/
agreement were signed: (i) Agreement on Cooperation
in Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy; (ii) MoU on
Cooperation in the field of Defence; (iii) MoU on
Cooperation in the field of Geology and Mineral
Resources; (iv) MoU on Pan-African e-Network and
(v) MoU on Waiver of Visas for Diplomatic and Official
Passport holders.

An amount of Rs. 1 crore was donated by India towards
flood relief in Namibia in April 2009. India’s timely gesture
and contribution made a positive impact and generated
immense goodwill in Namibia.
A seven member delegation comprising of Uranium
Corporation of India Limited (UCIL) and Nuclear Power
Corporation of India Limited (NPCIL), led by
Shri Ramendra Kumar Gupta, Chairman-cumManaging Director, UCIL visited Namibia, from
8-12 September, 2009. The delegation visited Rossing
South Uranium Mine, Swakopmund and held discussions
with a number of Namibian parties. During their visit,
the delegation called on Minister of Mines and Energy
Mr. Erkki Nghimtina and Minister of Trade and Industry
Dr. Hage Geingob.

During the visit, a number of announcement were made
by India: (i) a Line of Credit of US$ 100 million over the
next five years to be used in projects and supplies of
products from India; (ii) grants-in-aid of US$ 10 million
for the education and health sectors over the next five
years; (iii) grant of over US$ 12 million for the
establishment of the Faculties of Mining Engineering and
IT at UNAM (northern campus); (iv) increase in the
number of Indian Technical and Economic Cooperation
(ITEC) slots from 55 to 110 and the number of
scholarships for bachelors, masters and doctoral
programmes from 7 to 15.

A four member Diamond India Limited (DIL) delegation
headed by its Chairman Shri P. S. Pandya visited Namibia
and held discussions with Namibia Diamond Trading
Company (NDTC) for direct sourcing of rough diamonds
from Namibia. The DIL delegation succeeded in
purchasing diamonds on 25 June, 2009 directly from
NDTC. This was first time an Indian party purchased
diamonds directly from Namibia.

Dr. Nickey Iyambo, Namibian Minister of Safety and
Security visited India from 16-19 October, 2009.
Dr. Iyambo met the Home Minister Shri P. Chidambaram
and visited institutes in Delhi, Mussoorie and Chandigarh.
Namibian Minister held extensive discussions during his
visit and requested for India’s assistance in the field of
capacity building and training for Namibian police and
security forces.

The IT kiosks (Hole-in-the-Wall Project) set up in
Windhoek under GoI grants-in-aid was formally
inaugurated by Mr. Willem Konjore, Minister of
Youth, National Service, Sport and Culture and
Shri Tsewang Topden, India’s High Commissioner on
7 October, 2009.

A six member Indian delegation led by Secretary (Mines)
Smt. Santha Sheela Nair paid a successful visit to Namibia
from 26 October-1 November 2009 for the Joint Working
Group (JWG) meeting on Cooperation in the Field of
Geology and Mineral Resources. The Indian delegation
called on President Pohamba, founding President

The contract for the supply of two Chetak and one Cheetah
helicopters to the Namibian Ministry of Defence by
Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL) was signed on
1 April, 2009 in Windhoek by the Permanent Secretary
of the Namibian Ministry of Defence. The total value of
the contract is US$ 9.515 million.
61

Annual Report 2009 - 2010

Mr. John Rwangombwa, Minister of Finance and
Economic Planning of Rwanda visited New Delhi from
14-16 January, 2010 for the purpose of signing the Line of
Credit Agreement with EXIM Bank in respect of
US$ 60 million LoC extended to Rwanda.

As part of the decisions taken at the India-Africa Foreign
Summit 2008, a two-week capacity building programme
on International Business was conducted by the Indian
Institute of Foreign Trade (IIFT) in collaboration with
the Namibian Ministry of Trade and Industry from
21 September-2 October 2009 in Windhoek.

Seychelles

A two member delegation led by Major General Martin
Pinehas, Commander of the Namibian Air Force, visited
Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL), Bengaluru, from
5-10 December, 2009 and held technical discussions
regarding three helicopters being purchased by Namibian
Defence Force. The contract for the supply of two Chetak
and one Cheetah helicopters to the Namibian Ministry
of Defence by HAL was signed on 1 April, 2009.

During the year 2009-2010, there were intensive bilateral
interactions between India and Seychelles.
Shri Nalin Surie, Secretary (West) led an Indian
delegation and visited Seychelles from 12-13 May, 2009.
The delegation called on the President of Seychelles
Mr. James Michel and Vice President Mr. Joseph Belmont.
The delegation held meetings with Foreign Minister
Mr. Patrick Pillay and with Minister of Environment,
Natural Resources and Transport Mr. Joel Morgan.

A six member delegation from Namibian
National Council’s Standing Committee on
Constitutional and Legal Affairs visited New Delhi from
14-18 December, 2009 on a study tour with the Bureau of
Parliamentary Studies and Training (BPST), Lok Sabha
Secretariat.

National Defence College delegation led by Rear Admiral
V. S. Chaudhary visited Seychelles in September 2009.
India-Seychelles Joint Military Exercise/Training team was
held in Seychelles in November 2009. Brigadier Leopold
Payet, Chief of Defence Forces of Seychelles visited India
from 26 July-1 August 2009. Indian Naval Ships Nirdeshak
(April 2009), INS Matanga (May 2009), INS Trishul (June
2009), INS Shardul and Indian Coast Guard Ship ICGS
Varuna (October 2009) and INS Savitri (November 2009)
visited Seychelles on goodwill as well as on anti-piracy
mission. An Indian Naval contingent participated in the
National Day Parade of Seychelles on 18 June, 2009.
Nineteen civilians and ten defence personnel of Seychelles
Government have availed scholarships under Indian
Technical and Economic Cooperation Programme of
Government of India this year.

Dr. Theo-Ben Gurirab, Speaker of the National Assembly
and President of International Parliamentary Union (IPU)
and Mr. Asser Kapere, Chairman of the National
Assembly, participated in the 20th Conference of the
Commonwealth Speakers and Presiding Officers held in
New Delhi from 4-8 January, 2010.
The Pan African E-network, MoU that was signed on
31 August, 2009 during President Pohamba’s state visit
to India, is in the initial process of implementation. A
team from Telecommunications Consultants India
Limited (TCIL) is expected to visit Namibia in
January-February 2010 to initiate implementation
activities with the Namibian side.

South Africa
Relations with South Africa remained a foreign policy
priority for India and the new governments formed after
national elections in both countries strongly re-affirmed
the importance of the India-South Africa strategic
partnership. Ministerial exchanges, visits of senior officials
and meetings of bilateral mechanisms continued
throughout the year. Cooperation between the two
countries on multilateral issues such as climate change,
the global financial situation, reform of the UN system
and the WTO Doha Round also remained close and
effective.

Rwanda
India’s relations with Rwanda were further strengthened
in 2009.
Second tranche of US$ 60 million Line of Credit [out of
a total of US$ 80 million] was approved for the
construction of a 27.5 MW hydroelectric project on the
Nyabarongo River being executed by BHEL.
According to the provisional figures of the Directorate
General of Commercial Intelligence and Statistics for the
financial year 2009-10, exports from India to Rwanda are
projected at US$ 29.31 million (growth of 126.83%) and
imports from Rwanda to India at US$ 2.35 million (growth
of 253.55%).

Vice President Shri M. Hamid Ansari represented India
at the inauguration ceremony of Dr. Jacob Zuma as the
President of South Africa in May 2009. Ministerial visits
included that of Commerce and Industry Minister
62

Africa (South of Sahara)

the International Standards Organisation General
Assembly Meetings. Comptroller and Auditor General of
India Shri Vinod Rai visited Cape Town in November 2009
for the International Organisation of Supreme Audit
Institutions (INTOSAI) Executive Committee Meeting.

Shri Anand Sharma, accompanied by an official
and business delegation to South Africa from
21-24 August, 2009 during which he met President of
South Africa Dr. Jacob Zuma, Deputy President
Mr. Kgalema Motlanthe and several key Ministers on the
South African side including his counterpart, Minister of
Trade and Industry Mr. Rob Davies. Commerce and
Industry Minister also interacted with business leaders
during the visit. South Africa’s Minister of International
Relations and Cooperation Ms. Maite Nkoana-Mashabane
visited India in November 2009; she held wide-ranging
bilateral talks with Minister of External Affairs
Shri S. M. Krishna on 13 November, 2009. External Affairs
Minister Shri S. M. Krishna also met with his South
African counterpart on the margins of the IBSA
Ministerial Meeting in Brasilia in August and during the
United Nations General Assembly (UNGA) in New York
in September.

Admiral Sureesh Mehta, Chairman, Chiefs of Staff
Committee (COSC) and Chief of Naval Staff (CNS)
undertook a four-day visit to South Africa in June 2009
at the invitation of Chief of South African Navy. Apart
from service level interactions he also met the Acting
Secretary for Defence. Issues concerning operational
engagements, mutual cooperation in training, information
sharing and IONS initiative (of which India is currently
the Chairman) were discussed during the visit. Other
defence cooperation related visits included those of Vice
Admiral R. P. Suthan, Vice Chief of Naval Staff, in
May 2009 as a part of BCCI Board of Directors’ visit to
South Africa. During the visit, he also met the Chief of
South African Navy to discuss issues of long term
planning and development of the two navies. Vice Admiral
D. K. Dewan, Chief of Personnel, Indian Navy in
April 2009 visited South Africa to discuss training
initiatives between the two navies.

Other Ministerial visits to South Africa included visit of
Shri Sriprakash Jaiswal, Minister of State (independent
charge) for Coal, Statistics and Programme
Implementation to Durban in August to present the
P. C. Mahalanobis award of the International Statistical
Institute. Shri Prithviraj Chavan, Minister of State
(Independent Charge) for Science and Technology,
Parliamentary Affairs, Earth Sciences and Personnel and
Training visited Durban in October 2009 to attend the
Conference of the Third World Academy of Sciences; a
meeting of the IBSA Science & Technology Ministers was
held on the margins of the Conference. Dr. Raman Singh,
Chief Minister of Chattisgarh, accompanied by an official
delegation as well as a business delegation from the Indian
Chamber of Commerce, visited Johannesburg and Cape
Town. Shri. Elamaram Kareem, Minister of Industries of
Kerala visited Johannesburg in September 2009 to explore
prospects for promoting business between South African
companies and Kerala. From South Africa, Minister of
Trade and Industry Mr. Rob Davies visited India in
September 2009 for the informal WTO Ministerial
Meeting.

Bilateral economic relations remained strong but the
global financial crisis and the South African economy
slipping into a recession in 2009 affected bilateral trade.
Trade declined by 3% from US$ 6.27 billion in
2007-2008 to 6.10 billion in 2008-2009 with India’s
imports accounting for US$ 4.55 billion and our exports
to South Africa being valued at US$ 1.55 billion. Indian
participation at South African business events continued.
A CII led delegation attended the 11th Annual Power &
Electricity Congress 2009 in Johannesburg in April 2009.
A 30-member delegation led by ITPO participated in
SAITEX and Africa Big Seven Exhibition in Johannesburg
in July 2009. The second “Doing Business with India
Conference” was held in July 2009 in Johannesburg. This
year’s edition featured a special session on India’s
Pharmaceutical industry and a PHARMEXCIL delegation
of over 20 medium size companies exhibited their products
during the Conference. Maharashtra was the partner state
of the Conference and a special session was held to showcase it. The Chemical and Allied Products Export
Promotion Council (CAPEXIL) led a delegation to
participate in DECOREX Exhibition in Johannesburg in
August 2009. A road show was organized for a delegation
from Indian Electrical and Electronic Manufacturers
Association (IEEMA) in Johannesburg in November 2009
to promote ‘Elecrama 2010’ to be held in January 2010 in
Mumbai. General Manager of RITES visited South Africa

Senior official level visits included those of Secretary,
Ministry of Textiles in March 2009 for a Mega Textile
Show in Johannesburg and Cape Town, Secretary, Ministry
of Overseas Indian Affairs to Durban and Johannesburg
in October 2009 in connection with preparations for the
150th Anniversary of the arrival of Indians in South Africa,
and visits of senior officials from India’s Department of
Atomic Energy (DAE) in September and in October 2009.
Other visits included those of Secretary, Department of
Consumer Affairs to Cape Town in September 2009 for
63

Annual Report 2009 - 2010

to participate in the New Economic Partnership and
Development (NEPAD) Transport Summit in November
2009. A 10-member delegation of Indian sports goods
manufacturers, led by Sports Goods Export Promotion
Council, visited Johannesburg for SOCCEREX Exhibition
in November- December 2009.

previous year. The Indian exports were valued at
US$ 10.35 million and Indian imports, US$ 37.17 million.

Tanzania
India’s bilateral relations with Tanzania, traditionally warm
and friendly, continued to expand during the year under
report.

Academic cooperation, which received an impetus by the
launch of the Centre for Indian Studies in Africa (CISA)
in 2008 at the University of the Witwatersrand in
Johannesburg, moved forward with the appointment of
an eminent Indian historian as Chair of CISA in October
2009. A group of 65 executives from the Global Executive
Development Programme (GEDP) mid-career training for
middle/senior management executives of the Gordon
Institute of Business Science (GIBS) visited India in
September 2009. A 100-member Railway delegation
visited Johannesburg from February to May 2009 (in four
batches) to participate in a joint training programme with
Transnet, the state owned South African transport
company.

The bilateral relations also expanded in the field of
Communications and IT with the implementation of the
Pan Africa e-network and the setting up of the Centres
for Excellence in Information Technology by the
Government of India at the University of Dar-es-Salaam
and the Dar-es-Salaam Institute of Technology.
On the economic front bilateral trade and investment with
Tanzania witnessed new heights as India’s trade with
Tanzania stood at US$ 1.03 billion in 2008 ranking as the
second largest trading partner of Tanzania and in terms
of investment India ranks as the biggest investor in
Tanzania crossing over US dollar one billion.
Prime Minister of Tanzania, Mr. Mizingo Kayanza Peter Pinda,
visited India in September 2009, following the
announcement of “Kilimo Kwanza – Agriculture first” Policy
by Tanzania in July 2009. He led a delegation of the Tanzanian
Minister of Agriculture & Food Security and Zanzibari
Minister for Agriculture, Livestock and Environment, along
with senior officials. During the visit PM Pinda called on
Vice- President of India Shri M. Hamid Ansari and met with
External Affairs Minister Shri S. M. Krishna. The focus of
the visit was primarily on food security and agricultural
development with specific objective of intensifying
cooperation with India and learning from its experience.

A number of cultural troupes sponsored by the Indian
Council for Cultural Relations (ICCR) visited various
cities of South Africa including Bharatnatyam, music
and Bhangra troupes. The third edition of the
“Shared History” festival featuring Indian dance, music,
art, cuisine and literature events was organized in
September-October 2009.
The Finance Minister of South Africa Mr. Pravin Gordhan
visited India from 6-9 January for the Pravasi Bharatiya
Samman. Ms. Buyelwa Sonjica, Minister of Water and
Environmental Affairs of South Africa attended the
BASIC Ministers Meeting from 23-25 January, 2010.

The Tanzanian Minister for Industry, Trade and
Marketing, Dr. Mary Nagu, visited India at the invitation
of our Minister of Commerce and Industry to attend the
Informal Ministerial Meeting on the Doha Round of WTO
negotiations in New Delhi from 2-4 September, 2009.
Tanzanian Minister’s visit was important as Tanzania was
a Spokesperson for the Least Developed Countries (LDC)
in its negotiation in the WTO matters.

Shri Vijay Kumar, Special Secretary, Ministry of Mines
led a delegation to the Mining Indaba in Cape Town,
South Africa from 31 January-5 February 2010.

Swaziland
Swaziland is an active member of African Union (AU)
and South African Development Community (SADC).
India established diplomatic ties with Swaziland in 1971.
India’s relations with Swaziland continued to be warm
and friendly. Government of India sanctioned a Line of
Credit for US$ 10 million to Swaziland in September 2009
for setting up of a Science and Technology Park. Seventeen
training slots for Swaziland were sanctioned in 2009-10
under ITEC. Two scholarships under ICCR’s GCSS
scheme are also offered to Swaziland.

From the Indian side, the Speaker of Lok Sabha
Smt. Meira Kumar visited Arusha, Tanzania from
28 September-6 October 2009 leading a contingent of
Parliamentarians and State Assembly Speakers to attend
the 55 th Commonwealth Parliamentary Association
Conference.
Bilateral relations in other areas including culture, health
care and higher studies have also expanded. India has
emerged as the prime destination for advance medical

During 2007-08, the bilateral trade amounted to
US$ 47.52 million compared to US$ 61.57 million in the
64

Africa (South of Sahara)

Dr. Beatrice Wabudeya, Minister in-charge of Presidency,
Mr. Freddie Ruhindi, Deputy Attorney General/Minister
of State for Justice and Constitutional Affairs and
Mr. Fred Omach, Minister of State for Finance of Uganda,
visited Ahmedabad from 30-31 May, 2009 to hold
discussions with CADILA. The delegation also visited
Goa for discussions with CIPLA from 2-3 June, 2009.

treatment. As cooperation in health care sector has
become one of the fast growing areas, a delegation from
the Apollo Hospital visited Dar-es-Salaam in July 2009
at the invitation of the Tanzanian Ministry of Health to
carry out assessment of health facilities, out patient review,
consultations and interaction with the Ministry of Health
and Social Welfare. During the visit the delegation and
the Tanzanian Ministry of Health also further deliberated
on the proposal for establishing a super-speciality hospital
in Dar-es-Salaam. The Tanzanian Planning Commission
delegation visited India in May 2009 to learn from the
Indian experience in the operationalisation of the role
and functions of the Planning Commission in planning
and management of development of Economy.
The Tanzanian Comptroller and Auditor General
Mr. L. S. L. Utouh, visited India in October 2009 to study
India’s system and strengthen working relationship
between the two institutions.

Mr. Matia Kasaija, Minister of State for Internal Affairs,
visited India in June 2009. He met India’s Minister of State
for Home Affairs Shri Ajay Maken during the visit.
Mr. Urban Tibamanya, Minister of State for Urban
Development, visited India from 12-18 July, 2009. He met
Minister of State for Urban Development Shri Saugata
Roy on 14 July, 2009 and Minister of State for Railways
Shri E. Ahmaed on 15 July, 2009. The Ugandan Minister
of State also met the Minister of Finance, PWD and Urban
Development of the National Capital Territory of Delhi
on 15 July, 2009.

Tanzania continues to be one of the biggest beneficiaries
under our ITEC and Educational Scholarship Programme
in Africa. Apart from the sponsorship under the above
two programmes, India is also a preferred destination for
continuing higher education by Tanzanian students,
mainly on account of similar medium of Education and
cost.

Mr. Rwamirama K. Bright, Minister of State for
Agriculture of Republic of Uganda visited India from
5-9 October, 2009. He met with Prof. K. V. Thomas,
Minister of State for Agriculture, Consumer Affairs, Food
and Public Distribution on 8 October, 2009 and discussed
issues of bilateral cooperation in the agricultural sector
and follow-up of the MoUs signed on agriculture between
the two countries.

A delegation from the Plastic Export Promotion Council
visited Tanzania and participated in the Tanzania Trade
Show 2009. About seven Indian companies showcased
their products in the Exhibition from 2-4 December, 2009.
Also, an Electronic and Computer Software Export
Promotion Council (ESC) delegation comprising of twelve
companies visited Tanzania and held a Buyer-Seller Meet
on 3 December, 2009. During the BSM, about
35 prospective Tanzanian companies participated. During
the visit, the delegation also called on the Permanent
Secretary of the Ministry of Communication and Science
& Technology and a detailed presentation was made to
the officials on e-Governance, e-procurement and
Software Technology Parks that were developed in India.

Mr. Fred Mukisa, Minister of State for Agriculture in
charge of fisheries visited India from 21-28 October, 2009
for a field visit to study techniques that can be used to
enhance fisheries production in Uganda.
According to the provisional figures of the Directorate
General of Commercial Intelligence and Statistics for the
financial year 2009-10, exports from India to Uganda are
projected at US$ 217.90 million (growth of 41.75%) and
imports from Uganda to India at US$ 19.14 million
(growth of 26.56%).
A two member delegation from ASSOCHAM visited
Uganda from 23 August, 2009 for one week at the
invitation from the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal
Industry and Fisheries, Government of Uganda.

In the cultural front a four member Bharatnatyam dance
group sponsored by ICCR visited Tanzania in April 2009.
The dance troupe gave performances both in
Dar-es-Salaam and Zanzibar.

A six member delegation from National Agricultural
Research Organisation (NARO), Entebbe, Uganda visited
Indian Council for Agricultural Research (ICAR) and
other research institutes in India from 25-29 May, 2009.

Uganda
India’s relations with Uganda continued to be warm
and friendly. Several high-level visits from Uganda to
India took place during the year. These included the
following:

CAPEXIL organized a Reverse Buyer Seller Meeting
coinciding with the South Asian Print Congress from
28-29 September, 2009. Four Ugandan importers attended
65

Annual Report 2009 - 2010

Director General (Staff Duties) visited Zambia in
connection with the work of the Indian Military Advisory
Team attached to the DSCSC in Lusaka.

the BSM at Goa and CAPEXIL provided air passage to
the delegates.
Mr. Murli Deora, Minister of Petroleum and Natural Gas
visited Uganda from 27-28 January, 2010 for discussing
cooperation in the field of oil exploration and production
with Uganda.

Vice President Shri M. Hamid Ansari accompanied by
his spouse Smt. Salma Ansari paid an official visit to
Zambia from 5-7 January, 2010. He was accompanied
by Minister of State for Labour and Employment,
Shri Harish Rawat, three Members of Parliament, senior
officers and media. A business delegation separately
accompanied the Vice President’s delegation. During the
visit Vice President announced a new line of credit of
US$ 75 million for developmental projects in Zambia and
a grant of US$ 5 million for projects in health, education
and social sectors. A Loan Agreement between EXIM
Bank of India and the Zambian Ministry of Finance and
National Planning was signed to extend to Zambia a
US$ 50 million line of credit for the Itezhi Tezhi
hydropower project in which TATA and ZESCO are joint
venture partners.

Zambia
India-Zambia relations are marked by friendship, mutual
understanding and spirit of cooperation. President
Rupiah Banda empathized with India on Mumbai terrorist
attacks. Zambian Minister of Mines, Mr. Maxwell Mwale
who was the Chief Guest at Independence Day function
at the Embassy on 15 August, 2009, expressed Zambia’s
support to India’s fight against terrorism.
Bilateral trade showed a steady increase of about 40%.
India’s exports to Zambia grew by 29.08% in 2007-08 in
comparison to 2006-07 and India’s imports from Zambia,
by 35.54%. A 25 member delegation of the
Pharmaceuticals Export Promotion Council of India
(PHARMEXCIL) visited Zambia from 3-6 August, 2009.
A Buyer-Seller Meet was organized on 4 August, 2009
which was inaugurated by Zambia’s Deputy Minister of
Commerce, Trade and Industry, Mr. Richard Taima.
Ms. Esnat Mwape, Director General of the Pharmaceutical
Regulatory of Zambia Mr. Rakesh N. Shhah, MD,
Pharmanova Zambia Limited and Shri M. Krishna Swamy,
MD Alliance Pharmaceuticals Ltd., Zambia participated
in the Indo-Africa Pharma Business Meet held in
Hyderabad from 25-27 September, 2009.

Zimbabwe
The situation in Zimbabwe continues to be unstable with
problems buffeting the fragile coalition cobbled together
in February 2009 between the ruling ZANU-PF and the
two factions of the Movement for Democratic Change
(MDC). President Mr. Robert Mugabe, who has been
ruling the country since its independence in 1980,
is reluctant to share power with Prime Minister
Mr. Morgan Tsvangirai.
There are signs of international re-engagement with
Zimbabwe as the EU sent a high level delegation, the first
since 2002, to meet the leaders from all Zimbabwean
political parties in September 2009.

Telecommunication Consultants India Limited (TCIL)
has completed the work of setting up facilities in Zambia
for tele-education, tele-medicine and tele-conferencing
for Head of State under India’s Pan African E-Network
project. 75 slots have been allotted to Zambia under ITEC
civilian training programme. Most of these slots have been
utilized by Zambia.

India’s relations with Zimbabwe have been close and
cordial. Assistance to Zimbabwe under the ITEC
programme has been a regular feature of India’s assistance
to Zimbabwe for capacity building. ITEC is successful and
much sought after programme in Zimbabwe. Starting with
three Zimbabweans in 1985, over 400 Zimbabweans have
been trained in short-term civilian courses in India under
the ITEC programme. The number of utilized slots
increased to 100 during 2009.

Lt. Gen. S. P. S. Dhillon, DCOAS (IS&T) visited Zambia
from 18-21 March, 2009 and had meetings with Acting
Defence Minister, Deputy Army Commander, Deputy Air
Commander and Commandant of Defence Service
Command and Staff College (DSCSC) of Zambia. A
19-member National Defence College (NDC) delegation
visited Zambia from 10-15 May, 2009. They had meetings
with the Deputy Defence Minister of Zambia and Heads
of the Zambian Army and Zambian Air Force including
other officials. It was the first ever visit of an NDC team
to Zambia. From 3-6 June, 2009, a two member defence
delegation led by Maj. Gen. Chander Prakash, Additional

To commemorate the United Nations International Day
of Non-Violence, Embassy of India in association with the
Westridge High School and Hindoo Society of Harare
organized Gandhi Walk and painting exhibition cum
cultural programme on 2 October, 2009.
Prof. W. Ncube, Minister of Commerce & Industry visited
India from 3-4 September, 2009 on the invitation of the
66

Africa (South of Sahara)

7-8 May, 2009. The meeting was co -chaired by
Ambassador of India who is also Permanent
Representative of India to AU and AU Commissioner for
Infrastructure Affairs, Dr. Elham M. A. Ibrahim. The
Indian delegation was led by Dr. Ausuf Sayeed, Joint
Secretary (West Africa) who was accompanied by
representatives from TCIL, IGNOU, Amity University
and Apollo Hospitals. Representatives from more than
20 member countries participated in the deliberations.

Commerce & Industry Minister Shri Anand Sharma for
participating in the Informal Ministerial Meeting on the
Doha Round of WTO negotiations. A 13-member CII
delegation visited Harare from 23-25 June, 2009 to explore
business/investment opportunities in Zimbabwe.
Installation of machines in the Tool and Die Workshop
at India-Zimbabwe Technology Centre located at Harare
Institute of Technology and the common facility at Small
Enterprises Development Corporation (SEDCO) in
Chitungwiza and Bulawayo has been completed and
training of technicians by experts from India is underway.

The Mission which has permanent representation with
AU and Economic Commission for Africa (ECA) and has
partner status with Inter-Governmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) actively participated in various
summit meetings, conferences, seminars, interactive
sessions of these international organizations. After India
hosted the first ever Africa-India Forum Summit in April
2008, India’s interaction with AU has increased
tremendously. Under the ITEC Programme for the year
2009-10, 15 slots were offered to ECA and AU has been
offered 15 slots.

India continued to participate in the annual Harare
International Festival for Arts (HIFA) held in Harare from
1-6 May, 2009. India also participated in the annual
Zimbabwe International Film Festival (ZIFF) held in
Harare from 24 August-2 September 2009. An Indian film
‘Vilapangalkkappuram’ (Beyond the Wall) screened in the
International Images Film Festival for Women (IIFF) held
from 30 November-8 December 2009.
India continued to interact and attend the meetings of
Harare-based Africa Capacity Building Foundation
(ACBF), which is a premier institution for sustainable
development and poverty alleviation in Africa. India is
the first Asian country to have become a full member of
the ACBF.

As a follow-up to the decisions taken at the Interagency
Adolescent Female Sub-committee (IAFS) in April 2008,
Shri Gurjit Singh, Joint Secretary (East & South Africa)
visited Addis Ababa on 4 December, 2009 and held
discussions with African Union to finalize the joint action
plan. A delegation of the African Union is likely to visit
India early next year so that the joint action plan could
be announced.

African Union
The Fourth Session of African Union Health Ministers’
Conference with the theme “Universal Access to Quality
Health Services: Improve Maternal, Neonatal and Child
Health” was held in Addis Ababa from 7-8 May, 2009 with
experts meeting taking place from 4-6 May, 2009. An
Indian delegation led by Shri Rajeev Kher, Joint Secretary,
Ministry of Commerce, Government of India,
accompanied by Executive Director of PHARMEXCIL,
members from pharmaceutical companies like Ranbaxy,
Dr. Reddy’s Lab, Aurobindo Pharmaceuticals Ltd.
accompanied the delegation. The main concern of the
delegation was to allay fears in the minds of some African
countries that generic medicines produced and supplied
by India to many countries were sub-standard and
spurious. During its stay the delegation held discussions
with visiting delegations from Kenya, Uganda, Zambia,
Sudan, Egypt, South Africa, Libya and many NGOs like
Clinton Foundation, PSI Ethiopia, SCMS and explained
to them how the use of patented medicines over generic
medicines.

Dr. Shashi Tharoor, Minister of State for External Affairs
visited Addis Ababa from 27-30 January, 2010 to
participate in the African Union Summit being held there.
He participated in the Ministerial Meetings as Observer.
In addition to calling on Ethiopian Prime Minister and
Foreign Minister of Ethiopia, MoS held discussions with
Chairperson of African Union Commission, Mr. Jean Ping.
MoS inaugurated the Tele-medicine Centre of the
Pan-African e-Network Project at the AU clinic. Joint
Action Plan for the follow-up of the India Africa Forum
Summit 2008 decisions was also discussed with African
Union.
MoS also met Foreign Ministers of 15 African countries
on the sidelines of the AU Summit and discussed issues
of bilateral cooperation.

Common Market for Eastern & Southern
Africa (COMESA)
India is one of the cooperating partners of COMESA. High
Commissioner of India to Zambia, who is Special
Representative of India to COMESA Secretariat in

The sixth meeting of the Pan-African E-Network’s
Steering Committee took place in Addis Ababa from
67

Annual Report 2009 - 2010

Lusaka, participated in the 13th COMESA Summit held
in Victoria Falls Town in Zimbabwe from 7-8 June, 2009.
India deputed an expert on energy to COMESA who
completed one year deputation in June 2009 and
submitted a report on “COMESA Integrated Energy
Planning Strategy”. Exim Bank of India has been providing
credit lines to PTA bank which have been successfully
used in COMESA countries. A total of US$ 60 million
has so far been provided by the Exim Bank of India.

Barefoot College, Rajasthan. Cultural Cooperation
Agreement was signed.

Republic of Congo
A consignment of medicines worth Rs. 9.4 million was
donated by India to the Republic of Congo.

Ghana
Dr. Shashi Tharoor, Minister of State for External Affairs
made a brief halt at Accra on 19 September, 2009 when
he called on President Mr. John Evans Atta Mills.

India-COMESA trade has increased from 5.31 billion in
2007 to 8.9 billion in 2008, an increase of 68%. During
the Conclave on India-Africa Project Partnership,
COMESA Business Council (CBC) signed an MoU with
Confederation of Indian Industry (CII) in New Delhi on
23 March, 2009. This provided a framework for
cooperation between CBC and CII in economic,
commercial and technological fields.

Liberia
Dr. Shashi Tharoor, Minister of State for External Affairs
visited Liberia from 16-19 September, 2009. He called on
President Ms. Ellen Johnson Sirleaf and had wide
ranging discussions with Acting Foreign Minister
Mr. William V. S. Bull. Protocol on Foreign Office
Consultations was signed. India offered to Liberia
assistance in the form of US$ 2 million grant to meet
immediate requirements in health & education sectors;
25 India-made buses; one IT Centre of Excellence; two
Learning Stations under the Hole-in-the-Wall Computer
Literacy project and capacity building & training of
Liberian diplomats & police personnel. A 125-member
Female Formed Police Unit from India is serving as part
of the UN peacekeeping team, currently deployed to give
security cover to the Liberian President.

West Africa
Benin
Dr. Shashi Tharoor, Minister of State for External Affairs
led the Indian delegation at the first meeting of the
India-Benin Joint Commission at Cotonou from
22-23 October, 2009. Cultural Exchange Programme for
the years 2009-2012 was signed.

Cape Verde
Mr. Jose Brito, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Cooperation
and Communities, Republic of Cape Verde visited India
from 18-21 November, 2009. Official talks outlined ways
and means of further expanding and strengthening the
bilateral economic relations between the two countries.
Protocol on Foreign Office Consultations was signed.
Cape Verde promised to support India’s candidature for
non-Permanent seat on the UN Security Council for the
years 2011-2012. India offered a US$ 5 million Line of
Credit for setting up a Technological Park besides
Rs. 10 million grant for meeting requirements in the
education sector. One IT Centre of Excellence is also
proposed to be set up in Cape Verde.

Mali
India opened its resident Mission in Bamako, Mali.
Mr. Moctar Ouane, Minister of Foreign Affairs &
International Cooperation visited India from
8-13 October, 2009. Agreement on political, economic,
scientific, technical and cultural cooperation, Protocol
on Foreign Office Consultations and MoUs with the EXIM
Bank for operationalising Lines of Credit for
[i] US$ 36 million electricity inter-connection project
between Mali and Cote d’Ivoire and [ii] US$ 15 million
in the field of agriculture were signed.

Democratic Republic of Congo

Niger

Mr. Alexis Thambwe Mwamba, Minister of Foreign Affairs
visited India from 27-30 October, 2009. Official talks were
held with External Affairs Minister Shri S. M. Krishna at
which time US$ 263 million worth Lines of Credit for
projects in power, railway sectors were announced. India
offered to set up one IT Centre of Excellence and three
working stations under the Hole-in-the-Wall Project, in
DR Congo and also train Congolese women in solar
electrification and water harvesting courses in the

India opened its resident Mission in Niamey.

Senegal
Foreign Office Consultations
20 October, 2009 at Dakar.

was

held

on

Sao Tome and Principe
Dr. Carlos Alberto Pires Tiny, Minister of Foreign Affairs,
Cooperation & Communities held official talks with
68

Africa (South of Sahara)

Dr. Shashi Tharoor, Minister of State for External Affairs
in New Delhi on 1 December. India announced
US$ 1 million grant for setting up a Technology
Incubation-cum-Production Centre for development of
Small and Medium Enterprises (SME) sector and another
grant of Rs. 10 million for meeting immediate
requirements in education and health sectors. India also
agreed to favourably consider a Line of Credit of
US$ 5 million for priority projects in the fields of
agriculture, capacity building and infrastructure. Joint
Statement issued mentioned Government of Sao Tome
and Principe’s support for India to become a Permanent
Member of an expanded UN Security Council as also for

a Non-Permanent seat for the term 2011-2012. Protocol
on Foreign office Consultations was signed. Sao Tome and
Principe joined the Pan-African e-Network Project as the
47th country.

Togo
Government of India sent a consignment of medicines
for the people affected by floods.
The CII-EXIM Bank Conclave on India-Africa
Project Partnership 2010 held at New Delhi from
14-16 March, 2009 was attended by African and Indian
official and business delegates.

69

7

Europe

Central Europe

The Austrian Vice Prime Minister & Finance
Minister, Mr. Josef Pröll, Minister of Commerce,
Mr. Reinhold Mitterlehner along with a high-level business
delegation visited India from 17-19 February, 2010. The
two Austrian Ministers met with their Indian counterparts
and the Vice Prime Minister also called on the Vice
President, Prime Minister and UPA Chairperson. This was
the first high level visit from Austria after the visits of the
Austrian President in 2005 and Foreign Minister in 2007.

Austria

F

or India and Austria, it was a special year marking
60 years of establishment of Indo-Austrian diplomatic
relations. The bilateral relations were further strengthened
through exchange of high level visits, business delegations
and cultural troupes.
An Indian Parliamentary Delegation led by Speaker of
the Lok Sabha Smt. Meira Kumar visited Austria from
14-17 September, 2009. The Speaker called on Federal
President Dr. Heinz Fischer and met President of the
National Council Mag. Barbara Prammer and Minister
for
European
and
International
Affairs
Dr. Michael Spindelegger. A meeting with the members
of the Foreign Affairs Committee of the Austrian
Parliament was also organized. The Austrian Parliament
also organized a special ‘Democracy Workshop’ for our
Speaker to mark the International Day of Democracy.

Bosnia and Herzegovina
India-Bosnia relations are warm and friendly.
Mr. Barisa Colak, Minister for Justice, Government
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, visited India from
28-29 October, 2009 and signed the Mutual Legal
Assistance Treaty. The Union Minister of State for Home
Affairs Mr. Mullappally Ramachandran led the Indian
delegation. Discussions were also held on finalizing the
Agreement on Transfer of Sentenced Persons and the
Extradition Treaty. A Draft Air Services Agreement has
also been finalized and could be signed in 2010.

The Indo-Austrian Joint Economic Commission was held
in Vienna from 12-13 October, 2009. A 19-member
delegation from National Defence College visited Austria
from 17-22 May, 2009.

Bulgaria

In June-July 2009, ‘Szene Salzburg’ organized Indian
Classical Music performances in Salzburg with support
from the Indian Embassy and ICCR. The festival was part
of the events marking 60 years of establishment of
diplomatic relations between India and Austria. A ‘Chalo
India’ exhibition was organized by the Indian Mission in
association with ‘Essel Museum’ Vienna displaying about
100 works of Indian artists. The exhibition was
inaugurated by Dr. Heinz Fischer, Federal President of
Austria on 1 September, 2009 and the exhibition was open
for three months.

Relations between India and Bulgaria have been
traditionally warm and cordial and continued to flourish
during the year. Bulgarian Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs Mr. Ivailo Kalfin paid an
official visit to India from 28 February-3 March 2009. He
called on the Vice-President Shri Hamid Ansari and met
External Affairs Minister Shri Pranab Mukherjee. An
agreement for abolishment of visa regime in respect of
diplomatic and official passport holders and the
Programme for Cooperation in the fields of Education,
Science and Culture for the period 2009-11 were signed
during the visit.

The Indian Embassy also organized an “Incredible India
Evening” in Vienna on 13 November, 2009 on the
occasion of winning of Grand Prix Award from the
International Committee of Tourism Film Festivals
(CIFFT), Vienna by the Incredible India TV Commercial.
The ceremony was attended by the Minister for Tourism,
Kumari Selja.

Shri R. K. Mathur, Additional Secretary in the Ministry
of Defence of India, led a three member delegation to
Bulgaria from 6-9 May, 2009 for the 14th Session of the
Joint Committee on India Bulgaria Defence Cooperation.
Dr. T. Ramasami, Secretary, Department of Science &
Technology of India, led a five member-delegation to
Bulgaria from 13-16 May, 2009 for the Sixth session of
70

Europe

for Human Resource Development and other high level
officials, business delegates and media persons, paid a State
visit to Cyprus from 29-31 October, 2009 at the invitation
of Mr. Demetris Christofias, President of the Republic of
Cyprus. During her meetings with President
Demetris Christofias, President (Speaker) of the House
of Representatives, Marios Garoyian and the Archbishop
of Cyprus, Chrysostomos-II, the entire gamut of bilateral
relations was discussed. While India reiterated its longstanding support to the sovereignty, unity and territorial
integrity of Cyprus, President Demetris Christofias
reiterated Cyprus’ support to India’s candidature for
permanent seat in the UNSC. President Patil also
delivered a key-note address at the India Business Forum,
attended among others by the Cypriot Justice Minister
Loucas Louca and representatives of the Cyprus Chambers
of Commerce and Industry, Cyprus India Business
Association and Federation of Indian Chamber of
Commerce and Industries, Confederation of Indian
Industries and Associated Chamber of Commerce and
Industries in India (ASSOCHAM).

the Indo -Bulgarian Joint Science & Technology
Committee meeting. The Programme of Cooperation in
the field of S&T for the period 2009-11 was signed during
the visit. The Indian side also offered 10 PhD scholarships
for interested Bulgarian research scholars.
A 13-member Indian Council for Cultural Relations
sponsored Himachal Folk dance group visited Bulgaria
from 24-31 August, 2009 and participated in the
37th International Folklore Festival held in Bourgas and
also gave performances in Varna and Sofia. An ICCR
sponsored International Indology Conference was held
in Sofia from 25-26 September, 2009 in which Indologists
from India, Bulgaria, Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland,
Estonia and Croatia participated. A delegation from the
National Assembly of Bulgaria participated in the
Seventh General Assembly of the International
Parliamentarians’ Association held in New Delhi from
19-22 November, 2009.

Croatia
Ms. Jadranka Kosor of Croatian Democratic Union (HDZ)
was sworn in as Prime Minister of Croatia on 5 July, 2009
succeeding Ivo Sanader who has resigned on 1 July, 2009.

Shri Namo Narain Meena, Minister of State, Ministry of
Finance visited Cyprus from 30 September-2 October 2009
to attend the Annual Conference of Finance Ministers of
the Commonwealth Countries, held in Limassol.

The ninth Session of Indo – Croatian Joint Committee
on Trade and Economic Cooperation was held in Zagreb
from 5-6 March, 2009. The bilateral trade in 2008 was
US$ 147 million, a growth of 27% over 2007. India’s export
was US$ 137 million.

Czech Republic
Shri S. M. Krishna, External Affairs Minister, visited
Prague from 28-30 June, 2009, to attend India-EU
Ministerial troika. During the visit EAM had bilateral
meetings with Czech President Mr. Vaclav Klaus, Prime
Minister Mr. Jan Fischer and Deputy Prime Minister &
Foreign Minister Mr. Jan Kohout.

A function to mark the International day of Non-Violence
and 140th birth anniversary of Mahatma Gandhi was
organized in the Croatian Parliament on 2 October, 2009.
ICCR sponsored a 10 member Kathak dance group visited
Zagreb from 9-13 March, 2009. A 23-member folk
ensemble from Spandan Sanskrutik Trust Ahmedabad
participated in the 12 international Folklore Festivals in
Karlovac from 2-11 July, 2009.

Shri R. P. Agrawal, Secretary (Higher Education), led a
delegation comprising of Chairman (University
Grants Commission), and Director (IIT-Mumbai), from
26-28 April, 2009. A Joint Declaration on cooperation in
the field of Education was jointly signed and both sides
agreed on establishing a Joint Working Group on
Education. As a follow up of the visit, a Czech delegation
led by Deputy Minister for Research and Higher Education
visited India from 7-11 December, 2009 for the first
meeting of Joint Working Group on Education.

Cyprus
Relations between India and Cyprus have been
traditionally very close and friendly. India has consistently
and unwaveringly supported a peaceful resolution of the
Cyprus problem in accordance with the relevant UN
Security Council resolutions. India supports the
sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of Cyprus, and
respects the democratic choice exercised by the people of
Cyprus in the April 2004 referendum. Cyprus has also
extended its support to India on issues of vital concern to
her.

Shri Rajiv Kumar, Scientist, Department of Science and
Technology visited Czech Republic from 21-22 May, 2009
to discuss programme of cooperation in field of science
and technology. Prof. S. K. Brahmachari, Director
General, Council for Scientific and Industrial Research
(CSIR), led a five member delegation to Czech Republic
on the invitation of President of the Czech Academy of
Sciences from 17-18 September, 2009 to explore possibility

Smt. Pratibha Devisingh Patil, President of India,
accompanied by Smt. D. Purandeswari, Minister of State
71

Annual Report 2009 - 2010

of cooperation in the areas of mutual interest. Shri
Madhavan Nair, Chairman, Indian Space Research
Organization (ISRO), visited Czech Republic from
21-24 October, 2009 to take part in Space Exploration
Conference. Meetings were organized with Czech
institutes and companies in the Space sector.

Copenhagen from 17-18 December, 2009 to participate
in the Conference of Parties (COP15) to the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
(UNFCCC).
Ahead of Copenhagen Climate Summit COP15,
Shri Jairam Ramesh, Minister of State for Environment
and Forests, visited Copenhagen from 9-11 October, 2009
and addressed the Global Editors’ Conference on “From
Kyoto to Copenhagen: Confronting Global Warming and
Achieving Energy Security.” The two sides agreed to explore
prospects of cooperation in cleaning rivers and processing
of waste to energy. Danish Minister for Climate and
Energy Ms. Connie Hedegaard visited India from
22-23 October, 2009 to attend the “High-Level Conference
on Climate Change: Technology Development and Transfer,”
in New Delhi.

The third meeting of Indo -Czech Joint Defence
Committee was held in Prague on 2 April, 2009. During
the meeting cooperation in defence field was reviewed
and prospects for future cooperation were discussed. A
three member delegation from Army Headquarters visited
Czech Republic from 5-7 May, 2009 to attend Defence
Exposition in Brno.
A Czech delegation led by Mr. Vlastimil Ruzicka, Deputy
Minister, Ministry of Education, Youth and Sport visited
India from 7-11 December, 2009. During the visit first
meeting of Joint Working Group on Education took place
in Delhi. The Czech delegation visited educational
institutions in Delhi, Mumbai and Bangalore.

Shri Vayalar Ravi, Minister of Overseas Indian Affairs
visited Denmark from 28-29 September, 2009. An MoU
on Labour Mobility Partnership aimed at structured
recruitment of Indian skilled workers by Denmark was
signed between the two countries. The two sides have
also finalised the text of the Social Security Agreement.

A delegation from Defence Research and Development
Organization (DRDO) led by Dr. Prahalada,
Chief Controller visited Czech Republic from
13-17 December, 2009. During the visit the delegation
had the meeting with Deputy Minister of Industry and
Trade Mr. Erik Geuss. They also had discussions at Czech
Technical University, Brno Technical University, Institute
of Physics and with Czech companies.

The sixth round of Foreign Office Consultations took
place between India and Denmark on 18 May, 2009 in
New Delhi. The two sides had exchange of views on
bilateral, regional and multilateral issues. A National
Defence College (NDC) 19-member delegation visited
Copenhagen from 10-16 May, 2009 as part of their study
tour. Bilateral commodity trade between India and
Denmark was US$ 1,249.7 million in 2008. Trade in
Services trade between the two countries was at
US$ 1,454.1 million in 2008.

Shri Dinesh Rai, Secretary, Minsitry of Micro, Medium
and Small Enterprises (MSME) visited Czech Republic
from 11-13 January, 2010 Secretary, MSME was
accompanied by a delegation from CII. He had discussions
with Czech Deputy Minister for Industry and Trade
Mr. Milan Hovorka. He also had discussions with the
Czech Chamber of Commerce Czech Technical University
and Czech Invest.

Estonia
Bilateral relations with Estonia continued to be cordial
and friendly. Estonia appointed its first ever Ambassador
to India with residence in Tallinn. 20 slots were offered to
Estonia under the Indian Technical and Economic
Cooperation programme of and these were fully utilised.
Bilateral trade between Estonia and India reached Euro
49 million in 2008.

Denmark
India and Denmark remained engaged in furthering their
bilateral relation this year. Danish Prime Minister
Mr. Lars Lokke Rasmussen paid a one day Working Visit
to India on 11 September, 2009 as Host of the COP15
and met Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh. The two
leaders discussed issues related to Copenhagen Climate
Change Conference (COP15), regional and bilateral
issues. PM told Danish PM that India would play a
constructive role in reaching a balanced and effective
agreement at the COP15. An MoU on Cooperation in
the area of Environment was signed during the visit. A
CII business seminar on green technologies was addressed
by the Danish Prime Minister. Prime Minister visited

Finland
There has been considerable increase in high level
exchanges between India and Finland. Finnish Minister
of Economic Affairs Mr. Mauri Pekkarinen, visited India
with an official and business delegation comprising
130 members in November 2009. This was the largest
delegation from Finland to India. Finnish companies in
the business delegation also participated in the
72

Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh and the Prime Minister of Denmark, Mr. Lars Lokke Rasmussen
witnessing the signing agreements between India and Denmark, in New Delhi on 11 September, 2009.

President, Smt. Pratibha Devisingh Patil and the Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh at
the ceremonial reception of the President, Iceland, Dr. Olafur Ragnar Grimsson, at
Rashtrapati Bhavan, in New Delhi on 14 January, 2010.

73

Annual Report 2009 - 2010

15th Technology Summit & Technology Platform organized
by the CII, for which Finland was the partner country.
There has been significant increase in bilateral commercial
and economic activities and tourist outflow from Finland
to India. Bilateral trade between Finland and India
reached Euro 739 million in 2008.

in-Chief Western Fleet, also visited Greece and held useful
discussions with Greek Defence officials. Passex with
Hellenic Navy was held on 21 July, 2009. Indian Register
of Shipping (IRS) opened its office in Piraeus, Athens.
This is the first IRS office beyond the Asian Continent
and the first Indian company to be established in Greece.

An eight member delegation comprising members of the
Finnish Parliamentary Committee on Defence visited
India in February 2009. Senior officers of the Ministry of
Chemicals and Fertilisers and Director of the National
Institute of Pharmaceutical and Research (NIPER) visited
Finland in April 2009 and met with the University of
Helsinki and Teknologian Kehittanniskeskus (TEKES).
NIPER is in negotiating with these Finnish organisations
bilateral MoUs for collaborating and execution of joint
R&D Projects. A delegation comprising senior officers of
the Ministry of Human Resource Development and
Directors of the National Institutes of Technologies visited
Finland in May 2009 and met with several Universities.
Bilateral Air Services Agreement with Finland has been
renewed. The 16 th session of the Bilateral Joint
Commission took place in Helsinki in October 2009.

India participated as “Honoured Country” in the
Thessaloniki International Fair, Greece’s most prestigious
trade fair. Six Government departments/bodies and
66 companies took part in the Fair. Indian film and food
festivals were also held.
Various bilateral and other visits from India to
Greece which took place include visits by Justice
Mr. G. N. Ray, Chairman, Press Council of India, and
former Judge of Supreme Court of India, Dr. Subhas Pani,
Chairman & Managing Director, India Trade Promotion
Organisation, Shri K. B. L. Mittal, Secretary (Railways),
and Shri S. M. Acharya, Secretary (ESW) of Ministry of
Defence.
Forthcoming events: Prime Minister of Greece
Mr. George Papandreou will visit New Delhi from
4-7 February, 2010 to attend the Delhi Sustainable
Development Summit. He will address the DSDS and also
meet the PM and the UPA Chairperson to discuss
bilateral, regional and international issues.

Ms. Suvi Linden, Finnish Minister for Communications,
accompanied by an official and business delegation visited
India from 17-23 January, 2010 and signed a bilateral MoU
on Data Security.

Hungary

Forthcoming events: Finnish Prime Minister
Mr. Matti Vanhanen is scheduled to visit India in February
2010 to participate in the Delhi Sustainable Development
Summit being organized by TERI. Minister for Road
Transport & Highways is expected to visit Finland in early
2010 to sign bilateral agreement on Cooperation in Road
Transportation sector. Negotiations on revision of bilateral
Economic Cooperation have since been concluded and it
is also expected to be signed at an early date during the
visit of Commerce Minister to Finland. These visits will
significantly contribute in further strengthening bilateral
friendly relations.

India’s relations with Hungary are close, friendly and
multifaceted. Regular high-level visits have provided the
necessary fillip to our bilateral relations. Foreign Minister
of Hungary, Dr. Peter Balazs, paid an official visit to India
from 17-21 January, 2010 when he had extensive talks
with External Affairs Minister on 19 January, 2010. The
two sides stressed on the need to strengthen bilateral
cooperation in trade, investment, IT, pharmaceuticals,
auto-components, energy, defence & security, S&T,
agriculture sectors and also in consular and cultural
matters, including sports. There were also discussions
about Civil Nuclear Energy cooperation. The Hungarian
FM also met MoS (Commerce & Industry). The
Hungarian FM visited Mumbai from 19-21 January, 2010
when he met the Governor of Maharashtra. The current
year witnessed enhanced cooperation between the two
countries in various fields, including Science and
Technology. The India-Hungary S&T Fund for
Euro 2 million to promote joint research projects has been
operationalised and bilateral S&T projects will be selected
for funding soon. Two joint workshops on Science and
Technology were also organized in India and Hungary in
September and November 2009.

Greece
In Greece, a new government led by Mr. George Papandreou,
leader of the erstwhile main opposition Pan-Hellenic Socialist
(PASOK) party, came to power in a snap election held in
October 2009.
Indian Naval Ships INS Delhi and INS Beas
visited Piraeus port, the largest port in Greece, from
18-21 July, 2009. Coinciding with the visit of the Naval
Ships, Vice-Admiral S. Bhasin, Flag Officer Commanding74

Europe

2007-2008 registering an increase of 41.64%. Latvia’s
diplomats have been attending the Professional Course
for Foreign Diplomats, conducted by the FSI in Delhi.
Hindi courses in India have also been availed of by Latvian
nationals.

Forthcoming events: Minister of Commerce and Industry
is to visit Budapest for the Joint Economic Commission
Meeting in February 2010, when a meeting of the
Joint Business Council would also be held. MoS
Smt. Praneet Kaur may also visit Hungary in the first
quarter of 2010. During the visit, MoS would inaugurate
the Indian Cultural Centre at Budapest.

Lithuania
India and Lithuania share historic relations which
continued to expand during the current year. During
this year, the first woman President of Lithuania,
Ms. Dalia Grybauskaite assumed the Presidency of
Lithuania on 12 July, 2009. Foreign Minister of Lithuania,
Mr. Vygaudas Usackas, accompanied by Economy
Minister Mr. Dainius Kreivys, visited India from
2-5 December, 2009 and had meetings with External
Affairs Minister and Minister for New and Renewable
Energy. He also visited Mumbai and participated in the
opening ceremony of the Honorary Consulate of Lithuania
in Mumbai. Mr. Usackas, along with a business delegation,
participated in the Lithuania-India Business Forum in
Mumbai. Bilateral trade between India and Lithuania has
increased form Euro 32.23 million to Euro 292.69 million
in 2008 as a result of export of a major consignment of
fertilizers to India.

Iceland
India’s relations with Iceland continue to be close and
friendly. Iceland continued to provide valuable support
for India’s candidature for election to UN bodies and other
international organizations. Trade and investment
relations with Iceland have broadened and diversified.
Negotiations on Iceland’s proposal for a Free Trade
Agreement between European Free Trade Association
countries and India continued during the year with the
fourth being held in September 2009.
President of Iceland Dr. Olafur Ragnar Grimsson and First
Lady Ms. Dorrit Moussaieff, along with a 20-member
strong business delegation paid a State visit to India from
11-17 January, 2010. President Grimsson had meetings
with President, Vice President, Prime Minister, External
Affairs Minister, Leader of Opposition and Chairman of
UPA. In their meeting, Prime Minister and President
Grimsson discussed bilateral and international issues,
including cooperation in the field of geo-thermal energy,
IT, carbon sequestration and recycling, glaciological
studies, earthquake prediction and, oil exploration by
Indian companies of Iceland’s coast. He was also conferred
the Jawaharlal Nehru Award for International
Understanding for the year 2007 by President. President
of Iceland also participated in a workshop on renewable
energy. Besides Delhi, President Grimsson also visited
Mumbai and Bangalore, where he met the Governor of
Maharashtra and Karnataka, and had meetings with
Indian businessmen.

The two sides have started negotiations on a Bilateral
Investment Promotion & Protection Agreement (BIPPA)
and the first round of negotiation took place in Vilnius
from 18-19 May, 2009.

Macedonia
During this period, the Macedonian Government has
appointed an Honorary Consul in Kolkata with consular
jurisdiction over the State of West Bengal. A 13-member
ICCR sponsored Himachal Folk dance group visited
Macedonia from 1-4 September, 2009 and gave
performances in Skopje and Valandovo.

Malta

India’s Ministry of Tourism organized a Tourism Seminar
to promote tourism between India and Iceland in
September 2009. Following this an Icelandic delegation
from the tourism sector is participating in the SATTE
World Exhibition in New Delhi in February 2010. For the
first time two regional Indian films, one Tamil and one
Telugu have been partly filmed in Iceland.

India – Malta relations have always been cordial and longstanding. Malta-India interests are also linked to Maltese
initiative on the Law of the Sea as well as environment
concerns. Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign Minister
of Malta, Dr. Tonio Borg, paid an official visit to India
from 6-11 January, 2010. Besides Delhi ha also visited
Chennai and Agra. In Chennai Deputy PM of Malta
inaugurated the Honorary Consulate of Malta in the
presence of Governor of Tamil Nadu and in Delhi he
inaugurated the High Commission of Malta, which has
been established in July 2007. Deputy PM of Malta held
discussions on bilateral and regional issues with

Latvia
Bilateral relations between India and Latvia are cordial
and growing. India-Latvia bilateral trade in 2008-2009
stood at US$ 100.63 million against US$ 71.05 million in
75

Annual Report 2009 - 2010

Development and Transfer” in New Delhi from
22-23 October, 2009. During the said visit, the two sides
signed an MoU in the Area of Climate Change and
Implementation of the Clean Development Mechanism
Projects of the Kyoto Protocol.

Smt. Preneet Kaur. The two sides stressed on the need to
strengthen trade and economic ties He also had a meeting
with External Affairs Minister where international issues
were discussed. A delegation from Malta visited New
Delhi in February 2009 for second round of negotiations
on the Double Taxation Avoidance Agreement. A Trade
and Investment Promotion Delegation visited Mumbai
and New Delhi from 21-29 November, 2009. The main
areas of engagement between the two countries are in
the health sector, IT services and shipping.

A delegation comprising of Ministers of Power of North
Eastern States and officials of North Eastern Regional
Power Committee, North Eastern Regional Load Dispatch
Centre and Power Trading Corporation visited Norway
from 4-14 June, 2009 on a study tour and had interactions
with Norwegian power sectors officials and companies.

Though, bilateral trade between India and Malta has
shown downward trend during 2007-2008, our
exports again saw upward trend during 2008-2009
December-April Quarter and were 60.22 million.

The Fifth Round of the India-Norway Foreign Office
Consultations was held in Delhi on 16 June, 2009. During
the Second meeting of the Joint Working Group on S&T
in Oslo from 14-15 May, 2009, a Programme of
Cooperation on S&T between India and Norway was
signed. The First Joint Working Group meeting under the
Educational Exchange Programme was held at Oslo from
13-14 August, 2009. India and Norway also finalised the
text of a bilateral Social Security Service Agreement.

Montenegro
India’s relations with Montenegro have traditionally been
close and friendly since the days of the Socialist Yugoslavia
(Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia), of which it was
a constituent till June 2006. There is considerable goodwill
and feeling of friendship for India in Montenegro.
Montenegro also conveyed its support to India’s
candidature for the membership to the Executive Board
of UNESCO. The first round of Indo-Montenegro Foreign
Office Consultation was held in Montenegro on
21 July, 2009.

Forthcoming events: Norwegian Prime Minister
Mr. Jens Stoltenberg is visiting India from
4-7 February, 2010 to participate in the Delhi Sustainable
Development Summit being organized by Tata Environment
and Research Institute. Norwegian Foreign Minister is
scheduled to visit India on 2 March, 2010 for the
Fourth round of India-Norway Joint Commission meeting,
which he co-chairs along with External Affairs Minister.

Montenegro was included as a partner under Indian
Technical and Economic Cooperation (ITEC) programme
to address the shortage of qualified and experienced skilled
manpower. Five seats were allotted to Montenegro under
ITEC for the period April 2009-March 2010.

Poland
There have been regular visits at various levels between
India and Poland and relations have been continuously
expanding. President of India Smt. Pratibha Devisingh
Patil paid a State visit to Poland from 23-26 April, 2009
accompanied by MoS Dr. Ashwani Kumar, three Members
of Parliament and a business delegation. President held
talks with the Polish President Mr. Lech Kaczynski,
Prime Minister Mr. Donald Tusk and Parliament Speaker
Mr. Bronislaw Komorowski. President addressed the
Indian community and the Indo-Polish Economic Forum.
In Krakow President met the Rector of Jagiellonian
University and the Governor of Malopolskie province.
Two agreements on Tourism Cooperation and in Health
& Medicine sphere were signed during the visit.

Norway
Extensive interactions between the two countries
continued during the year at both the ministerial and
official levels. Shri Pawan Kumar Bansal, Minister of
Parliamentary Affairs and Water Resources, visited Oslo
from 18-19 August, 2009. During his visit, he attended a
briefing at Norwegian Geotechnical Institute on its
activities and future plans in India and interacted with
the Indian community in Oslo. Kumari Selja, Minister of
Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation and
Tourism visited Norway to attend a meeting of Board of
Governors on Urban Poor Fund International (UPFI) on
27 August, 2009. She also inaugurated India Tourism Road
Show to promote India as a tourism destination.

Mr. Jacek Najder, Undersecretary of State in the
Polish Ministry of Foreign Affairs, visited India from
7-9 October, 2009 for bilateral discussions. Reserve Bank
of India Governor Dr. D. Subbarao visited Poland from
9-12 November, 2009 to attend a seminar on International

Norwegian Minister of Environment and International
Development Mr. Erik Solheim visited India to attend
the “High-level Conference on Climate Change: Technology
76

Europe

Monetary System organized by the National Bank of
Poland.

Medium Enterprises, Slovakia. A workshop was also
organized where representatives of Confederation of
Indian Industry, who had accompanied Secretary (MSME)
to participate in the Conference, interacted with Slovak
businessmen in “one-on-one” meetings. He along with
the Ambassador of India to Slovak Republic called on
Slovak Minister of Economy Mr. Lubomir Jahnatek
to discuss ways of increasing economic cooperation
between India and Slovakia. Trade between India and
Slovakia in 2008 was US$ 244 million, an increase from
US$ 228.5 million in 2007.

Bilateral Trade has been growing at a healthy rate and
was US$ 1,275 million in 2008. Poland was able to buck
the recessionary trends in the EU and its economy is
expected to grow at 1.4% in 2009.

Romania
Romania and India continued to support co-operate in
multilateral fora on matters of common interest. Cultural
exchange scholarships to Romanian nationals continued
in the fields of music, dance and learning Hindi. ITEC
training was availed of by several Romanian citizens. A
Protocol to the Agreement between the Government of
India and the Government of Romania on Bilateral
Investment Promotion and Protection Agreement entered
into force in October 2009.

Slovenia
Minister of State for External Affairs Smt. Preneet Kaur
visited Ljubljana from 30 August-1 September 2009 to
participate in the Bled Strategic Forum. On the sidelines
of the Forum, MoS(EA) also called on the President of
the Slovenia Dr. Danilo Tuerk and Foreign Minister
Mr. Samuel Zbogar. During the visit of MoS(EA) an MoU
was signed between ICCR and Faculty of Arts University
of Ljubljana for establishment of Hindi Chair at University
of Ljubljana. Dr. Arun Kumar Mishra, who has been
nominated by ICCR, has taken up position in the Faculty
of Arts University of Ljubljana on 16 November, 2009.

Foreign Office Consultations (FOC) took place in New
Delhi on 26 June, 2009. The Romanian delegation was
led by Mr. Doru-Romulus Costea, Secretary of State for
Global Affairs, Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Indian
side was led by Shri Nalin Surie, Secretary (West), MEA.

Serbia

A Slovenian Parliamentary Friendship Group led by
Mr. Jozef Jerovsek visited India from 23-27 November, 2009.
The Slovenian Parliamentary delegation has informed that
the city of Slovenj Gardec has been declared by
the UN as the ‘City of Peace’. The Mayor of the city
Mr. Matjaz Zanoskar is part of the delegation.

Relations between India and Serbia continued to remain
cordial. Serbia remained an important player in the Balkan
region and looks upon India as a major emerging global
power. The Fifth Round of India-Serbia Foreign Office
Consultations, held in Belgrade on 20 July, 2009
underscored the need for manifesting the feelings of
friendship in other areas, particularly economic
cooperation.

The first Slovenian Ambassador to India assumed charge
in the Slovenian Embassy in New Delhi in the middle of
September 2009. The seventh session of the Joint
Committee on Trade and Economic Cooperation between
India and Slovenia took place in Ljubljana on
29 September, 2009.

An Agreement on Visa Exemption for holders of
Diplomatic and Official passports, signed in September
2007, became operational with effect from 17 July, 2009.
Following inclusion of Serbia as a partner country under
ITEC Programme, five seats were allotted to Republic of
Serbia under the programme for the year April 2009 to
March 2010. Serbia conveyed its support to India’s
candidature for membership to the Executive Board of
UNESCO.

National Small Industries Corporation (NSIC)
coordinated the participation of 14 companies in the
annual International Trade Fair in Celje from
9-16 September, 2009. Our Embassy in Slovakia organized
an International Conference on Mathama Gandhi in
Ljubljana on 2 October, 2009. Shri R. Bandyopadhyay,
Secretary, Department of Public Enterprises participated
in the 49 Governing Council Meeting of the International
Centre for promotion of Enterprises in Ljubljana in June
2009.

Slovakia
Shri Dinesh Rai, Secretary in the Ministry of Micro, Small
and Medium Enterprises, visited Bratislava from
22-25 June, 2009 to take part in the Conference titled
“Perspectives of Doing Business in India : Support for Slovak
Businesses with Entry on the Indian Market” organized by
the National Agency for Development of Small and

Forthcoming events: President of Slovenia
Dr. Danilo Turk is scheduled to visit India from
77

Annual Report 2009 - 2010

February 2009 and a MoU between Indian Council of
Medical Research and the Karolinska Institute in
August 2009.

4-6 February, 2010 to participate in the Delhi Sustainable
Development Summit being organized by Tata Environment
and Research Institute. He will also deliver a talk on the
Western Balkans at Indian Council of World Affairs.

A Swedish MP from the Moderate Party and
Member of the Standing Committee on the
Constitution, Ms. Margareta Cederfelt visited India from
22-27 February, 2010. She called on the Chairman and
Members of the Indian Standing Committee on Personnel,
Public Grievances, Law & Justice; Members of the National
Human Rights Commission and the Supreme Court.

Sweden
The exchange of bilateral visits between India and Sweden
continued during the year. Swedish Prime Minister
Frederick Reinfeldt accompanied by Foreign Minister
Carl Bildt, Trade Minister Ewa Björling, and a business
delegation visited India from 5-6 November, 2009 for the
bilateral and India-EU Summit meetings. The two
countries signed two MoUs on Cooperation on Defence
and on Environment, and an Agreement in Fusion
Research was signed between India and EU.

Switzerland
Bilateral relations were nurtured through visits during the
year. A three member delegation led by Dr. M. S. Gill,
Minister for Youth Affairs & Sports paid an official visit
to Switzerland from 8-17 August, 2009. During his
meeting with the Swiss Federal Councillor for Sports
detailed collaboration in programmes on mountaineering,
dope control in sports, coaching and training of
mountaineering instructors were discussed. A five member
delegation led by Shri Kamal Nath, Minister for Road
Transport & Highways visited Switzerland from
11-12 August, 2009 and participated in a road show,
‘Building India: Road Infrastructure Summit’, jointly
organized by CII, ICICI, JM Financials & Swiss-India
Chamber of Commerce. The Minister also addressed the
CII-WEF ‘India Highways Infrastructure Round Table’.

Minister of Commerce and Industry Shri Anand Sharma,
accompanied by an 18-member high powered official
and business delegation visited Sweden from
15-16 September, 2009 and held meeting with Sweden’s
Minister for Trade Dr. Ewa Björling. The Joint Work
Programme of the Indo-Swedish Joint Commission for
Economic, Industrial and Scientific Cooperation was
signed by two sides.
The Minister for Water Resources and Parliamentary
Affairs Shri Pawan Kumar Bansal, participated in World
Water Week in Stockholm. India’s Dr. Bindeshwar Pathak,
Founder President of Sulabh International Social Service
Organisation was conferred Stockholm Water Prize during
this event.

A four member delegation led by the Minister of Textiles
Shri Dayanidhi Maran, visited Switzerland from
25-28 October, 2009. Minister visited textile industrial
units in Zurich. He also addressed a Convention on
“Collaborative Business Opportunities in Textile & Apparel
Sector”. Ms. Doris Leuthard, Federal Councillor for
Economic Affairs of the Swiss Confederation, led a four
member delegation to India to attend the informal WTO
Doha Round Ministerial Meeting in New Delhi from
3-4 September, 2009. The meeting aimed to revive Doha
Round of negotiations.

Under the EU’s Erasmus Mundus Scholarship and
Academic Cooperation programme, a large number of
Indian students and Post-doctoral researchers have joined
Lund University and Karolinska Institute in Sweden. The
Indian Embassy donated a set of 120 books on Mahatma
Gandhi to Lund University and on Gandhi Jayanti
Stockholm International School, in cooperation with the
Indian Embassy observed the International Day of
Non-Violence through a seminar on “The Relevance of
Mahatma Gandhi’s Vision in Today’s World”.

A four member Indian delegation led of Department of
Science and Technology visited Switzerland from
29 April-2 May 2009 for the First meeting of the
Indo-Swiss Working Group on Science and technology.
A four member delegation led by Shri C. B. Bhave,
Chairman Securities and Exchange Board of India, visited
Basel from 26-27 June, 2009 to attend the Plenary Meeting
of the Financial Stability Board.

Indo-Swedish bilateral trade continued to grow and stood
at US$ 2.6 billion in 2008-2009 against US$ 2.3 billion in
2007-2008, registering an increase of 15.40%.
The India-Sweden Health Week was held in New Delhi
from 31 January-5 February 2010. In this connection, the
Swedish Minister of Elderly Care and Public Health Care
Ms. Maria Larsson along with a large delegation of officials
visited India. The event was organized by the Ministry of
Health & Family Welfare in pursuance of the Agreement
for Cooperation in the Field of Health signed in

The Sixth Round of Foreign Office Consultations took
place in New Delhi on 4 December, 2009. The entire
78

Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh with the Prime Minister of Sweden, Mr. Fredrik Reinfeldt, at
the delegation level talks, in New Delhi on 5 November, 2009.

President of France, Mr. Nicolas Sarkozy receiving the Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh
for the working lunch, at Hotel Marigny, in Paris on 14 July, 2009.

79

Annual Report 2009 - 2010

The Seventh session of the Foreign Office Consultations
(FOC) at Secretary Level was held on 9 April, 2009
and at Joint Secretary/Director General level on
16 December, 2009 in Ankara.

gamut of bilateral, regional and international issues of
concern to both sides was discussed. A two member
delegation led of Ministry of Finance, visited Switzerland
from 9-13 November, 2009 for negotiations on the new
comprehensive Protocol which will amend the existing
Indo-Swiss Double Taxation Avoidance Agreement
(DTAA), signed in November 1994.

Forthcoming events: The Turkish President Abdullah Gul
is visiting India from 7-11 February, 2010. He will be
accompanied by a large business delegation which will
have meetings in both New Delhi and Mumbai.

On 3 September, 2009 India and Switzerland signed the
bilateral Social Security Agreement in New Delhi. The
fourth round of negotiations for the India-EFTA Trade
and Investment Agreement (TIA) was held in Delhi from
22-23 September, 2009

West Europe
Belgium
India and Belgium enjoy friendly relations with trade &
commerce forming an important component. Belgium was
India’s ninth largest trading partner globally in 2008-09.

Turkey
Minister of Commerce and Industry Shri Anand Sharma
(CIM) visited Ankara from 7-8 September, 2009, to take
part in the Ninth session of Joint Committee for
Economic and Technical Cooperation (JCETC) held on
8 September, 2009. During his visit, CIM met the Turkish
State Minister for Foreign Trade Mr. Zafer Çaðalayan,
Turkish Minister for Trade and Industry Mr. Nihat Ergun
and the Turkish co-Chair of JCETC State Minister
Mr. Mehmet Aydýn. India Turkey Joint Business Council
meeting was held in Istanbul on 9 September, 2009.

On 19 November, 2009 the Belgian Prime Minister
Mr. Herman Van Rompuy was selected by the EU leaders
to become the first President of the European Council
under the Lisbon Treaty. A new cabinet was sworn in with
Yves Leterme, the Foreign Minister in the previous
Government, as Belgium’s new Prime Minister by the
King of Belgians on 25 November, 2009. The new cabinet
includes all the members of the last cabinet with same
portfolio as was in the government of Van Rompuy. The
only two changes were Steven Vanackere succeeded Yves
Leterme as Belgian Foreign Minister and Ms. Inge Vervotte
replaced Mr. Vanackere as Minister for publicly owned
businesses. It is the second time Leterme has become the
PM of Belgium.

Finance Minister Shri Pranab Mukherjee attended the
Annual Meeting of International Monetary Fund in
Istanbul from 2-7 October, 2009. During his visit, he met
Ali Babacan, the Turkish Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Economy on 7 October, 2009 and discussed
various issues concerning the bilateral economic relations
and the ongoing global economic crisis.

The India-Belgium Social Security Agreement, the first
one to be signed with any country in Europe, became
operational with effect from 1 September, 2009.

Besides these visits, Minister of State for Civil
Aviation Shri Prafulla Patel visited Istanbul from
30-31 October, 2009 to attend inauguration of the new
international terminal of Sabiha Gokcen International
Airport and Minister of Textiles Shri Dayanidhi Maran
visited Istanbul from 1-4 November, 2009 and held a
textile Road-show on 3 November, 2009 for attracting
investments, and exploring trade opportunities.

Minister of Overseas Indian Affairs Shri Vayalar Ravi
visited Belgium from 30 September-3 October 2009. He
jointly inaugurated the India Calling Conference 2009 in
Brussels on 30 September with the then Belgian Foreign
Minister and current Prime Minister Yves Leterme and
met his Belgian counterpart Ms. Lauratte Onkelix, Deputy
PM & Minister for Social Affairs and Health.
The 11th round of Economic JCM between India and
Belgium-Luxembourg Economic Union (BLEU) was held
in Brussels from 4-5 May, 2009 after a gap of eight years.
Indian delegation was led by the Commerce Secretary
Shri G. K. Pillai & the BLEU delegation was led by
Ambassador Jan Van Dessel, Director General for Bilateral
Relations in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Belgium.
The Luxembourg delegation was led by Director,
International Economic Relations in the Ministry of

In the calendar year 2008, the volume of bilateral trade
reached a figure of over US$ 3 billion with US$ 2.45 billion
as India’s exports to Turkey. Both sides envisage
raising this figure to US$ 5 billion by year 2011. On
23 September, 2009 PSLV C14 rocket of the Indian Space
Research Organisation carried Turkey’s first nano-satellite
ITUpSAT1, designed and manufactured by the Istanbul
Technical University, ushering the bilateral space
cooperation into a new phase.
80

Europe

Foreign Affairs of Luxembourg. The two sides reviewed
the ongoing cooperation and discussed possible
cooperation in the fields of transport, iron and steel,
diamonds trade, tourism, biotechnology and
pharmaceuticals, ICT, aeronautics, investment and market
access, financial sectors, science and technology etc.
India and Belgium set annual bilateral trade target of
Euro 12 billion to be achieved by 2012 from the level of
Euro 8.8 billion in 2008.

first time ever that Indian troops took part in another
country’s national day parade. President Sarkozy hosted
a lunch in honour of Prime Minister Manmohan Singh,
after which PM and the President addressed the larger
gathering of invitees to the President’s National Day
reception at the Elysée. PM extended an invitation to
President Sarkozy and his wife to visit India.
Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh and President
Mr. Sarkozy had a luncheon meeting on the sidelines of
the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting in
Trinidad & Tobago on 27 November, 2009 and discussed
climate issues and reviewed bilateral ties.

Among other visits, a three member delegation led by
Shri Rakesh Srivastava, Joint Secretary (Ports), Ministry
of Shipping visited Belgium from 5-9 October, 2009 for
attending the Working Group Meeting under the MoU
in the area of Shipping and Ports. During the visit, the
delegation signed a new Letter of Intent for period
2010-2012 to cooperate in the ports & shipping areas with
the Flanders Government to implement the MoU signed
in 1997.

The 20th Round of the Indo-French Strategic Dialogue
was held in New Delhi on 17 January, 2009 between NSA
Shri M. K. Narayanan and the Diplomatic Adviser to
President Sarkozy Jean-David Levitte. The bilateral
Foreign Office Consultations were held in Paris on
5 February, 2009. The Indian delegation was led by Foreign
Secretary Shri Shiv Shankar Menon while the French side
was led by Secretary General Gérard Errera. The 21st round
of the Indo-French Strategic Dialogue was held
on 18 January, 2010 in New Delhi, between NSA
and the Diplomatic Adviser to President Sarkozy,
Mr. Jean-David Levitte, from the French side.

Prince Phillip, the Crown Prince of the Kingdom of
Belgium is scheduled to pay an Official Visit to India
leading an Economic Mission from 20-27 March, 2010,
the fourth such Mission during the last fifteen years. A
large business and official delegation is expected to
accompany him. The Vice President will be the official
host. Other places to be visited by the Crown Prince are
Mumbai, Pune and Bengaluru. The visit in March 2010
is meant to consolidate bilateral economic relations
between India and Belgium.

Indo-French bilateral trade decreased to Euro 5.69 billion
(US$ 8.08 billion) in the last 12 months (September 2009October 2008), reflecting the difficulties caused by the
global economic crisis, as compared to Euro 6.96 billion
(US$ 10.39 billion) during the corresponding 12-month
period a year earlier (September 2008-October 2007), a
decrease of 18.24%. The trade balance was in favour of
India at Euro 409.6 million. The newly formed
Indo-French CEO’s Forum held a preliminary meeting in
Paris on 26 June, 2009 and the first meeting of the Forum
was held in New Delhi from 28-29 November, 2009.

France
Relations between India and France have traditionally
been close and friendly. With the establishment of the
strategic partnership in 1998, there has been significant
progress in all areas of bilateral cooperation through
regular high-level exchanges at the Head of State/Head
of Government levels and growing commercial exchanges
including in strategic areas such as defence, nuclear energy
and space. France was the first country with which India
entered into an agreement on nuclear energy following
the waiver given by International Atomic Energy Agency
and the Nuclear Suppliers’ Group enabling India to resume
full civil nuclear cooperation with the international
community. Today our relations are growing fast in
important areas for the future, with wide-ranging
cooperation in political, economic and cultural fields and
on defence, space, science & technology, and education.

French Minister for Foreign Trade Ms. Anne-Marie Idrac,
visited India from 26-29 October, 2009. The focus
of the visit was on collaboration in the food processing
sector. During her visit, Ms. Idrac inter alia met
Shri Anand Sharma, Minister of Commerce and Industry,
Shri Subodh Kant Sahay, Minister of Food Processing
Industries, Dr. Montek Singh Ahluwalia,
Deputy Chairman of the Planning Commission, and
Shri Jaipal Reddy, Minister of Urban Development.
Indo-French dialogue on economic and technical issues
is conducted in a structured way through Joint Working
Groups. During the year JWG meetings on IT & Telecom,
Urban Development & Urban Transportation;
Agriculture, Roads and Environment were held. Bilateral

Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh visited France from
13-14 July, 2009. He was the guest of honour at the French
National Day celebrations (Bastille Day parade). A
400 strong contingent of the Indian armed forces took
part in the parade and led the march past. This was the
81

Annual Report 2009 - 2010

The Joint Working Group (JWG) meeting of the
Indo-French Educational Exchange Programme (IFEEP)
(Paris, March 2009) agreed to intensify ties between the
academia, intellectuals and youth by (i) strengthening the
“Consortium of Indo-French Universities” (CIFU)
(ii) bolstering social sciences research (under “Maison des
Sciences de l’Homme” (MSH)/UGC/ICSSR framework),
the Indo-French Cyber University and student/scholar/
researcher mobility through flexible visa regime and
(iii) substantively involving French collaboration in setting
up of a new IIT in Rajasthan. Institutionally, the number
of MoUs signed between leading Indian and French
educational institutions has now crossed 300. The number
of Indian students studying in France now is around 1700.

Air Services Talks were held, from 10-11 February, 2009,
in Paris and an MoU on the Bilateral Air Services
Agreement was signed on the occasion.
Defence cooperation with France is a key aspect of our
overall bilateral relationship. The High Level Committee
on Defence Cooperation held its 12th session in Delhi on
30 November, 2009 and reviewed bilateral ties covering
strategic perceptions, collaboration in R&D and
procurement issues. Earlier under the framework of the
structured talks on Indo-French Defence Cooperation
several meetings were held namely: the Indo-French
Research Forum (IFRF), held in India, from
5-7 October, 2009; Army/ Navy/ Air Staff talks, held in
India from 25-27 November, 2009; the Military Sub Group
(MSG) meeting, held in India on 30 November, 2009;
and the Indo-French Sub-Committee on Defence
Industry, Procurement, Research and Technology, held
in New Delhi on 30 November, 2009. Defence Minister
Hervé Morin visited India from 3-4 December, 2009 and
held discussions with Defence Minister. The Indo-French
Naval Exercise, Varuna 2009 was held for the first time in
the Atlantic Ocean, in the waters of France off the coast
of Brittany from 27 June-4 July 2009. From the Indian
side, INS Delhi, Brahmaputra, Beas and the tanker INS
Aditya participated in the exercise. Planning is underway
for the 2010 Indo-French Air Force Exercise Garuda IV.

In S&T, cooperation is increasing under the CEFIPRA
framework for joint projects/publications/seminars and
exchange of scientists. A strong collaboration is also
underway between ICMR and INSERM in medical
research, developing new vaccines and setting up of
advanced medical laboratories in India.
A cooperation agreement between the Commissariat à
l’Energie Atomique and the Department of Atomic Energy
of India was reviewed in the Annual Joint Coordination
Committee Meeting held in France in October 2009. An
Amendment Agreement was signed, on the occasion by
the Chairmen of Department of Atomic Energy and CEA
enabling DAE to join the Consortium for the Jules
Horowitz Reactor construction and operation. After the
unanimous adoption of the Inter Governmental
Agreement on Civil Nuclear Cooperation by the Senate
on 16 October, 2009, the National Assembly ratified the
agreement on 24 November, 2009.

France and India view each other as important partners
in space technology and applications. Arianespace
continues to provide launch facilities for Indian Satellites
(INSAT), while India’s PSLV has been used to launch
satellites for European customers. A bilateral technical
meeting between ISRO and its French counterpart CNES
took place in Bengaluru in July 2009. ISRO and CNES
are working as equal partners on a scientific satellite
programme called Megha Tropiques which is scheduled to
be launched in mid 2010 on the PSLV launcher of ISRO.
Another launch of a satellite SARAL (satellites for
ARGOS and ALTIKA) designed and built by ISRO is
expected to be launched during the period 2009-2010 with
active co-operation from CNES. Both satellites are
expected to yield scientific data of relevance to global
concerns related to climate change. The Joint Working
Group between ISRO and CNES meet regularly.

After the unanimous adoption of the Inter Governmental
Agreement on Civil Nuclear Cooperation by the Senate on
16 October, 2009, the French National Assembly ratified
the agreement on 24 November, 2009. The instruments of
ratification were exchanged on 14 January, 2010, following
which the Agreement has come into force.
In 2009 bilateral cultural relations continued to be prolific.
There were more than 70 major performing arts events
including performances by maestros of Indian
Classical Music like Ustad Amjad Ali Khan and
Pandit Shiv Kumar Sharma in prestigious Parisian venues
and 82 visual art (photos and paintings) exhibitions.
Indian films participated in 17 major film festivals
including an annual film festival at Musee Guimet “Indian
Summer” which screened Marathi and Malyalam cinema
this year. At the Cannes Film Festival there were films by
young and new Indian directors. A total of four spectacles

Bilateral cooperation in the fields of higher education,
research, S&T has strengthened further during the year
in pursuance of the commitments made in the IndoFrench Joint Statements issued during President Sarkozy’s
visit to India in January 2008 and Prime Minister
Dr. Manmohan Singh’s visit to France in September 2008.
82

Europe

based on mainstream cinema (Bollywood), attracted
extraordinary numbers of audience of all ages in Paris and
other cities of France. India was the Partner Country at
the ‘Salon du Cinema’ in January 2009. One sees a growing
trend of combining Trade fairs with Cultural activities. In
France India participated in five Trade and Culture fairs
including in Montpellier where India was the country of
honour this year. Besides eight exclusively Cultural
Festivals were also organized.

for the second consecutive term with a new coalition
partner the Free Democratic (Liberal) Party (FDP). The
grand coalition of the two major political parties, CDU
& the Social Democratic (SPD) came to an end as the
people of Germany voted in favour of a growth oriented
agenda of the CDU-FDP. While Ms. Angela Merkel
took over as Chancellor on 28 October, 2009,
Mr. Guido Westerwelle from the FDP took over as the
Vice Chancellor and Foreign Minister in a 16-member
cabinet. In spite of being an election year, bilateral
exchange in terms of important visits continued as in past
years. There was significant expansion of bilateral trade
and investment ties and a substantial expansion of
partnerships in science and technology.

The President of the ICCR Dr. Karan Singh visited Paris
in September and held meetings with the French Minister
for Culture Mr. Frederic Mitterand and the Chairman of
Culture France. Discussions covered the planned cultural
festivals of the two countries “Bonjour India” by France in
early 2010 and an Indian Festival “Namaste France” in
France in 2010-2011. A memorandum of understanding
on the subject was later signed between ICCR and the
French Ministry of Foreign Affairs on 17 November, 2009.

In the field of Science & Technology, following important
visits took place. A delegation of Indian Scientist led by
Dr. R. Chidambaram, Principal Scientific Advisor to
Government of India visited Dresden for the
Indo-German Second CAR-Fraunhofer Symposium from
25-28 May, 2009. Dr. G. Madhavan Nair, Chairman, Space
Commission/Secretary, Department of Space, Bangalore
along with Dr. Radhika Ramachandran, Counsellor
(Space), EoI, Paris visited European Space Agency (ESA)
in German Aerospace Centre (DLR), Koln
from 27-28 May, 2009. Shri Kapil Sibal, Union
Minister of Human Resource Development and
Shri Prithiviraj Chauhan, Minister of State for Science
and Technology participated at the meeting of Nobel
Laureates in Lindau, Bavaria from 27-28 June, 2009.
Shri Kapil Sibal was honoured by being inducted as a
member of the Honorary Senate of the Lindau Council
in recognition of his contributions to the Lindau effort.
43 Indian students from the field of Chemistry also
participated in this event. Other important events in the
field of cooperation in economic and education field
included the inauguration of Bavarian-Indian Centre for
Business and University Cooperation on 28 July, 2009 at
Hof in the Bavarian state of Germany. The erstwhile
Minister for Economics & Technology Dr. Karl Theodor
Freiherr von Guttenberg and Ambassador jointly
inaugurated the centre.

Minister of Textiles Shri Dayanidhi Maran is scheduled
to visit France from 31 January-3 February 2010
to promote Indian textiles. Minister of Food Processing,
Shri Subodh Kant Sahai will be visiting France
from 3-5 February, 2010 at the invitation of
Ms. Anne-Marie Idrac, the French Minister for Foreign
Trade. The Minister for Chemicals and Fertilizers is
expected to visit France from 11-12 February, 2010 to
promote ‘India Chem 2010’.
Various cultural events are scheduled to be held in the
first quarter of 2010. The Indian Cultural Festival
‘Namaste France’ will be flagged off in March 2010 with
the Exhibition on Indigenous art “Other Masters of India”
in Museum of Quai Branly. An exhibition of Indian
costumes “The Last Maharajas” comprising the Hutheesing
collection will be organized at the Foundation Yves Saint
Laurent, in Paris in February 2010. Several performing
arts, film festivals, etc are also being held during the period.

Germany
Germany is India’s largest trading partner within the EU,
second most importance source of technological
collaborations globally and an important investor. The
year 2009 was especially important as an election year.
While India had Lok Sabha elections in April 2009,
Germany witnessed hectic political activity with the
European Parliamentary elections, election of the Federal
President, elections in many Federal states and finally the
Bundestag elections in September 2009. In the Bundestag
elections, Chancellor Merkel’s Christian Democratic Party
(CDU), along with its sister party from Bavaria - the
Christian Social Union (CSU), managed to get re-elected

The increasing economic and trade ties generated lot of
interest in both the countries as many high-level visits
took place in the year 2009. These included a delegation
from Lower Saxony led by its Minister for Economics
Dr. Phillip Rösler on a visit to Mumbai, Pune, Chennai
and Kolkata from 25 April-2 May 2009. Another
delegation from Bavaria led by Ms. Emilia Müller, the
Bavarian State Minister for European and International
Affairs, visited Karnataka from 22-26 July, 2009 to identify
concrete projects for implementing the objectives of the
83

Annual Report 2009 - 2010

Dr. Christoph Heugsen, Advisor to German
Chancellornon Foreign and Security Policy, and
Shri M. K. Narayanan, NSA, who are co-chairs for the
Indo-German Strategic Dialogue, held a meeting in
New Delhi on 21 December, 2009.

Action Plan for further strengthening cooperation
between Bavaria and Karnataka (which was signed on
the sidelines of the Global India Business Meeting held
in Munich in June 2009).
The visits from the Indian side included a visit of
Commerce and Industry Minister Shri Anand Sharma for
the first Global India Business Meeting (GIBM), at
Munich from 28-30 June, 2009 hosted by the State of
Bavaria. CIM’s speeches/interaction focused on
Government’s thinking on the policy framework/measures
for addressing the impact of the current global economic
slow down, ensuring continued investor friendly
environment, keeping the economy on fast track,
approach towards Doha Round and global financial
regulatory infrastructure, Indo-EU and Indo–German
economic ties etc. While Shri B. N. Bachegowda, Minister
for Labour, Government of Karnataka, led a delegation
that visited Germany (Frankfurt & Berlin) from
16-19 June, 2009 to attend meetings related to social
protection and to visit important institutions in this area,
Shri Murugesh R. Nirani, Karnataka Minister for Large
and Medium Industry, represented Karnataka in the
German India Business Meeting. A separate programme
for Karnataka, namely ‘Spotlight on Karnataka’, was
organized to highlight the state’s industrial potential and
investor-friendly schemes for attracting investments from
global firms. On the margins of the GIBM,
Bavarian Minister for Federal and European Affairs,
Ms. Emilia Müller and the Karnataka Minister for Large
and Medium Industries, Shri Murugesh R. Nirani signed
an ‘Action Plan’ on 30 March, 2009 for implementing some
concrete projects in the priority areas recognized by the
Karnataka-Bavaria MoU.

Minister of State for Textiles Smt. Paanabaaka Lakshmi
visited Germany from 15-20 January, 2010 to participate
in the Heimtextile Fair 2010 at Frankfurt and Dometex
Fair 2010 at Hanover.
Dr. Horst Koehler, President of the Federal Republic of
Germany will be leading a delegation comprising of senior
officials, businessmen and journalists on his scheduled visit
to India from 1-6 February, 2010. He will be visiting
New Delhi, Pune and Mumbai.
Shri Dayanidhi Maran, Union Minister for Textiles will
be visiting Frankfurt from 3-4 February, 2010 to meet
leading German textile importers.
Shri M. K. Alagiri, Union Minister for Chemicals
and Fertilisers will be visiting Germany from
8-12 February, 2010 for the promotion of bilateral
collaboration in this important sector.

Ireland
India-Ireland relations continued to develop in various
spheres, especially in economic and commercial, S&T,
and education sectors. The growing Indian population in
Ireland in the healthcare and IT sectors, as well as
significant increase in the number of Indian students for
higher education in Ireland and steady growth of bilateral
trade in goods and services enhanced the bilateral
interaction between the two countries.
Dr. T. Ramasami, Secretary (S&T) visited Ireland in
May 2009 for a Joint Committee Meeting under the
bilateral Agreement on Scientific and Technololgical
Cooperation. During the visit, he called on Minister for
Science, Technology and Innovation of Ireland and they
signed a Programme of Cooperation in Science and
Technology.

The momentum of bilateral visits continued even after
the elections as Minister President of the state of
Baden-Wurttemberg, Mr. Gunther Oettinger led a
140-member delegation to India (New Delhi, Pune,
Mumbai and Bangalore) from 15-20 November, 2009.
This was by far the largest German delegation to India.
The delegation comprised of senior ministers of the state
Government, members of state Parliament, member of
the Press, company representatives, bankers, state tourism
officials and representatives of universities. His political
level meetings included meetings with Shri Kapil Sibal,
Minister for Human Resources and Development,
Smt. Sheila Dikshit, Chief Minister of New Delhi and
Shri Raj Bhardwaj, Governor of Karnataka. The Minister
and his delegation participated in various economic and
scientific meetings and visited various German companies
operating in India.

The visit of Dr. A. P. J. Abdul Kalam, former President of
India to Ireland in June 2009 made a significant in
contribution to our bilateral ties. During the visit, he met
Irish President Ms. Mary McAleese. Irish Foreign Minister
Michael Martin hosted a dinner in his honour.
Dr. Kalam addressed a large gathering of intellectuals at
Trinity College Dublin, outlining his vision of India
transforming into a developed nation by 2020, and
highlighting the potential for closer cooperation in the
areas of interest between the two countries.
84

Europe

The Fifth Round of Foreign Office Consultations
between India and Ireland took place in New Delhi in
September 2009, recognizing the roadmap for
strengthening bilateral relations.

the co-chairmanship of Commerce and Industries
Minister Shri Anand Sharma and Italian Minister Scajola.
The delegation had bilateral meetings with a number of
Ministers in Delhi and the Italian business delegations
had B2B interactions in New Delhi and Mumbai in
coordination with the FICCI.

The Chief Justice of India visited Ireland in October 2009
for a public lecture in Trinity College Dublin on ‘Judicial
Activism under the Indian Constitution’.

Luxembourg
India and Luxembourg signed an Agreement on Social
Security (SSA) & Administrative Arrangements
to Implement the SSA on 30 September, 2009
during the visit of Minister of Overseas Indian Affairs
Shri Vayalar Ravi to Luxembourg from
29-30 September, 2009.

Italy
Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh visited Italy from
7-11 July, 2009, to participate in the G-8/G-5 Summit at
L’Aquila. On the sidelines of the Summit, he had a bilateral
meeting with Italian Prime Minister, Mr. Silvio Berlusconi.
During the meeting bilateral relations were reviewed and
international issues of mutual interest discussed.

The 11th round of Economic Joint Commission Meeting
between India and Belgium-Luxembourg Economic Union
(BLEU) was held in Brussels from 4-5 May, 2009 after a
gap of eight years.

Earlier, the External Affairs Minister Shri S. M. Krishna
visited Trieste, Italy from 25-27 June, 2009, to participate
in the G-8 Outreach Foreign Ministers’ meeting on
stabilisation of Afghanistan and Pakistan. External Affairs
Minister also had a bilateral meeting with Italian Foreign
Minister, Mr. Franco Frattini on the sidelines of the
Outreach session.

Luxembourg is the 26th largest investor in India worldwide
and 11th largest within the EU.
A six member delegation of the Dutch Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Economic Affairs visited India
at the invitation of the National Security Advisor
Shri M. K. Narayanan from 22-24 December, 2009. The
delegation also visited Pune, Bengaluru and Mumbai.

In the context of the G-8/G-5 interaction, Speaker of the
Lok Sabha, Smt. Meira Kumar participated in the
G-8/G-5 Speakers’ Conference held in Rome from
12-14 September, 2009. She also had bilateral discussions
with Italian Speaker of the Chamber of Deputies,
Mr. Gianfranco Fini.

The Minister of Economy & External Trade of
Luxembourg Jeannot Krecke led a business delegation to
India from 9-14 January, 2009. The delegation visited New
Delhi, Kolkata and Mumbai and had B2B interactions,
apart from several official meetings. This was the fourth
visit of the Minister to India after his appointment to the
post in 2004 and the first ministerial level visit from
Luxembourg to India after April 2007. His previous visits,
leading similar business delegations, took place in 2005
(28 March-2 April); 2006 (28-29 March); and
2007 (23-26 April).

Gen. V. Camporine, Chief of Defence Staff of Italy visited
India from 23-26 September, 2009.
Other visits include those of Shri Sharad Pawar,
Minister of Agriculture (15-18 November, 2009),
Shri Dayanidhi Maran, Minister of Textiles
(28-31 October, 2009); Dr. Abijit Sen, Member,
Planning Commission (18-20 April, 2009); Labour
Secretary (29-31 March, 2009); Agriculture Secretary
(18-20 April, 2009); Environment Secretary
(22-24 April, 2009); Economic Relations Secretary
(23-24 April); Petroleum Secretary (24-25 May, 2009);
Foreign Secretary (26-27 June).

Netherlands
India-Netherlands relations continued to be cordial and
friendly during the course of the year. The multifaceted
ties saw an all round strengthening with regular exchanges
of high level visits from both sides. The trade and
investment cooperation remained a key component of the
India-Netherlands relationship and showed satisfactory
growth despite the global economic downturn.
Two-way trade has been growing steadily, and stood at
Euro 3.86 billion in 2008. The Netherlands remained
among the top ten partners of India both in terms of the
volume of bilateral trade with a significant positive balance

The Italian Minister of Economic Development,
Mr. Claudio Scajola, along with the Deputy Minister
Adolfo Urso led a official delegation, including
representatives from the Italian Regions, and a business
delegation of more than 120 Italian businessmen to India
from 14-16 December, 2009. The 18th session of the IndiaItaly Joint Commission for Economic cooperation was held
during the visit in New Delhi on 14 December, 2009 under
85

Annual Report 2009 - 2010

of trade for India as well as of the foreign direct investment
into India.

invitation of the National Security Adviser,
Shri M. K. Narayanan, from 22-24 December, 2009.

The highlight of the year was the Pravasi Bhartiya
Divas (PBD) – Europe held in The Hague on
19 September, 2009. This was the third such event in a
series of PBDs held abroad by GoI. The Netherlands has
a significant presence of Indian Diaspora, close to 200,000.
Minister of Overseas Indian Affairs Shri Vayalar Ravi
visited the Netherlands to address the Convention. The
Dutch side was represented by former Prime Minister
Dr. Ruud Lubbers, Minister of Social Affairs
and Employment Mr. Piet Hein Donner and
Mr. J. Van Aartsen, Mayor of The Hague. The Convention
brought prominent members of the Indian Diaspora in
Europe on a common platform to discuss the role of the
Indian Diaspora in enhancing Indo-European
Cooperation, and deliberate on the opportunities and
challenges faced by them in the fields of culture, heritage
and tradition, as also trade and investment opportunities
available for them in India.

A six member delegation of the Dutch Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Economic Affairs led by its
Chairperson, Ms. A. J. Timmer visited India from
2-9 January, 2010.
Kumari Selja, Minister for Housing and Urban Poverty
Alleviation and Tourism is expected to lead a delegation
of Mayors and Municipal Commissioners to the Seventh
Forum of World Alliance of Cities Against Poverty
(WACAP) to be held in the city of Rotterdam from
24-26 February, 2010.
Common Fund for Commodities
India played an active role at the Common Fund for
Commodities (CFC) headquartered at Amsterdam during
the year. India continued to fulfil all its obligations related
to the CFC in line with its commitments. India
participated in the Twenty-First Annual Meeting of the
Governing Council of the CFC, held in The Hague from
15-16 December, 2009. Mr. Dinesh Sharma, Joint
Secretary, Ministry of Commerce was elected as the
Executive Director for the Twenty-First Constituency of
the CFC member states, comprising India, Sri Lanka,
Pakistan and Serbia, for a two-year term beginning 2010.
India also participated in an ‘International Seminar on the
Role of Commodities’ organized by the CFC to
commemorate its Twentieth Anniversary, held at the
World Forum in The Hague on 14 December, 2009.

The Dutch Minister of Social Affairs and
Employment Mr. Piet Hein Donner visited India from
22-24 October, 2009. During the visit he met the Minister
of Overseas Indian Affairs Shri Vayalar Ravi and signed
the Bilateral Social Security Agreement which will allow
export of social security benefits between India and the
Netherlands, encouraging the mobility of skilled human
resources between the two countries. Minister Donner
also met Minister of Labour Shri Mallikarjun Kharge and
discussed enhancement of cooperation both bilaterally
and in international forums on labour related issues.

Portugal

Among other visits were, visit of Prime Minister’s Special
Envoy on Afghanistan, Ambassador S. K. Lambah to
represent India at the International Conference on
Afghanistan held on 31 March, 2009. India also
participated in the Fifth meeting of the Global Initiative
to Combat Nuclear Terrorism held at The Hague from
16-17 June, 2009.

Traditionally cordial and friendly ties were maintained
with Portugal during 2009-10. Minister of State for
External Affairs Dr. Shashi Tharoor participated in the
Fifth Ministerial Conference of the Community of
Democracies and spoke at the inaugural session chaired
by Foreign Minister Luis Amado of Portugal on
11 July, 2009 in Lisbon.
This year saw active co operation in Defence with the
visit of a 16-member National Defence College group led
by Major General Abhijit Guha from 17-22 May, 2009
and the visit by INS Delhi and INS Beas, two battleships
of the Western Fleet of the Indian Navy under command
of Rear Admiral SPS Cheema, AVSM, NM from
8-11 July, 2009.

On the consular cooperation field, a notable development
has been the withdrawal of Dutch opposition to India
joining the Hague Convention Abolishing the
Requirement of Legalization for Foreign Public Document
under the Hague Conference of Private International Law.
This accession has removed the legalization requirement
for Indian documents like birth and marriage certificates
before their use in the Netherlands and in all other
member countries of the Hague Convention.

Member Secretary (Finance) Shri R. Ashok led a three
member delegation to the Fourth WTO Forum on Policy
issues of the ITU held in Lisbon from 21-24 April, 2009.
Other Indian dignitaries included Dr. K. Kasturirangan,

Foreign Policy & Security Adviser to the Dutch Prime
Minister Mr. Karel van Oosterom visited India at the
86

Europe

Dr. Shashi Tharoor, MoS visited Barcelona from
15-17 January, 2010 to participate in the Seminar
“War and Peace in the 21st Century” being organized by
Centre for International Studies of Barcelona (CIDOB).

Member of Parliament (Rajya Sabha) who was a key note
speaker on “Understanding and Governing the risks of
Planetary scale Geo-engineering” and Dr. Rajendra Pachouri
of TERI who was also a keynote speaker on ‘Climate
Change and the Challenge of Sustainable Development’.

Kumari Selja, Minister for Tourism and HUPA visited
Madrid from 18-22 January, 2010 to attend the
Fifth Tourism Leadership Forum of UN World Tourism
Organization (Headquarters in Madrid) and the Annual
International Tourism Fair (FITUR) 2010.

Artists sent by ICCR were the violinist,
Dr. L. Subramanyam and shehnai player,
Pandit Ashok Chaurasia who gave performances which
were well attended by Portuguese music lovers, the
members of Indian community and others.

Shri A. Raja, Minister of Communications and IT is
expected to visit Spain to participate in the GSMA Mobile
World Congress to be held at Barcelona from
15-17 February, 2010.

Spain
2009-10 was an important year in the bilateral
relations between India and Spain as the President
Smt. Pratibha Devisingh Patil paid the first-ever State Visit
from India to Spain from 20-23 April, 2009 at the
invitation of the King of Spain. Apart from meeting with
the King, she had detailed discussions with Prime Minister
Zapatero. Seven areas viz. infrastructure, agriculture,
tourism, cooperation in Latin America, renewable energy,
SMEs and research and development in S&T were
identified as focus areas for strengthening bilateral
cooperation. She also proposed doubling of bilateral trade
over the next five years. The following three MoUs were
signed during the visit:
i.

MoU on Agriculture and Allied Fields

ii.

MoU on Tourism Cooperation

iii.

MoU on Renewable Energy

United Kingdom
The highlight of the year was the State visit of President
Smt. Pratibha Patil to UK from 27-29 October, 2009 which
was the third such visit of an Indian President to the UK
and the first State visit after the commencement of the
Strategic Partnership between India and the UK in 2004.
President had detailed interactions with Her Majesty the
Queen and other Royal Family members. She met
Prime Minister Gordon Brown, Conservative Party Leader
David Cameron and Liberal Democratic Party Leader
Nick Clegg. At a ceremony, President received the ‘Baton’
from the Queen as a curtain raiser to the 2010
Commonwealth Games to be held in New Delhi. During
her visit, the President had a meeting with a wide
cross-section of the Indian Community in the UK.

The State Visit was followed by the first-ever official visit
by Crown Prince of Spain Prince Felipe of Asturias to
India from 10-12 November, 2009 at the invitation of the
Vice President of India. He was accompanied by
Princess Letizia. In New Delhi, the Prince had meetings
with the Vice President, Prime Minister, Leader of the
Opposition in Lok Sabha and External Affairs Minister.
The President hosted a private lunch for the Crown Prince
and Princess. The Prince also inaugurated the Cervantes
Institute in New Delhi, named after the well-known
Spanish writer Miguel de Cervantes and an Investment
Seminar in Mumbai.

Prime Minister met the UK Prime Minister
Mr. Gordon Brown in London on 1 April, 2009 on the
sidelines of the G-20 Summit in London. He met PM
Brown again on 8 July, 2009 in L’Aquila in Italy on the
sidelines of the G-8 Summit and in Pittsburgh on
25 September, 2009 on the sidelines of the G-20 Summit.
He again met UK PM Gordon Brown on the sidelines of
the CHOGM in November 2009 in Port of Spain.
A meeting between External Affairs Minister
Shri S. M. Krishna, and UK Foreign Secretary
Mr. David Miliband took place in Trieste on 25 June, 2009.
A number of other Ministerial exchanges of visits
took place. Commerce and Industry Minister
Shri Anand Sharma visited UK from 21-24 June, 2009.
He again visited from 17-18 September, 2009 to
participate in Emerging Markets Summit. Minister of
Finance Shri Pranab Mukherjee, led a delegation to
London from 4-5 September, 2009 to participate in
G-20 Finance Ministers’ and Central Bank Governors’
meeting. He again attended the meeting in Scotland from

Prof. K. V. Thomas, Minister of State for Agriculture,
Food & and Public Distribution visited Spain from
13-17 September, 2009 to participate the Fifth
International Fisheries Ministers´ Conference and World
Fishing Exhibition in Vigo (Galicia). During the visit, he
also had bilateral meetings with the Minister of
Environment, Rural and Marine Affairs of Spain and
Mayor of Santiago de Compustela.
87

Annual Report 2009 - 2010

A six member delegation of MPs from the Conservatives
Friend of India (CFIN) led by the Chairman Mr. Shailesh
Vara visited India from 27 July-2 August 2009. A
delegation of Liberal Democrats led by Lord Alderdice
visited India from 27 September-3 October 2009.

6-7 November, 2009. Minister for Road Transport &
Highways Shri Kamal Nath led a delegation to London
from 1-2 September, 2009 to participate in a road show
titled ‘Building India-Road Infrastructure Summit’; Minister
of Petroleum & Natural Gas Shri Murli Deora visited
London from 8-9 September, 2009 to participate in a road
show.

Two-way bilateral trade has shown an impressive growth.
Total trade (in goods and services) is around £ 12 billion.
The UK’s exports to India were up almost 30% in 2008 to
£ 5.9 billion while imports were up 17% in 2008 to
£ 6.2 billion (UK figures). The UK is the most preferred
nation for investments by India Inc. so far, accounting
deals worth US$ 6 billion (till August 2008). UK is the
third largest investor in India. Top sectors attracting FDI
inflows from UK are power, oil & gas, telecom and service
industries.

Commerce & Industry Minister Shri Anand Sharma
visited London for the Sixth Joint Economic and
Trade Committee (JETCO) meeting in London on
4 February, 2010.
Minister of Human Resource Development
Shri Kapil Sibal visited UK from 13-15 January, 2010 for
the second meeting of UK-India Education Forum.
First Secretary of State and Secretary of State for Business,
Innovation & Skills Lord Mandelson led a delegation to
India from 18-23 December, 2009. Besides Delhi,
Lord Mandelson also visited Bengaluru.

Memorandum of Understanding to facilitate cooperation
in the prevention, detection, investigation and combating
of customs offences between Central Board of Excise and
Customs (CBEC) of India and HMRC of UK was signed
in London on 9 November, 2009.

Chief of Air Staff Air Chief Marshal P. V. Naik will visit
U.K. from 14-19 March, 2010 at the invitation of his
counterpart.

European Union
India and the European Union (EU) are Strategic Partners
whose relationships are founded on shared values and
principles of democracy, rule of law, respect for human
rights and fundamental freedoms. India and the EU have
regular interactions at various levels including at the
highest level. The India-EU Joint Action Plan which was
adopted in 2005 and reviewed in 2008 covers the entire
gamut of relations between India and the EU.

Air Marshal S. C. Mukul, AVSM, VM, VSM, Chief
of Integrated Staff is scheduled to visit UK from
26-28 February, 2010.
The next India- UK Round Table meeting will be held in
the Ditchley Park, UK from 26-28 February, 2010.
Chief Justice of India Dr. K. G. Balakrishnan, accompanied
by a delegation was in London from 13-15 June, 2009 to
attend the ‘International Conference of Jurists for Judicial
Reforms’. Minister for Law & Justice Shri Veerappa Moily,
visited London from 29 September-2 October to attend
opening of the legal year in England and Wales.

India’s relations with the EU assumes importance in the
context of the EU’s strength as the largest economic block
in the world, advancements in the fields of science and
technology and technologies related to energy and
environment sectors. As EU acquires greater power and
influence in more areas of interaction within the Union,
it can be expected that the ambit of its cooperation with
India will also increase.

The Executive Steering Group (Army) Meetings were held
in Delhi from 14-16 September, 2009. The India-UK
Military Sub Group meeting was held in London from
14-16 October, 2009.

Following the successful ratification of the Lisbon
Treaty by all the Member States of the EU, the
European Council on 19 November, 2009 appointed
Mr. Herman Van Rompuy as the President of the European
Council and Ms. Catherine Ashton as the
High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and
Security Policy and Vice-President of the European
Commission in charge of external relations. The Treaty
which entered into force on 1 December, 2009, among
other things, is expected to streamline the functioning of
EU institutions and also assist in better co-ordination of
foreign policy among EU Member States.

From the UK side, Lord Bach, Parliamentary UnderSecretary for Ministry of Justice visited India from
23-28 August, 2009; Douglas Alexander, Secretary of
State for International Development and Ed Miliband,
Secretary of State for Climate Change jointly visited India
from 1-2 September, 2009; Lord Mervyn Davies, Minister
of State, Department for Business, Innovation and Skills
and Foreign and Commonwealth Office visited India from
14-18 September, 2009; Lord Hunt, Minister of State for
Climate Change visited India from 22-23 October, 2009.
88

Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh meeting the British Prime Minister, Mr. Gorden Brown,
on the sidelines of the G-20 Summit, at Pittsburgh, USA on 25 September, 2009.

89

Annual Report 2009 - 2010

India-EU Summit

Joint Working Groups Meetings

th

The 10 India-EU Summit was held in New Delhi on
6 November, 2009. India was represented by Prime
Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh and the EU was
represented by Mr. Fredrik Reinfeldt, Prime Minister of
Sweden and President of the rotating Presidency of the
European Council and European Commission President
Jose Manuel Durao Barroso. The Summit reviewed
India-EU Relations and exchanged views on
developments in India and EU; recognized the need to
pursue the reform of the main UN bodies with a view to
enhancing the representativeness, transparency and
effectiveness of the system; resolved to jointly fight
terrorism in all its forms and manifestation; took note of
the signing of the India-EU Agreement in the field of
nuclear fusion energy research underlining the importance
of energy security and clean energy; agreed to work
towards early conclusion of the Broad-based Trade and
Investment Agreement and the Maritime Transport
Agreement. The leaders also identified trade and
investment, energy, counter-terrorism, science and
technology, climate change, and free movement of peoples
as priority areas of cooperation.

The 13 th meeting of the India-EU Joint Working
Group on Consular Issues was held in New Delhi on
25 May, 2009. Issues raised by the Indian side related to
facilitation of movement of genuine travellers, reduction
of excessive documentation, work permits, fast-track
system for Indian business travellers, timely consular
access and prevention of harassment of Indian nationals
transiting via Schengen countries. The EU side raised
issues relating to delayed consular access, possibility of
issuing temporary ID cards for EU nationals who stand
acquitted or bailed by the courts, clarity regarding rules
on purchase of properties by the foreign nationals, progress
on Hague Convention on the Civil Aspects of
International Child Abduction, formalizing an MoU with
the Indian Air Force for mountain rescue operations for
EU nationals, permitting EU prisoners to make and receive
telephone calls and ensuring rapid exit of EU nationals in
case of emergencies like the Mumbai terror attacks.
The India-EU JWG on Counter Terrorism was held in
New Delhi on 11 June, 2009. The meeting discussed issues
including dialogue issues related to terrorist organizations
in India’s neighbourhood with special focus on
LeT, Al Qaida, Taliban, fight against terrorist financing,
technical assistance to third countries, prevention of
radicalization, cooperation at UN (CCIT, Global Counter
Terrorism strategy) and exchange of information about
latest developments in combating terrorism in India and
in the EU.

European Parliament
The European Parliament in its plenary session in
September 2009 approved the establishment of a India
Delegation in the European Parliament and formally
constituted it on 30 September, 2009. There are
20 members and 20 substitutes in the delegation.
Mr. Graham Watson, British MEP was elected the
Chairperson.

The India-EU Forum on Effective Multilateralism, jointly
organized by Indian Council of World Affairs and the
European Union Institute for Security Studies (EUISS),
was held in New Delhi from 8-9 October, 2009.

India-EU Troika & Senior Officials Meeting
Energy Panel

The 20 th India-EU Troika Meeting took place in
Prague on 30 June, 2009. External Affairs Minister
Shri S. M. Krishna led the Indian delegation. The EU
side was led by Mr. Jan Kohout, Foreign Minister of Czech
Republic in his capacity as the President of the European
Council for External Relations. European Commissioner
for External Relations Ms. Benita Ferrero Waldner also
participated in the meeting. India-EU Relations, regional
issues and global issues including climate change,
terrorism, global financial crisis, non-proliferation and
energy security were discussed at the Troika Meeting.

The India-EU Energy Panel met in Brussels on
6 October, 2009. The meeting concluded with the decision
that the two sides would focus on the three areas of the
cooperation namely, Energy Efficiency; Coal/Clean Coal
Technology; and renewables, in particular solar.

Trade and Investments
The EU continues to be India’s largest trading partner. In
2008, total bilateral trade between India and the EU grew
to Euro 60.92 billion. Indian exports to EU was valued at
Euro 29.39 billion while imports from the EU was
Euro 31.53 billion. In 2008, total Indian Exports to the
EU in the different services sectors was Euro 7.94 billion
whereas total Indian Imports from the EU was worth
Euro 8.56 billion. In the first half of 2009, India’s exports

There is regular mechanism of Senior Officials Meetings
(SOM) between India and the EU. Two meetings were
held during the year once in New Delhi on 15 June, 2009
and on 28 September, 2009 in Brussels.
90

Europe

Multilingualism between India and the European
Commission and Shri Jitin Prasada, Minister of State for
Petroleum and Natural Gas who visited Brussels at the
invitation of EC Commissioners for External Relations
and Energy to attend the ASEM Ministerial Meeting on
Energy Security on 18 June, 2009.

to EU was Euro 12.9 billion while India’s imports was
Euro 12.7 billion.
The EU is one of the largest sources of FDI for India.
However, FDI inflows from the EU to India declined from
Euro 4.019 billion in 2007 to Euro 3.27 billion in 2008.
India has also emerged as a major investor in the EU
with total investments from India increasing from
Euro 1.003 billion in the year 2007 to Euro 3.69 billion in
2008.

EU Commissioner for Commerce, Catherine Ashton and
Commissioner for Agriculture Ms. Mariam Fishcher Boel
visited India at the invitation of Shri Anand Sharma,
Minister of Commerce and Industry on 3 September, 2009
to attend the WTO Informal Ministerial Meeting held in
New Delhi.

Important Visits
Important visits between India and the EU include visits
by Smt. D. Purandeswari, Minister of State for Human
Resource Development who visited Brussels from
6-8 March, 2009 to interact with the European
Commission and to sign the Joint Declaration on

Commissioner for Competition Neelie Kroes visited India
from 15-18 November, 2009 to attend a conference on
“Competition, Public Policy and Common Man” organized
in New Delhi by CII.

91

8

The Americas

United States of America (USA)

climate change; (iv) education and development; and
(v) economics, trade and agriculture encompassing new
areas of enhanced cooperation in the fields of health,
education, women’s empowerment, climate change and
strategic security. They also discussed regional and global
issues of common concern including the challenge of
terrorism, nuclear proliferation, the impact of climate
change and issues of shared interest such as disarmament,
UN reforms, global food and energy security among others.
The US Secretary of State called on Prime Minister and
Shri L. K. Advani, Leader of the Opposition.

T

here was a growing convergence in the interests of
India and the USA – both within the bilateral
framework as well as on regional and global issues. The
first priority, this year, was to work together towards a
recovery from the global economic and financial crisis.
India and the USA played a key role in the Summit
meetings that were held to address the most immediate
challenges.
Prime Minister met President Obama on 2 April, 2009,
at the G-20 Summit in London. The two leaders reviewed
bilateral relations and discussed several positive and
constructive steps to take the India-US global partnership
forward. They discussed regional and global issues
including the threat that the terrorism emanating from
India’s neighbourhood poses to all free societies - and the
international efforts required to deal with the problem.
The two leaders had a significant convergence of views
and approaches in this regard. President Obama informed
Prime Minister Singh of the new comprehensive
US strategy for Afghanistan and Pakistan. Prime Minister
welcomed his clear enunciation of the problems and the
goals and stated that India would continue to play a
constructive role, working to build peace and stability in
her periphery. They discussed global issues like energy
security and climate change and the manner in which
India and the USA could work together on these issues,
and committed themselves to the strengthening and
reform of the G-20, World Bank and the IMF and an early
and balanced outcome of the Doha Round of World Trade
Organisation negotiations with focus on the development
dimensions.

Two agreements – Technology Safeguards Agreement
(Space) and an Indo-US Science and Technology
Endowment Fund and Board Agreement were signed during
the visit. The Science and Technology Agreement provides
for the establishment of an India-US Board and an
Endowment for developing Joint Research and
Development, Innovation, Entrepreneurial and
Commercialization Activities in Science and Technology.
The Technology Safeguards Agreement provides for India
to launch third country civil or non-commercial satellites
of US origin or which have US components. Both
Governments announced their agreement on a formulation
on End Use Monitoring (EUM) to be included in letters of
offer and acceptance for defence equipment to be acquired
from USA for Government of India. A Joint Statement
was issued during the visit highlighting the significance of
Indo-US relationship and the global and bilateral agenda
that would be pursued by the two sides.
Earlier, the US Under Secretary for Political Affairs
Mr. William J. Burns had made a preparatory visit from
10-13 June, 2009 in which he held talks with Foreign
Secretary Shri Shiv Shankar Menon to discuss new
elements of cooperation for the above bilateral agenda
announced in July 2009. Under Secretary Burns called
on Prime Minister and handed over a letter addressed to
him by President Obama, congratulating him on his
election victory, reiterating his invitation to Prime
Minister to visit Washington and renewing his
commitment to the bilateral relationship.

Visit of US Secretary of State to India
US Secretary of State Ms. Hillary Clinton visited India
from 17-21 July, 2009 in response to an invitation of
External Affairs Minister of India Shri S. M. Krishna, with
whom she jointly reviewed bilateral relations and
announced a new agenda for Indo-US bilateral
cooperation in (i) science and technology, health and
innovation; (ii) strategic cooperation; (iii) energy and
92

Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh meeting the US President, Mr. Barack Obama, at
White House, Washington on 24 November, 2009.

US Secretary of State, Ms. Hillary Clinton calling on the Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh,
in New Delhi on 20 July, 2009.

93

Annual Report 2009 - 2010

Other High Level Exchanges

US Under Secretary for Political Affairs

US NSA

Mr. William Burns, US Under Secretary for
Political Affairs, made a visit to New Delhi from
15-16 October, 2009 to discuss the agenda and
preparations for the Summit meeting of Prime Minister
of India with the US President in Washington in
November 2009. He met with Foreign Secretary
Smt. Nirupama Rao and called on several Ministers
participating in the Strategic Dialogue including Human
Resource Development Minister Shri Kapil Sibal,
Commerce and Industry Minister Shri Anand Sharma,
Minister of Health and Family Welfare Shri Ghulam Nabi Azad
and Deputy Chairman, Planning Commission
Dr. Montek Singh Ahluwalia.

US National Security Advisor Gen. James Jones visited
New Delhi from 25-26 June, 2009. He held talks with
Shri M. K. Narayanan, National Security Advisor and
called on Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh and
Defence Minister Shri A. K. Antony.
Home Minister
Home Minister Shri P. Chidambaram visited USA from
8-10 September, 2009 to strengthen India’s bilateral
partnership with the USA in the field of counter-terrorism
and to identify areas for mutual cooperation with focus
on procurement of advanced technology and sharing of
information and best practices in investigation and
prevention of terrorist attacks. Earlier, the India-US Joint
Working Group on Counter Terrorism led on the Indian
side by Shri Vivek Katju, Special Secretary (Pol & IO),
Ministry of External Affairs held its 11th meeting in
Washington on 17 June, 2009. The meeting enabled the
Working group to address a wide range of issues relating
to Counter Terrorism and India’s membership of the
Financial Action Task Force.

Former US President
Former US President Mr. George W. Bush visited
New Delhi from 29-31 October, 2009 to participate in
the Hindustan Times Leadership Summit. He also visited
Mumbai.
Prime Minister’s visit to the USA
From 22-24 November, 2009, Prime Minister
Dr. Manmohan Singh, visited the USA in response to the
invitation of the US President conveyed by the
US Secretary of State who visited India on 20 July, 2009.
It was the first State visit hosted by the US President.
The US House of Representatives in a rare gesture,
adopted, unanimously, a resolution to commend the
maturing of India US relations and welcome Prime
Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh, to the United States.

Visit of Foreign Secretary of India to the USA
Foreign Secretary Smt. Nirupama Rao met with her US
counterpart, Mr. William Burns, Under Secretary
for Political Affairs, US State Department on
21 September, 2009 in Washington. She also met with
Ms. Maria Otero, Under Secretary for Democracy and
Global Affairs, US State Department and discussed the
agenda and issues identified for co-operation in the
India-US Global Issues Forum.

On the occasion, the Prime Minister and the US President
launched a new phase in the India-US partnership,
describing it as a ‘global strategic partnership’. Both
Governments reaffirmed that the common ideals and
complementary strengths of India and the United States
provide a foundation for addressing the global challenges
of the 21st century and resolved to build on these to expand
the US-India global partnership for mutual benefit , peace,
stability and prosperity in Asia, and to make a significant
contribution towards a better world .

External Affairs Minister
External Affairs Minister Shri S. M. Krishna met
with Secretary of State, Ms. Hillary Clinton on
25 September, 2009 on the sidelines of the United Nations
General Assembly in New York. The two leaders discussed
progress in the Bilateral Strategic Dialogue and other
issues of mutual interest.

Prime Minister of India and the US President underscored
the compelling need to put in place global institutions
“which are both inclusive and effective to meet present
and future challenges and committed themselves to
achieving genuine reform of the United Nations including
in its Security Council in a manner that reflects the
contemporary realities of the 21st century” and thereby
“enhances its ability to carry out its mandate as a

National Security Advisor
National Security Advisor Shri M. K. Narayanan visited
USA from 25-29 October, 2009. He met with his
US counterpart, Gen. James Jones, Defence Secretary,
Secretary Homeland Security, Director, FBI and several
Senators and Congressmen. NSA also visited the National
Counter Terrorism Centre.
94

The Americas

representative, credible and effective forum for meeting
the challenges of the new century”. Their discussions
covered the need to have an “open and inclusive
architecture” for cooperation in the Asia-Pacific region.
They welcomed the emergence of the G-20 as a premier
forum to deal with international economic issues. Both
leaders reiterated their commitment to strengthen and
reform the global economic and financial architecture in
the G-20, World Bank and the IMF.

on agricultural cooperation and food security and
collaboration in the application of space technology and
related scientific capabilities in outer space for
development purposes – including in the field of
agriculture.
Both Governments looked forward to the conclusion of a
Bilateral Investment Treaty and called upon the
India-US CEOs Forum to identify new directions in the
India-US economic relationship.

Both leaders reviewed the bilateral relationship, welcomed
the understandings reached on bilateral co-operation in
agriculture, education, health, clean and efficient energy
while addressing the impact of climate change and also
discussed the next steps to take new initiatives and further
bilateral co-operation in these areas. They discussed global
issues of shared interest and regional issues of immediate
concern to both Governments – particularly the threat of
terrorism emanating from India’s immediate
neighbourhood. They underscored the absolute
imperative to bring to justice the perpetrators of the
Mumbai attacks of 26 November, 2008 and the need for
resolute and credible steps to be taken to eliminate safe
havens and sanctuaries that provide shelter to terrorists
and their activities.

A Traditional Knowledge Digital Library (TKDL) Access
Agreement between the Council of Scientific & Industrial
Research (CSIR) and US Patent and Trademark Office
was signed.
A Memorandum of Understanding was also signed on
facilitating comprehensive bilateral cooperation on a
range of IPR issues focusing on capacity building, human
resource development and raising public awareness of the
importance of IPR.
A Memorandum of Intent was also signed to promote
two-way investments between ‘Invest in America’ of the
US Department of Commerce and ‘Invest India’, a joint
venture of the Department of Industrial Policy and
Promotion and various State Governments of India and
FICCI concerning the promotion of investment in the
US and India.

Both leaders reaffirmed a shared vision of a world free of
nuclear weapons and pledged to work together, as leaders
of responsible states with advanced nuclear technology,
for global non-proliferation, and universal,
non-discriminatory and complete nuclear disarmament.
They agreed to consult each other regularly and seek the
early start of negotiations on a multilateral,
non-discriminatory and internationally verifiable Fissile
Material Cut-off Treaty at the Conference on
Disarmament.

In the field of education, both Governments launched a
21st Century Knowledge Initiative with a total funding of
US$ 10 million that will be allocated to increasing
university linkages and junior faculty development
exchanges between US and Indian universities, including
greater emphasis on community colleges. They announced
the expansion of the Fulbright-Nehru scholarship
program.

In the field of defence, both Governments agreed to
continue pursuing mutually beneficial defence
cooperation through the existing security dialogue,
service-level exchanges, defence exercises and trade and
technology transfer and collaboration and to expedite
necessary arrangements to facilitate these activities.

A Memorandum of Intent was signed on the establishing
of a Regional Global Disease Detection Centre in India
in partnership with the US Centres for Disease Control
and Prevention.

It was agreed to enter into a Green Partnership to address
the global challenges of food security, clean energy and
energy security. During the visit, Memoranda of
Understanding were concluded with the National
Renewable Energy Laboratory of the USA for
collaboration with India’s Solar and Wind Energy
Research Centres respectively.

Other Visits
Ambassador Richard Holbrooke, US Special Envoy
for Afghanistan and Pakistan visited India on
18 January, 2010 to consult Government of India and seek
our assessment about the situation in Afghanistan and
Pakistan. He met with Foreign Secretary Smt. Nirupama
Rao, National Security Adviser Shri M. K. Narayanan,
and called on External Affairs Minister Shri S. M. Krishna
and Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh.

It was also agreed to increase India-US agricultural
cooperation through a Memorandum of Understanding
95

Annual Report 2009 - 2010

from 8-9 October, 2009 and thereafter in Washington from
6-7 November, 2009 and from 21-22 November, 2009.
The next round of negotiations is scheduled to be held in
New Delhi from 15-19 February, 2010.

Dr. Robert Gates, US Secretary of Defence visited India
from 19-20 January, 2010. He exchanged views with
Defence Minister, External Affairs Minister and called on
Prime Minister. The visit was an occasion to review
bilateral defence cooperation and discuss the regional
security situation.

The second meeting of the India-US Civil Nuclear
Working Group, one of the five working groups
under the India-US Energy dialogue was held from
28-30 April, 2009 in Idaho National Laboratory, Idaho,
USA. Both countries identified specific areas of
collaboration in the field of nuclear energy and reactors
and agreed to draw up a work-plan for collaboration in
their next meeting.

Congressional/Parliamentary visits
In February 2009 Congressman John Lewis, a
close associate of the US Civil Rights Leader,
Dr. Martin Luther King, led a delegation to visit India comprising Senior US Congressmen and Martin Luther
King III, the son of the revered Dr. Martin Luther King
Junior and several other US Congressmen including –
Representative Spencer Bachus, Representative
Jim McDermott, Representative Al Green, Representative
Loretta Sanchez, Representative Sheila Jackson-Lee and
several Congressional Staff officials. The delegation was
received by the President of India and other dignitaries
as they retraced the journey of the revered Civil Rights
Leader, Dr. Martin Luther King Junior through India when
he came here in 1959 on a pilgrimage to experience the
legacy of Mahatma Gandhi.

A 55-member Civil Nuclear Trade Mission from the
US led by the US-India Business Council and the Nuclear
Energy Institute, Washington visited New Delhi and
Mumbai from 6-11 December, 2009. They called on
Secretary, Department of Atomic Energy and Secretary,
Ministry of Power. The delegation interacted with Indian
public and private power sector companies and FICCI
and CII. Mr. Mark Weber, Advisor, Bureau of Industry,
US Department of Commerce accompanied the Trade
Mission.

A US Congressional delegation led by Representative
(Rep.) Howard Berman and comprising Rep.
Gary Ackerman, Rep. Sheila Jackson Lee,
Rep. Dan Lungren, Rep. Jim Costa and Rep. Jim Moran
visited India from 15-20 April, 2009. The delegation called
on Prime Minister and met with National Security Advisor
Shri M. K. Narayanan and Foreign Secretary
Smt. Nirupama Rao.

India-US Civil Nuclear Working Group held its third
meeting from 3-5 February, 2010 in Mumbai. The meeting
was led by Dr. R. B. Grover, Director (Strategic Planning
Group) in the Department of Atomic Energy and
Dr. Warren Pete Miller, Assistant Secretary for Nuclear
Energy in the US Department of Energy.
Energy Dialogue
US Energy Secretary Mr. Steven Chu visited
New Delhi from 12-16 November, 2009. He co-chaired
a meeting of the India-US Energy Dialogue along with
Deputy Chairman, Planning Commission on
13 November, 2009. He met with Minister of Power
Shri Sushil Kumar Shinde, Minister of New and
Renewable Energy Dr. Farooq Abdullah, Minister of
Environment and Forests Shri Jairam Ramesh, Minister
of State in the Prime Minister’s Office and Special Envoy
of Prime Minister on Climate Change Shri Shyam Saran.
Both Governments agreed to pursue a bilateral
memorandum of understanding on co-operation in clean
energy and the establishment of a clean energy research
centre - which was later finalised and signed during the
visit of Prime Minister to the USA.

A US Senate delegation led by Senator Judd Gregg
accompanied by Senator Evan Bayh, Senator
Arlen Specter, Senator Michael Enzi, Senator
Amy Klobuchar and Senator John Cornyn visited India
from 31 December 2009-4 January 2010. The delegation
called on Prime Minister and discussed India-US relations.
A US Congressional delegation led by Senator
Claire McCaskill accompanied by Senators Jeff Merkley,
Frank Lautenberg and Congressman Barron Hill would
be visiting New Delhi on 16 February, 2010 to discuss
India-US relations.
Civil Nuclear Cooperation
Pursuant to the Agreement on Civil Nuclear Cooperation
signed by both Governments on 10 October, 2008, a
number of steps were taken towards implementing the
Agreement. India-US talks on Arrangements and
Procedures on Reprocessing as per Article six (iii) of the
123 Agreement were held in Vienna from 21-22 July, 2009,

Trade and Economic Collaboration
India-US bilateral trade in goods in the period
January-October 2009 stood at US$ 31.5 billion. India
exported goods worth US$ 17.6 billion to the US in this
96

The Americas

from 24-26 October, 2009 for the India-US Trade Policy
Forum meeting.

period and imported goods worth US$ 13.9 billion from
USA in the same period. India exported IT and IT enabled
services worth US$ 28.3 billion in 2009 to the USA.

A Trade Mission from the State of Washington led by
Mr. Sam Sumner Reed, Secretary of State of Washington
visited India from 11-21 September, 2009. The trade
delegation interacted with industry members in Delhi,
Hyderabad and Mumbai.

The US is of one of the leading foreign investors in India.
Total FDI equity inflow to India from the US during the
period April 2000-August 2009 was US$ 7.44 billion
accounting for 8% of total inflows into India during this
period. US-bound investment from India increased about
48% on an average per year over 2004-08. In 2008, Indian
companies invested around US$ 8.5 billion in the US
market through M&Q, equity participation and other
routes.

The second India-US Aviation Partnership Summit was
held in Washington D.C. from 7-9 December, 2009.
Secretary,
Ministry
of
Civil
Aviation,
Shri Madhavan Nambiar led the Indian delegation which
comprised Director General, Civil Aviation,
Dr. Naseem Zaidi, Chairman, Airports Authority of
India, Shri V. P. Agrawal among others. The US
was represented by Secretary of Transportation,
Mr. Ray LaHood, Administrator, US Federal Aviation
Administration, Mr. Randolph Babbit, US Deputy
Secretary for Commerce, Mr. Dennis Hightower among
others. More than 200 representatives from
80 aviation companies both from India and the
US participated in the event. The Summit gave a boost
to India-US Civil Aviation Cooperation and was an
important platform for the stakeholders in the two
countries – regulators, service providers, industry and
government to deliberate and discuss issues for
strengthening civil aviation ties.

Commerce and Industry Minister (CIM),
Shri Anand Sharma visited Washington from
16-19 June, 2009 to attend the 34th anniversary of the US
India Business Council. He met with his US counterpart
US Trade Representative, Ambassador Ron Kirk with
whom he discussed Indo-US trade relations. CIM also
met with US Commerce Secretary Mr. Gary Locke and
US Secretary of State Ms. Hillary Clinton at the ‘Synergies
Summit’ hosted by the US India Business Council. CIM
visited USA from 13-15 October, 2009 to attend the
Global Services Summit.
The first round of India-US negotiations on a Bilateral
Investment Treaty was held in New Delhi from
11-12 August, 2009.

A Joint Working Group meeting on civil aviation security
was held in New Delhi on 20 January, 2010.
Two Memoranda of Understanding – one on Deployment
of Air Marshals by US on its aircraft coming into India
and the second on cooperation to facilitate airport
technical visits were signed.

Road Transport & Highways Minister Shri Kamal Nath
visited USA from 13-17 September, 2009 to seek
US investments in the road sector in India.
A meeting of the India-US Economic Dialogue was held
in New Delhi on 20 October, 2009. Mr. Michael Froman,
Deputy Assistant to the US President & US Deputy
National Security Adviser for International Economic
Affairs met Deputy Chairman, Planning Commission with
whom he co-chairs the Economic Dialogue.

Defence Relations
The fifth meeting of the India-US Senior Technology and
Security Group was held from 11-12 May, 2009 in
Washington USA. The meeting was co-chaired by
Shri S. K. Mathur, Additional Secretary in Ministry of
Defence and Mr. James Hursch, Deputy Under Secretary
of Defence, Acting Director Defence Technology Security
Administration in the US Department of Defence. Issues
related to technology transfer and technology
collaboration were discussed.

A meeting of the India-US Trade Policy Forum was held
in New Delhi on 26 October, 2009. The meeting was
co-chaired by Minister for Commerce and Industry
Shri Anand Sharma and the US Trade Representative,
Ambassador Ron Kirk. A range of issues was discussed in
the five focus groups on Agriculture, Innovation and
Creativity, Investment, Services and Tariff and Non-Tariff
barriers. A Social Security Agreement, a Bilateral
Investment Treaty between the two countries were also
discussed as were next steps for providing market access
for items of interest to both sides.

Admiral Timothy Keating, Commander, US Pacific
Command visited India from 13-15 May, 2009 to discuss
with Government of India issues related to the regional
security situation, terrorism, and maritime security. He
met Foreign Secretary, National Security Adviser and
Chief of Naval Staff. India’s Chief of Army Staff, General
Deepak Kapoor, visited USA from 20-24 July, 2009.

US Deputy Trade Representative, Ambassador Demetrios
Marantis visited India from 11-13 August, 2009 and again
97

Annual Report 2009 - 2010

and Child Development, Smt. Krishna Tirath and held
exploratory discussions with Secretary, Ministry of Women
and Child Development, Shri D. K. Sikri, Co-Chair of
the India-US Womens’ Empowerment Forum, to set the
agenda for the India-US Women’s Empowerment
Dialogue.

India-US Army to Army Joint Exercises – Yudh
Abhyas was held in Babina, Madhya Pradesh from
12-29 October, 2009. A similar India-US Joint Exercise –
Cope India (Air Force) was held in Agra from
15-25 October, 2009.
The India-US Defence Procurement and Production
Group meeting was held in New Delhi from
3-4 November, 2009. Vice Admiral Jeffrey Wierenga and
Director General (Acquisition), Ministry of Defence
co-chaired the meeting. A meeting of the India-US
Defence Policy Group co-chaired by Indian Defence
Secretary and Mr. William Lynn, Deputy Secretary,
US Department of Defence took place in New Delhi from
5-6 November, 2009.

Disarmament and Non-proliferation
Ms. Ellen Tauscher, US Under Secretary of State for Arms
Control and International Security Affairs visited India
from 11-13 November, 2009 for India-US Strategic
Security Talks co-chaired by Foreign Secretary,
Smt. Nirupama Rao and Under Secretary Tauscher. She
called on National Security Advisor, Shri M. K. Narayanan
and met with Special Envoy of Prime Minister, Shri Shyam
Saran, to discuss India’s proposals for bilateral
co -operation in disarmament and nuclear
non-proliferation.

US Pacific Command (PACOM) Commander Admiral
Robert Willard, visited India from 3-4 December, 2009.
He called on National Security Advisor
Shri M. K. Narayanan and Chief of Army Staff
Gen. Deepak Kapoor. They exchanged views on issues
related to defence cooperation & regional security situation.

High Technology Cooperation
High Technology Cooperation remained a top priority area
of focus in India-US co-operation. Bilateral trade in high
technology products stood at US$ 5.56 billion in 2008.
India imported high technology products worth
US$ 4.5 billion from the US and exported products
worth US$ 1.06 billion to the US in 2008. Aerospace
(US$ 2.6 billion - 60%) and IT and Communication
products (US$ 1.03 billion - 22%) constituted the bulk of
High Technology Products imported from the US.

India-USA Joint Technical Group held its 12th meeting
in Delhi from 28-29 January, 2010. The meeting was
co-chaired by the Chief Controller Defence Research and
Development in DRDO and his US counterpart
Mr. Alfred Volkman, Director of International
Cooperation in US Department of Defence.
Global Issues
Ambassador Ron Kirk, US Trade Representative visited
New Delhi from 3-4 September, 2009 to attend the
informal ministerial meeting of the Doha Round hosted
by India.

The India-US Biotechnology and Life Sciences Working
Group under the bilateral High Technology Cooperation
Group met on the sidelines of BIO 2009 on 20 May, 2009
in Atlanta. Discussions focused on capacity building in
harmonising regulatory framework and collaboration in
R&D, Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) issues like data
protection, traditional knowledge disclosure norms,
differentiation between legitimate generics and
counterfeits inter alia. India’s leading pharmaceutical and
biotechnology companies and Government of India
Ministries demonstrated their technological capabilities
and explored opportunities for enhancing biotech exports
and R&D collaboration.

Deputy Chairman, Planning Commission visited USA
from 22-25 September, 2009 as the Indian Sherpa at the
G-20 Summit in Pittsburgh.
The seventh meeting of the Indo-US Global Issues Forum
took place in New Delhi on 5 November, 2009. Foreign
Secretary Smt. Nirupama Rao and the Under Secretary
for Democracy and Global Affairs, US State Department,
Ms. Maria Otero co-chaired the meeting. The two sides
discussed cooperation in addressing global issues related
to climate change, sustainable development, food security,
energy security, health, elementary education, democracy,
human rights and disaster management.

A public-private meeting of the Biotechnology and Life
sciences Working Group of the High Technology
Cooperation Group was held in New Delhi on
27 July, 2009. Participants included the US Delegation
Department of Commerce, members of ADVAMED
(US medical device Industry organization) and
US biotechnology Industry and from the Indian side, the
Ministry of External Affairs, Ministry of Health,
Department of Biotechnology and Department of

Ambassador Melanne Verveer, US Ambassador-at-large
for Global Women’s Issues visited Delhi from
8-11 November, 2009 to attend the India Economic
Summit in New Delhi. She called on Minister for Women
98

The Americas

strengthen the existing cooperation between the two
countries in the health sector.

Pharmaceuticals, FICCI, CII and members of the Indian
Industry. The meeting focused on collaboration in the field
of medical devices, pharmaceuticals and biotechnology.

An India-US Joint Working Group meeting on maternal
and child health, human development research and
prevention of sexually transmitted diseases and HIV/AIDS
was held at the National Institutes of Health, USA from
18-19 November, 2009. Under the India-US Programme
on Environmental and Occupational Health, a workshop
on Climate Change and Health was organized in Goa from
31 August-2 September 2009.

The seventh India-US High Technology Cooperation
Group meeting would be taking place in Washington from
15-16 March, 2010.
Education Cooperation
Minister for Human Resource Development
Shri Kapil Sibal visited New York and Washington from
25-31 October, 2009. He met with US Education
Secretary and visited several universities in both the cities.
During the visit of Prime Minister to Washington, both
Governments launched the “Obama-Singh 21st Century
Knowledge Initiative” with funding from both sides –
US$ 5 million each - to increase university linkages and
junior faculty development exchanges between US and
Indian universities. They also agreed to substantially
expand the Fulbright – Nehru Programme with additional
funding of US$ 1 million by each Government - to provide
more student and scholar exchange grants in jointly
identified priority fields that complement the areas of
bilateral cooperation under the Strategic Dialogue.

An MoU between the University of Minnesota and the
Indian Council of Medical research (ICMR), New Delhi
was signed in October 2006 for cooperation in health
research. A joint workshop on Diabetes and Cancer
under the MoU was organized in New Delhi from
26-28 August, 2009. A delegation from the University of
Minnesota visited New Delhi to attend the third Joint
Steering Committee meeting on health cooperation with
ICMR on 1 October, 2009.
Bilateral talks on India-US Commercial Space
Launch Agreement took place in Bengaluru from
27 - 28 October, 2009. Assistant US Trade Representative
for Services and Investment Ms. Christine Bliss led the
talks from the US side. The Indian delegation was led by
Dr. A. Bhaskaranarayana, Scientific Secretary, Indian
Space Research Organisation (ISRO).

The Fulbright scholarship program in India celebrated its
60th anniversary on 2 February, 2010. The Minister of
External Affairs was the chief guest at an event organized
by the United-States India Education Foundation to mark
the event.

Canada

On 1 February, 2010, Ms. Judith McHale, Under Secretary
for Public Affairs and Public Diplomacy in the US State
Department initiated the India-US Education Dialogue
in New Delhi along with Secretary, Ministry of Human
Resource Development. Their discussions focused on
strengthening bilateral education cooperation and
implementation of the Singh-Obama Knowledge Initiative
which was launched in November 2009 with a financial
commitment of US$ 5 million each from India and USA.

The India Canada agenda was steadily expanded
during the year - pursuant to the Foreign Office
Consultations held in Ottawa in December 2008. The
visit of Prime Minister of Canada Mr. Stephen Harper to
India in November 2009, accompanied by the
Mr. Stockwell B. Day, Canadian Minister of International
Trade, and the Mr. Lawrence Cannon, Canadian Minister
of Foreign Affairs was a culmination of intensified high
level bilateral contacts between leaders of both
Governments through the year as they pursued an
enhanced bilateral agenda across a wide range of areas.

Science, Technology and Health Partnership
An Agreement to establish an India-US Science and
Technology Endowment Fund and Board was signed on
20 July, 2009 in New Delhi.

Clean Energy
In April 2009, Deputy Chairman, Planning Commission
Dr. Montek Singh Ahluwalia led an Inter-Ministerial
delegation to participate in the Canada India Energy
Forum hosted in Toronto by the Canada India Foundation
from 15-17 April, 2009. Deputy Chairman, Planning
Commission called on the Premier of Ontario and
addressed several prestigious institutions, at their
invitation, on India’s growth strategy, prospects and the
present opportunities in India for investments.

A preparatory meeting for establishing the India-US
Science & Technology Joint Commission was held in
Washington on 8 December, 2009. The Indian delegation
was led by Secretary, Department of Science and
Technology Dr. T. Ramasami.
India and the US set up a separate dialogue on Health
cooperation co-chaired at the ministerial level to
99

Annual Report 2009 - 2010

Civil Nuclear Cooperation
Government of India and the Government of Canada
pursued their common intention in finalising an
inter-governmental agreement on Civil Nuclear
Cooperation. Discussions and negotiations were held
between experts on both sides led by Dr. R. B. Grover,
Director (Strategic Planning Group) in Department of
Atomic Energy and Mr. Don Sinclair, Director General,
International Security Bureau, Department of Foreign
Affairs and International Trade, Canada. On
28 November, 2009, both sides finalised the text of an
agreement for Civil Nuclear Cooperation between India
and Canada.
Petroleum & Natural Gas
Shri Jitin Prasada, Minister of State for Petroleum &
Natural Gas (PNG) led a delegation to Calgary, Canada
from 22-25 August, 2009 for a Road Show as part of the
eighth round of NELP-VII and CBM-IV.

Trade and Economy
Mr. Gerald Keddy, Parliamentary Secretary to Canadian
Minister of International Trade visited India from
1-5 September, 2009 to inaugurate a Canadian Zonal Trade
office in Kolkata. He also participated in the WTO Informal
Ministerial Meeting and called on the Commerce and
Industry Minister Shri Kamal Nath, Minister of State for
Finance and Minister of State for Science & Technology.
Province of Ontario’s Minister of Trade &
Investment Ms. Sandra Pupatello visited India from
21 August-3 September 2009. She met Minister for Road
Transport and Highways, Commerce Secretary and
Secretary, Department of Science and Technology. In
Mumbai, she interacted with members of the Indian
Industry.
India-Canada bilateral trade
Bilateral trade for the period January-November 2009 are
as under:
[Figures in US$ billion]

Description

January-November 2008

January-November 2009

% change

India’s Total Exports

1.9

1.6

- 15.1

India’s Total Imports

2.05

1.7

-14.4

3.9

3.3

-14.7

Trade
[Statistics Canada]

Mr. Stockwell B. Day, Canadian Minister of International
Trade visited Ahmedabad on 25 September, 2009 to
inaugurate Canada’s Trade office in that city. The sixth
India-Canada Trade Policy Consultations held in Ottawa
from 29-30 September, 2009, provided an opportunity for
both Governments to review bilateral economic
and commercial relations. Commerce Secretary
Shri Rahul Khullar led the Indian delegation, while
Mr. Louis Levesque Canadian Deputy Minister of
International Trade led the Canadian delegation.
Discussions between India and Canada were held in
Ottawa and Quebec City from 19-23 October, 2009
regarding a draft Social Security Agreement with the
Federal Government in Canada and with the province of
Quebec. The Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs was the
lead Ministry from the Indian side at the discussions.
Agriculture Cooperation
On 4 June, 2009 Punjab’s Minister of Agriculture
Mr. Sucha Singh Langah and Manitoba’s Deputy Premier
and Agriculture Minister Ms. Rosann Wowchuk signed a

Memorandum of Understanding between the Canadian
Province of Manitoba and Punjab to support the
establishment of a Food Development Centre in Punjab.
Senator Donald Oliver from the Province of Nova Scotia
in Canada led the Atlantic Canada delegation to India
from 15-23 January, 2010. He met Minister of Food
Processing Industries, Government of India, Ministers of
Industries, Employment, Government of Maharashtra and
Secretaries in the Union Ministries of Shipping,
Transportation.
Strategic Issues
India-Canada Dialogue on Strategic Issues was held on
18 June, 2009 in Ottawa. Shri Vivek Katju, Special
Secretary (Pol & IO) in Ministry of External Affairs led
the GoI delegation. Ms. Colleen Swords, the Assistant
Deputy Minister (ADM), in Canada’s Department of
Foreign Affairs and International Trade, was his
counterpart. Both delegates exchanged perceptions to
enhance mutual understanding on the situation in the
South Asian region, issues related to disarmament, refugee

100

Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh and the Prime Minister of Canada, Mr. Stephen Harper
witnessing the signing of agreement between India and Canada, in New Delhi on 17 November, 2009.

President, Smt. Pratibha Devisingh Patil and the Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh with the
President of Argentina, Ms. Cristina Fernandez De Kirchner, at the Ceremonial Reception, at
Rashtrapati Bhavan, in New Delhi on 14 October, 2009.

101

Annual Report 2009 - 2010

issues, disaster management and other global issues of
common concern.
Counter-terrorism Cooperation
The India-Canada Joint Working Group on Counterterrorism met in Ottawa on 19 June, 2009.
The Government of India delegation was led by
Shri Vivek Katju, Special Secretary (Pol & IO) in MEA.
The meeting enabled a discussion on global threat
perceptions, ongoing terrorist investigations, technical
cooperation in the area of counter-terrorism, terrorismfinance, drug-trafficking etc. Special Secretary also called
on the Mr. Stockwell B. Day, Canadian Minister of
International Trade who chaired the Afghanistan
Committee in Canada’s Parliament, and met
Mr. Leonard Edwards, Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs
to exchange views on the situation in Afghanistan, where
Canada’s defence personnel are deployed.
Defence Cooperation
Major General M. G. Macdonald, Canadian Chief of
Defence Intelligence visited India and held discussions
with his counterpart in India, and with Deputy National
Security Advisor on 23 September, 2009 in New Delhi.
Science & Technology
The third India-Canada Joint Committee on Science and
Technology Cooperation was held in Ottawa on
8 June, 2009. Both countries announced seven joint
projects and expressed interest in enhancing cooperation
in nano-technology. The two countries are working
towards establishment of a virtual network of “Certain of
Excellence in Nano-technology” with participation
of Canadian universities. The Government of
India delegation was led by Dr. T. Ramasami,
Secretary, Department of Science and Technology.
Dr. Ramasami called on Mr. Stockwell Day, Canada’s
Minister of International Trade and Mr. Gary Goodyear,
the Canadian Minister of State for Science and
Technology.
Environment
The first meeting of the India-Canada Environment
Forum which has been set up under the India-Canada
Agreement for cooperation in the area of environment,
was held from 18-19 June, 2009 in Ottawa. The
Government of India delegation was led by
Shri Hem Pande, Joint Secretary (Independent Charge)
in the Ministry of Environment and Forests. The two
countries discussed the preparation of an Action Plan for
specific proposals for bilateral cooperation.

Visit of Mr. Stephen Harper, Prime Minister of
Canada to India
Prime Minister of Canada Mr. Stephen Harper visited
India on an official visit from 15-18 November, 2009.
PM
Harper
was
accompanied
by
the
Mr. Lawrence Cannon, Canadian Minister of Foreign
Affairs and the Mr. Stockwell B. Day, Canadian Minister
of International Trade and senior Members of the
Canadian Parliament, officials of the Canadian
Department of Foreign Affairs and International Trade
and a business delegation. The visit was an important
milestone in the transformation of the bilateral
relationship as it reinforced the commitment of both
Governments to chart a higher-level strategic agenda.
Both Prime Ministers agreed on initiatives to strengthen
and diversify bilateral relations and to collaborate on a
shared global agenda. They discussed regional security
issues - especially their shared commitment to the
reconstruction and economic development of Afghanistan
and their mutual interest in closer cooperation in
countering terrorism. They reiterated the need for
intensified global cooperation in addressing these
challenges. Both Governments agreed to work for the early
conclusion of the comprehensive convention on
international terrorism within the UN framework.
It was agreed that bilateral trade and the economic
relationship between India & Canada would be intensified
by putting in place facilitating mechanisms through the
signing of bilateral economic agreements. Both leaders
express the hope that with the finalisation of the proposed
bilateral institutional framework, bilateral trade could be
taken from the current level through concerted efforts to
US$ 15-20 billion in the next five years.
Building on the success of both India and Canada in
weathering the economic downturn, both Governments
agreed to work collaboratively towards global economic
recovery and to build international efforts in advance of
the G-20 meetings that Canada will host in 2010. They
also discussed climate change in the context of the
Copenhagen meeting to be held in December 2009 and
the importance of moving forward constructively on World
Trade Organisation Doha Round negotiations.
Two MoUs were signed in the presence of the Prime
Ministers of India and Canada. The first was
Memorandum of Understanding to establish a Joint Study
Group consisting experts from both countries to examine
the feasibility of a Comprehensive Economic Partnership
Agreement (CEPA) between the two countries. The
second was a Memorandum of Understanding on

102

The Americas

cooperation in the field of energy, including renewable
energy & energy efficiency, hydrogen fuel-cell technology,
bio-fuels, wind and solar energy, power-generation,
transmission, distribution and end-use, energy research
and development, increased sustainable exploration and
production, mining and drilling of oil and gas.
Prime Minister Harper held talks with Prime Minister
during which both leaders reviewed bilateral relations and
discussed regional and global issues of mutual interest.
Prime Minister Stephen Harper was received by the
President of India, Smt. Pratibha Devi Singh Patil and
Vice-President, Shri Mohammad Hamid Ansari. External
Affairs Minister Shri S. M. Krishna and Leader of
Opposition, Shri L. K. Advani called on Prime Minister
Harper. The Canadian Prime Minister called on
Smt. Sonia Gandhi, Chairperson of the UPA. Prime
Minister Harper met the leaders of the Indian industry
and business community and participated in Round Table
discussions on the themes of investment, education, and
infrastructure. Prime Minister Harper also visited Mumbai
and Amritsar.
A Joint Statement issued during the visit welcomed
ongoing efforts to strengthen institutional framework for
bilateral relations including through the signing of a
Bilateral Investment Promotion and Protection
Agreement, a Social Security Agreement and a Civil
Nuclear Cooperation agreement. It also recognized
education, science and technology and innovation as areas
which could be explored further to build people to people
contacts and synergies between institutions of higher
learning in both countries. In this context, discussions
were held in pursuance of the interest on both sides to
take initiatives to facilitate exchanges in the field of culture
including the celebration of the Festival of India in
locations across Canada in 2011.
During the visit, the Mr. Lawrence Cannon, Canadian
Minister of Foreign Affairs exchanged views with Defence
Minister Shri A. K. Antony, National Security Adviser
Shri M. K. Narayanan and Deputy Chairman,
Planning Commission, Dr. Montek Singh Ahluwalia.
Mr. Stockwell B. Day, Canadian Minister of International
Trade, met the Minister for Commerce and Industry
Shri Anand Sharma and the Minister of State for Science
and Technology Shri Prithviraj Chavan.
Culture
A three member delegation led by Dr. Vijay S. Madan,
Joint Secretary, Ministry of Culture visited Ottawa from
25-29 January, 2010 for discussions with National Art
Gallery, regarding the Inuit Art Exhibitions to be held in

October 2010 in India, exhibitions/events connected with
the Year of India in Canada 2011 and the MoU for Cultural
Cooperation which is under negotiation.
Science and Technology
A three member delegation led by Dr. S. Natesh, Senior
Advisor & Head, International Collaboration,
Department of Biotechnology visited Vancouver from
20-26 January, 2010 to take part in business-to-business
partnering summit with Canadian experts, and the
Bio partnering North America event.
Other High Level exchanges
Premier of the Province of Ontario, Mr. Dalton McGuinty
visited India from 6-11 December, 2009. He led a
75-member mission focused on clean technologies and
comprising leading Canadian companies in this sector. In
Delhi, Premier McGuinty and Deputy Chairman,
Planning Commission Dr. Montek Singh Ahluwalia jointly
addressed the plenary session on “Partnering in
Clean Technology, Innovation & Adoption” on
7 December, 2009. Premier McGuinty offered eco-friendly
technologies to clean/conserve Yamuna River in Delhi.
He met Minister of Roadways, Commerce Minister,
Minister of Human Resource Development, and Minister
of State for Science &Technology and Chief Ministers
of Delhi and Maharashtra. He also interacted with the
corporate sector in India and chaired a Round-Table
discussion on global trade at the Indian School of Business
in Hyderabad.
Mr. Mark Mayrand, Chief Electoral Officer of Canada
visited India at the invitation of Shri Navin Chawla, Chief
Election Commissioner of India to attend the Diamond
Jubilee celebrations of the founding of Election
Commission of India in Delhi from 25-27 January, 2010.
Ms. Maria Barrados, President, Public Service Commission
of Canada visited India from 27 January-6 February 2010.
She met Chairperson of Union Public Service Commission
and Directors of the Indian institute of Public
Administration and Lal Bahadur Shastri National
Academy of Administration.
Mr. Jean Charest, Premier of Quebec Province, visited
India from 31 January-7 February 2010. He is led a
186-member delegation comprising business leaders,
researchers, scientists and university representatives with
the aim of strengthening bilateral cooperation in areas
such as energy, hydropower, biotech, life sciences,
ICT, R&D, infrastructure, education and tourism.
Mr. Charest met Ministers of Human Resource
Development, Civil Aviation, Road Transport &

103

Annual Report 2009 - 2010

Highways, Mines & DONER and the Chief Ministers and
Governors of Delhi, Mumbai and Bangalore.
Mr. Mark Carney, Governor, Bank of Canada is visiting
India on February 16, 2010.
Chief Justice of Canada, Beverley Mc Lachlin
accompanied by Justices Morris J. Fish &
Marshall Rothstein and Witold Tymowski, Legal Officer,
from the Supreme Court of Canada will be travelling to
India from 22-26 February, 2010. The visit is part of an
ongoing Indo-Canadian legal exchange, the last visit
having taken place in May 2008 to Canada.
There is also expected to be a visit to India by a 20-member
Canadian Forces National Securities Programme (NSP)
delegation from 22-26 February, 2010.
India-Canada Foreign Office Consultations will be held
on 3 March, 2010 in New Delhi. Secretary (West) in the
Ministry of External Affairs Shri Vivek Katju, and
Mr. Leonard Edwards, Deputy Minister in the Department
of Foreign Affairs, Government of Canada will lead the
discussions and review of bilateral, regional and global
issues.
Deputy Chairman, Planning Commission is expected to
visit Canada for the G-20 Sherpas meeting, scheduled
from 18-19 March, 2010.
Shri Kamal Nath, Minister for Road Transport
and Highways proposes to visit Canada from
22-26 March, 2010. The visit is aimed at sensitizing the
business and investor community of the opportunities in
the Highway sector in India as per the PPP model.

Latin American Countries
Argentina
India and Argentina reiterated their mutual desire to work
towards a strategic partnership during the state visit of President
of Argentina Dr. (Ms.) Cristina Fernandez de Kirchner to India
from 14-15 October, 2009. She was accompanied by a large
delegation consisting of Ministers including Foreign Minister
Mr. Jorge Taiana, Governors of the Province of La Pampa,
San Juan and a large business delegation. This was the first
Presidential visit from Argentina in 15 years, which coincided
with the 60th anniversary of the establishment of diplomatic
relations between India and Argentina. President Pratibha
Patil met the visiting dignitary, Prime Minister held
delegations level talks and Vice President of India,
Chairperson of United Progressive Alliance and Leader of
Opposition called on the President of Argentina. The joint
statement released during the visit reflects desire on both

sides to strengthen their multifaceted bilateral relations and
work towards a strategic partnership. In all, nine
Agreements/MoUs covering various sectors such as S&T,
Hydrocarbons, sports, trade promotion and outer space were
concluded. An Agreement for Cooperation in the Peaceful
Uses of Nuclear Energy was initiated. Both sides expressed
satisfaction at the growing economic engagement and
bilateral trade which has increased from US$ 694 million
in 2003 to US$ 1328 million in 2008 and set a trade target
of US$ 3 billion by 2012. President Cristina participated in
Business Seminars in Mumbai and Delhi and invited Indian
businessmen to invest in Argentina.
Indo-LAC Business Conclave in Buenos Aires was
organized by the Embassy of India in collaboration with
Confederation of Indian Industries on 2 July, 2009 in
Buenos Aires in which Presidents of Chambers of
Commerce from India, Brazil, Mexico and Argentina as
well as Commercial Representatives from Indian missions
in Brazil, Chile and Colombia participated. Business
seminars were also organized in Uruguay, Cordoba and
Buenos Aires. A Cultural Festival of India was organized
from 5-15 November, 2009, in Argentina, Paraguay and
Uruguay. The Festival included handicrafts exhibition,
Bharatanatyam and Dandiya Gujrati folk dance
performances, Film Festival, seminars, literary contest,
Food Festival, photo exhibition besides Incredible India
tourism promotional activities.

Bolivia
Bolivian Vice-Minister for External Trade and Integration
Mr. Pablo Guzmán Laguia visited India at the invitation
of Commerce and Industry Minister Shri Anand Sharma
for the informal WTO Ministerial meeting of the Trade
Ministers held in New Delhi from 3-4 September, 2009.
Jindal Steel and Power Ltd., completed the infrastructure
facilities for export of iron ore from their leased mine in
El Mutun in Bolivia which they acquired with a total
investment of over US$ 2.1 billion.

Brazil
The strategic partnership with Brazil received
further impetus with the visit of External Affairs
Minister Shri S. M. Krishna to Brazil from
31 August-1 September 2009 for the Fourth Bilateral Joint
Commission meeting and the Sixth Ministerial Meeting
of the IBSA (India-Brazil-South Africa) Dialogue Forum.
EAM co-chaired the Joint Commission Meeting along
with Brazilian Foreign Minister Mr. Celso Amorim. The
JC discussed various issues of bilateral interest including
agriculture, energy, trade and investment, science and

104

The Americas

technology, defence and space research. Both sides
reiterated the strategic relevance of their bilateral relations
and the importance of close consultations with each other
on various multilateral issues. Both sides reaffirmed their
commitment to supporting each other’s candidature for
a permanent seat on an expanded Security Council in
the UN and make concerted efforts to sensitize other
countries on the importance of the expansion of the
Security Council in both the permanent and
non-permanent categories. The Brazilian side has assured
to consider resolving the pending issue of allocating Block
BMS 17 to ONGC Videsh. The two sides agreed to
encourage the participation of their petroleum companies
through joint bidding, joint ventures and collaboration
in upstream and downstream opportunities and activities
in Brazil, India and third countries. Engineers India
Limited (EIL) expressed keen interest in servicing
segments of Hydrocarbons sector in Brazil in Petroleum
Refineries, Petrochemicals, Oil & Gas Processing
(Onshore), Oil & Gas Processing (Offshore) and
Pipelines.
Brazilian Foreign Minister Mr. Celso Amorim visited India
in September 2009 to take part in an informal meeting
on the WTO Doha round in New Delhi at the invitation
of Minister of Commerce Shri Anand Sharma.
Trade between India and Brazil was to the tune of
US$ 3.68 billion during 2008-09.
Secretary (West) Shri Vivek Katju held bilateral talks with
Mr. Roberto Jaguaribe, Under Secretary for Political
Affairs, Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Brazil from
28-29 January, 2010 in New Delhi. They comprehensively
reviewed bilateral relations, issues pertaining to India,
Brazil, South Africa (IBSA) and Brazil, India, Russia,
China (BRIC).

Chile
India-Chile Defence Cooperation have been further
strengthened with the visit of Chief of Army Staff General
Deepak Kapoor to Chile from 31 May-5 June 2009. Earlier,
an 18-member National Defence College delegation
visited Chile from 11-15 May, 2009. During this visit, talks
were held on strengthening cooperation between
NDC and ANEPE (counter part of NDC).
Prof. M. S. Swaminathan, Chairman, M. S. Swaminathan
Research Foundation (MSSRF) and father of the
Green Revolution of India, visited Chile from
23-29 October, 2009 at the invitation of the President of
Chile. He was accompanied by seven eminent scientists
from the Foundation. A Partnership Framework

Agreement was signed between the MSSRF and Fundacion
Para la Innovacion Agraria.

Colombia
Bilateral relations with Colombia intensified during the
year with exchange of Ministerial level visits. Minister of
State for External Affairs Dr. Shashi Tharoor, visited
Colombia from 18-19 January, 2010 and called on
President Mr. Alvaro Uribe, Vice President Mr. Francisco
Santos and President of the House of Representatives,
Mr. Edgar Gomez Roman. He held bilateral talks with
Foreign Minister Bermudez and also exchanged views on
regional developments and multilateral issues. The visit
coincided with the valedictory of the 50th Anniversary of
the establishment of the diplomatic relations. MoS signed
an MoU on Cooperation in Health. An MoU for
Cooperation between National Institute of Information
Technology and SENA (a Colombia Government entity
for vocational and professional training) was signed which
will help to expand the scope of training in IT and software
to cater to the Colombian BPOs and call centres. Earlier
Foreign Minister of Colombia Mr. Jaime Bermudez,
accompanied by Minister of Commerce, Industry &
Tourism, Luis Guillermo Plata and a small business
delegation visited India. External Affairs Minister held
delegation level talks where both sides reviewed bilateral
relations and exchanged views on regional and multilateral
issues. During the visit, an MoU for Cooperation in
Bamboo Applications and Bilateral Investment Promotion
and Protection Agreement (BIPPA) were signed.
Earlier, bilateral Foreign Office Consultations were held
in New Delhi on 2 April, 2009. Vice Minister of Foreign
Affairs of Colombia Ambassador Clemencia Forero Ucros
and Shri Nalin Surie, Secretary (West) headed the
Colombian and Indian delegation respectively. The Vice
Minister also called on Minister of State for External
Affairs Dr. Shashi Tharoor and discussed bilateral
relations. The first meeting of the Joint Committee on
Defence Cooperation with the Colombia was held in
Bogota from 7-9 September, 2009. Additional Secretary
Shri R. S. Mathur, Ministry of Defence and Colombian
Vice-Minister co-chaired the meeting which focused on
cooperation in defence production and training.
Several business delegations visited Colombia during
the year to explore business opportunities: a high power
delegation in June 2009 and Spices Board of India
delegation in July 2009. On 6 August, 2009 Finacle TM
Universal Banking Solution, a subsidiary of Infosys
Technologies signed a contract with Bancolombia,
Colombia’s largest bank. A delegation led by President of

105

Annual Report 2009 - 2010

the state oil company Ecopetrol visited India from
8-11 September, 2009.
India participated as the Country Invitee of Honour
in the 26 th Festival of Cine of Bogota from
1-9 October, 2009. Six films of the famous Indian
Director, Shri Shyam Benegal, including the film ‘Making
of the Mahatma’ was shown on 2 October, 2009, day
celebrated as Gandhi Jayanti.

Ecuador
Hindustan Aeronautical Limited (HAL) had handed over
five of the seven Dhruv Helicopters purchased by Ecuador
to the Defence Minister of Ecuador Javier Ponce in
May 2009. A Memorandum of Understanding to set up
an IT Centre in Ecuador with Indian assistance was signed
on 11 August, 2009 in Quito. A Festival of India was
organized on 19 November, 2009 in Ecuador in which
Vice President Mr. Lenin Moreno was the Chief Guest.

Mexico
In pursuance of our Privileged Partnership with Mexico,
bilateral interactions were facilitated during the year. The
Chief Election Commissioner of India, Shri Navin Chawla,
visited Mexico from 1-6 July, 2009, at the invitation of
his Mexican counterpart, as an observer for the midterm
elections in Mexico on 5 July, 2009.
Bilateral trade with Mexico is approximately
US$ 2.3 billion in favour of Mexico [US$ 650 million +
US$ 1738 million]. A 40-member business-cum-tourism
delegation from Bancomer, the largest Bank in Mexico,
visited India from 20 November-4 December 2009. Seven
Indian engineering companies, led by Engineering Export
Promotion Council (EEPC), participated in Automechanica in Mexico City from 15-17 July, 2009.
10 Indian companies representing book publishing and
printing industry, participated in an international book
fair held from 29 November-3 December 2009 in
Guadalajara. A six member textile delegation coordinated
by the Mexican Apparel Industry Association visited India
from 18-20 November, 2009.
ICCR has decided to open an Indian Cultural Centre in
Mexico in 2010 which will give a further boost to our
cultural relations with Mexico. India participated, for the
first time, in the Third International Cultural Festival of
Acapulco “La Nao” from 5-8 November, 2009, with an
ICCR folk dance troupe from Mathura, Geetanjali
International Folk Tang (GIFT).

Paraguay
Festival of India was organized for the first time in Paraguay
in 2009. Food Festival, Film Festival and Classical and
Folk Dance shows were organized.

Peru
Bilateral relations with Peru received a boost with the
visit of Minister of State for External Affairs
Dr. Shashi Tharoor to Peru from 20-22 January, 2010.
He held discussions with Foreign Minister of Peru,
Mr. Jose Antonio Garcia Belaunde on strengthening
bilateral relations and exchanged views on regional and
multilateral issues. Both the Ministers signed a bilateral
Protocol of Cooperation in Science and Technology for
the year 2010-2012 and an MoU for Cooperation between
Indian Council of World Affairs and its counterpart CEPEI
was signed in the presence of MoS. He also met the Mayor
of Lima Mr. Luis Castaneda Lossio and Secretary General
of the Andean Community Mr. Freddy Ehlers with whom
he exchanged views on the developments with regard to
the Andean community. He interacted with the members
of the Peru-India Chamber of Commerce, Indian
community, think-tanks and academicians.
Peru sent one candidate for the Professional Course for
Foreign Diplomats and UN Peace Keeping Courses in New
Delhi. Business delegations from the CHEMEXCIL, Jute
Manufacturers Development Council (JMDC) and
TEXPROCIL visited Peru during this period and various
Buyer Seller Meets were held in Lima.

Uruguay
Festival of India was organized for the first time in Uruguay
in 2009. Food Festival with two chefs from India (ITDC)
along with Classical and Folk Dance shows were organized.
Film Festival was also organized with ten Bollywood
movies.

Venezuela
In 2008-09 Venezuela became India’s largest trade partner
in the LAC region due to high imports of crude oil to the
tune of US$ 4 billion and exports from India were
US$ 179 million. An 18-member delegation of
the National Defence College visited Venezuela from
17-22 May, 2009. A nine member ICCR sponsored troupe
visited Venezuela from 23-28 May, 2009 to commemorate
the 50 th anniversary of establishment of diplomatic
relations between India and Venezuela. A Festival of India
was also held on the occasion at Merida, where two
seminars on “India: Multiple Dialogues” and “India and the
Global Financial Crisis” were organized. A photo exhibition

106

The Americas

on Kashmir, an art exhibition, an Indian film and
documentary festival and a food festival were also
organized as a part of the Festival of India.

USA/Canada/UK/Australia or any country of the
European Union that has been used at least once, can
enter Panama on the basis of a Tourist Card valid for
30 days issued on arrival.

Central America
Caribbean

Belize
In September 2009, at the request of Belize India has
agreed to depute an Indian police officer for revamping
of Belize Police Academy.

Costa Rica
As part of our endeavour to participate in the capacity
building of Costa Rica an MoU to set up an IT Centre in
Costa Rica by the Government of India was signed on
18 September, 2009.

El Salvador
El Salvador started implementing visa free agreement
signed between India and El Salvador for Diplomatic and
Official passport holders of both countries with effect from
1 April, 2009. As a gesture of solidarity, Government of
India made a cash donation of US$ 250,000 to El Salvador
as humanitarian assistance in the wake of hurricane ‘Ida’
in November 2009.

Guatemala
India has opened its mission in Guatemala in
December 2009. Following an appeal for international
assistance by the Government of Guatemala due to
recurring droughts and food insecurity, the Government
of India made a cash donation of US$ 250,000 to
Guatemala in November 2009.

Honduras
Honduras utilized the US$ 30 million credit line extended
by GoI for acquiring trucks, communication equipment,
etc. from India.

Nicaragua
The training of IT personnel at “NIIT-INATEC
India-Nicaragua IT centre” manned by NIIT staff, under
the auspices of MEA, gained popularity in imparting
IT skills.

Panama
The Government of Panama relaxed the visa regime for
Indian nationals after the assumption of charge by the
newly elected President, Ricardo Martinelli, on
1 July, 2009. Now Indian nationals having visa for

Antigua & Barbuda
It supported India’s candidature for various international
organizations including External Auditor of International
Organization for Migration (IOM) and UN Appeals
Tribunal.

Cuba
India’s relations with Cuba gained a new momentum in
2009 with a series of activities and exchange of high level
visits from both sides. Shri E. Ahamed, MoS led a ten
member Indian Delegation to the NAM Ministerial
COB Meet in Havana from 27-30 April, 2009.
During this visit, he met Cuban Foreign Minister
Mr. Bruno Rodrigues Parrilla and discussed a wide range
of bilateral and multilateral issues.
“India Cuba Knowledge Centre” was extended for one more
year at the request of the Cuban Government. A
“Co-operation Convention in the ICT Sector” was signed
on 8 June, 2009 with Cuba. On 20 November, 2009, at
the ITEC Day Reception, the beginning of the celebrations
of the 50 th anniversary of the establishment of the
diplomatic relations between India and Cuba (1960-2010)
was officially announced. As part of these celebrations,
ICCR sponsored the visit of a renowned Cuban Painter
Ms. Zaida del Rio to India.
India extended a Line of Credit of US$ 5 million to Cuba
for the purchase of agricultural machinery from India in
November 2009.

Dominican Republic
Bilateral Relations with Dominican Republic continued
to widen and deepen in all spheres. The relations received
fresh impetus with the visit of Minister of State for
External Affairs, Dr. Shashi Tharoor to Dominican
Republic from 23-25 January, 2010 at the invitation of
President of Dominican Republic, Dr. Leonel Fernandez
with whom he held discussions on strengthening bilateral
relations, regional developments and multilateral issues.
He also met Foreign Minister, Mr. Carlos Morales Troncoso
and Foreign Trade and Tourism Minister,
Mr. Eddy Martinez. An MoU for setting up an IT Centre
in Dominican Republic was signed during the visit.

107

Annual Report 2009 - 2010

Guyana
An ICCR composite dance and music troupe participated
in the 171st anniversary celebration of Indian Arrival Day
in Guyana in May 2009. An Agreement to extend a line
of credit (LoC) of US$ 4 million to purchase heavy duty
agricultural pumps for drainage and irrigation projects in
Guyana has been concluded.

Haiti
India made a cash contribution of US$ 5 million as
emergency relief to Haiti for earthquake devastation on
12 January, 2010. Minister of State for External Affairs
Dr. Shashi Tharoor visited Haiti on 26 January, 2010 to
personally convey our sympathies to the people and
Government of Haiti. This was the first ever visit by an
Indian Minister to Haiti and he met President of Haiti
Mr. Rene Preval. The first Indian Formed Police Unit
(FPU) Contingent which joined the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) to support
international efforts to ensure a safe environment in Haiti
successfully completed one year duty on 17 October, 2009.
The contingent proactively supported the Haitian
National Police (HNP) & United National Police
(UNPOL) in routine duties as well as special operations.
The contribution of IFPU in furtherance of the mission
mandate has been highly appreciated by MINUSTAH
authorities. The second Contingent arrived in
Port-au-Prince, Haiti on 17 October, 2009 itself.

Jamaica
ICT Centre established with the Indian assistance under
the ITEC Programme, in Kingston, started functioning
from February 2009.

Suriname
Bilateral relations between India and Suriname reached
higher plane this year, with investments in commercial
farming in Suriname. An Indian company, Three-F
(Foods, Fats & Fertilizers) has been offered 21,000
hectares of land by Suriname government for its oil-palm
project. Once the project is fully operational, it will involve
an investment of over US$ 200 million and is likely to
create more than 4000 jobs locally.

Ministry of Defence, Suriname has signed an MoU with
Hindustan Aeronautical Limited for supply of three
Chetak helicopters at US$ 13.407 million under a Line of
Credit extended by Government of India.
Suriname’s Minister for Public Works Mr. Ganesh Kandhai
visited India from 13-17 April, 2009 at the invitation of
the Kirloskar Brothers in connection with the Second
Phase of the Pumping stations being set up by Kirloskar
Brothers.

St. Lucia
India made a cash donation of US$ 250,000 to St. Lucia
for reconstruction of St. Jude Hospital which was
destroyed in a fire accident.

Trinidad & Tobago
During the visit of Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh
to Trinidad & Tobago for the CHOGM Summit from
27-29 November, 2009, he held bilateral discussions with
several countries of the region.
National Institute of Fashion Technology and University
of Trinidad and Tobago signed an MoU for cooperation
in Fashion Technology.
CII organized the first ever India-Caribbean Conclave on
23 June, 2009 which was inaugurated by T&T Trade and
Industry Minister Mr. Mariano Brown. Suriname, Cuba
and El Salvador also took part in the Conclave. A CII
team also participated in the 10th Trade and Investment
Convention (TIC) from 24-27 June, 2009. An India
Tourism and Travel Seminar was inaugurated by the T&T
Minister of Tourism Ross. The new India-T&T Chamber
of Industry and Commerce was launched to foster trade
and investment not only in India and T&T but also in
the region.
A Festival of India was also organized from
7-31 August, 2009 to coincide with celebrations of both
India and Trinidad & Tobago’s Independence Day which
falls on 31 August. An ICCR-sponsored cultural troupe,
visited Trinidad and Tobago from 26 May-1 June 2009 to
participate in the Indian Arrival Day celebrations.

108

United Nations and
International Organizations

UNP
64th Session of the UN General Assembly
xternal Affairs Minister Shri S. M. Krishna led the
Indian delegation to the General Debate of the
64 th session of the UN General Assembly (UNGA),
New York from 20-27 September, 2009. In his address to
the UNGA on 26 September, 2009, EAM stressed the
need for reform and restructuring of the UN and other
global governance structures to effectively meet challenges
that confront the current international system. He said
that the voice of the developing world, including the small
island nations and of Africa, was of principal and core
relevance to have truly participatory and global responses
to global challenges. In particular, EAM highlighted the
need for revitalization of the role of the UNGA and
strengthening its role in global deliberations; and
converting the UN Economic and Social Council
(ECOSOC) into a strong body for development; and
reforming the UN Security Council and making it more
representative by expanding its permanent and
non-permanent membership.

E

Speaking of the economic and financial crisis, External
Affairs Minister said that the international response
should not be limited to measures to stimulate economies
but more importantly, include ways to restructure the
current international governance system which failed to
respond to the crisis. He pointed out that hard-won gains
in alleviating poverty, hunger, illiteracy and disease were
being reversed and the achievements of the Millennium
Development Goals were seriously threatened by the
economic turmoil. It was imperative, he said, that the
United Nations act in concert to coherently overcome
these challenges and the developing countries receive
priority in any global response to the crisis.
Underlining the central role of international trade and
commerce in revitalizing global economic growth,
External Affairs Minister reiterated India’s commitment
to negotiations in the Doha Development Round and
called for their resumption at an early date. He said that
India strongly favoured fair and equitable rule-based
multilateral trade negotiations, which recognized and

9

address the legitimate demands of the developing
countries.
On climate change, External Affairs Minister said that
India would work for an outcome at the Copenhagen
Conference that recognized the development imperatives
of developing countries and was rooted in the principle
of common but differentiated responsibilities and
respective capabilities. He stressed the need to move away
from concentrating on ‘mitigation’ only and ensure that
there was focus on adaptation, which was critical for
developing countries. EAM stressed that developing
countries must be supported financially, technologically
and with capacity building resources so that they could
cope with the immense challenges of adaptation and
special efforts were required to develop programmes that
addressed the critical needs of Small Island States and of
the most vulnerable countries. In this context, he
mentioned the hosting of a high-level global conference
on “Climate Change: Technology Development and Transfer”
(22-23 October, 2009) by India in cooperation with the
UN. EAM also spoke about domestic measures taken by
India such as the National Action Plan on Climate Change
with separate eight National Missions, including Missions
for Enhanced Energy Efficiency and Solar Energy, doubling
the budget for forestry in 2009 to US$ 1.3 billion, setting
ambitious goals, supporting and facilitating major research
to assess various aspects related to climate change.
Underscoring the highest priority attached by India to the
goal of nuclear disarmament, External Affairs Minister
welcomed the renewed global debate on achieving a world
free of nuclear weapons. He reiterated India’s proposal for a
Nuclear Weapons Convention for banning the production,
development, stockpiling and use of nuclear weapons and
to provide for their complete elimination within a specified
time-frame, first articulated in the Rajiv Gandhi Action Plan
in 1988 and mentioned by the Prime Minister at the
63rd UNGA session in September 2008.
Recalling India’s long-standing association with
UN peacekeeping operation, External Affairs Minister
stressed that strengthening the normative basis for
peacekeeping operations and giving major Troop

109

Annual Report 2009 - 2010

Contributing Countries (TCCs) a greater say would serve
to make peacekeeping more effective.
External Affairs Minister also called upon all countries to
make serious efforts to arrive at an early consensus on the
text of a Comprehensive Convention on International
Terrorism (CCIT) to strengthen the international legal
framework of the fight against terrorism.
On the sidelines of the UNGA, External Affairs
Minister represented the Prime Minister at the “Summit
on Climate Change” organized by UN Secretary General,
Mr. Ban ki-Moon on 22 September, 2009. In his
intervention at the Round Table, EAM said that India
has a major interest in ensuring a substantive and
constructive outcome in Copenhagen and would be part
of the solution, even though we have not caused the
problem. He said that the outcome must be rooted in
equity and respect the provisions and principles of the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change, especially common but differentiated
responsibilities and also historical responsibility. Further,
it must also ensure that developing countries can pursue
accelerated development, also so that they have the
resources to cope and adapt to climate change.
The Minister of State for Environment and Forests,
Shri Jairam Ramesh and the Special Envoy to Prime
Minister on Climate Change, Shri Shyam Saran also
attended the meeting on Climate Change.
On the margins of the UNGA Session, External Affairs
Minister participated in several high-level multilateral
meetings held in New York, namely, 14th Summit Meeting
of the Group of Fifteen (G-5) (25 September),
IBSA (India, Brazil and South Africa) Ministerial Meeting
(21 September), G-5 Foreign Ministers’ meeting
(22 September), Commonwealth Foreign Ministers’
Meeting and the Commonwealth Ministerial Meeting on
Terrorism (24 September), BRIC (Brazil, Russia, India &
China) Ministerial Meeting (24 September), meeting on
the 60 th anniversary of establishment of UNRWA
(24 September), Ministerial meeting of the Group of
Fifteen (24 September), Fifth India-GCC Political
Dialogue (25 September), G-77 Ministerial Meeting
(25 September), and Informal Meeting of SAARC Council
of Ministers (26 September). In addition, the Indian
delegation also participated in the Ministerial Meeting of
the Group of Friends of the Alliance of Civilizations
(26 September) and the Ministerial meeting of the
International Conference of New or Restored
Democracies (ICNRD) (29 September).
Smt. Preneet Kaur, Minister of State for External Affairs
participated in the 64th Session of the UNGA and made a

statement on 19 October, 2009 on the subject of “Sports
for Peace and Development: Building and Peaceful and Better
World through Sport and the Olympic Ideal.”
Dr. Shashi Tharoor, Minister of State for External Affairs
participated in the 64th UNGA Session and delivered a
statement on 20 October, 2009 on the subject of “New
Partnership for Africa’s Development: Progress in
Implementation and International Support.” Dr. Tharoor also
made a statement in the UNGA on 12 October, 2009
during the Commemoration of the 15th Anniversary of
the International Conference on Population &
Development.
A non-official delegation of India consisting of
18 Members of Parliament participated in the 64th UNGA
Session during October-November 2009 and delivered
statements on India’s position on a number of topical
issues.
India was among the 16 Member States elected as Vice
Presidents of the 64th UNGA Session in the elections held
in June 2009. The 16 elected members and five permanent
members of the Security Council together serve as
members of the General Committee of the UNGA.

Third International Day of Non-Violence
UN commemorated the Third International Day of
Non-Violence by release of a commemorative stamp and
a souvenir card by Dr. Ali Abdussalam Treki, the President
of the UN General Assembly and Dr. Asha-Rose Migiro,
the UN Deputy Secretary General in an event held at the
Dag Hammarskjold Library, New York on 2 October, 2009.
The one dollar stamp issued by the UN Postal
Administration depicts an artistic rendition of Mahatma
Gandhi and was designed by Dr. Ferdie Pacheco. The
souvenir card depicts a block of the four new stamps and
carries messages from External Affairs Minister of India,
Shri S. M. Krishna and the UN Secretary General,
Mr. Ban Ki-moon.

Political Issues in the UN
Indian representatives made statements in the UNGA
Plenary and its Committees on the issues of reform of the
UN Security Council, revitalization of the General
Assembly, international terrorism, peacekeeping,
peacebuilding, Central Emergency Response Fund,
promotion and protection of human rights, protection of
civilians in armed conflicts, the situation in Afghanistan,
the situation in the Middle East, the Question of Palestine,
and support by the UN to the efforts of Governments to
promote and consolidate new or Restored Democracies.
Highlights of India’s participation in discussions in the
UN on main political issues are given below.

110

United Nations and International Organizations

Middle East

Reform of the UN Security Council

India remained engaged in the consideration of the Middle
East issue in the Fourth Committee as well as the Plenary
of the 64th UNGA. India’s statements on the Palestinian
issue reiterated its long-standing, historic and steadfast
support for the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people
including their right to live in a sovereign, independent,
viable and united State of Palestine within secure and
recognized borders, side by side at peace with Israel as
endorsed in the Quartet Roadmap and UNSC Resolutions
1397 & 1515. India’s statements also underscored its
commitment to support Palestinian people in pursuit of
their legitimate goals and their efforts aimed at economic
and social development with dignity and self-reliance
while reiterating its resolute opposition to all acts of terror
and violence.

India remained actively engaged in the pursuit of a genuine
and comprehensive reform of the UN Security Council,
involving expansion in both its permanent and nonpermanent membership categories and improvement in
its working methods. A significant development in the
process of UNSC reform was the commencement of
intergovernmental negotiations in informal plenary of the
UN General Assembly in March 2009. Three rounds of
negotiations took place from March-September 2009 in
during the 63rd UNGA session. During these negotiations,
the most delegations clearly expressed their preference
for an expansion in both the permanent and
non-permanent categories. This aspect was noted in the
summaries issued by the Chair of the intergovernmental
negotiations.

Stressing on the primacy of humanitarian concerns in the
Gaza Strip, India called for an end to Israeli settlements
in the occupied Palestinian territory and easing restrictions
on free movement of goods and persons within Palestine.
India condemned in the strongest possible terms the
violations of international humanitarian law and human
rights law committed during the Gaza conflict in
December 2008- January 2009 and called for the
unqualified adherence by all the concerned parties to the
relevant instruments of international humanitarian law
and human rights law. India voted in support of the
Resolution on the UN Fact-Finding Mission on the Gaza
Conflict at the UN Human Rights Council and also at
the UN General Assembly. At the same time, India
expressed its reservations on some of the
recommendations made by the UN Fact-Finding Mission
on the Gaza Conflict, including on involvement of the
International Criminal Court and the UN Security
Council as well as on some of the procedures adopted by
the Mission.

At the end of the 63rd UNGA session, India, in concert
with other G-4 countries (Brazil, Germany and Japan)
and other like-minded African, Asian, Caribbean and
Pacific Island states, successfully worked for adoption by
the UNGA of a resolution that called for immediate
resumption of the negotiations in the 64th UNGA, building
on progress achieved in the 63rd Session. The fourth round
of negotiations was held in December 2009. Subsequently,
the G-4 countries and South Africa mobilized
138 countries to sign a petition to the Chair of the
negotiations, requesting him to present a text on which
negotiations could proceed.

India enhanced its contribution to the UN Relief Works
Agency (UNRWA) during 2009 which was
60th anniversary year for its establishment for undertaking
relief work in the occupied Palestinian territories. India
also provided US$ 10 million as budget support to the
Palestinian National Authority after the International
Conference to Support the Palestinian Economy for the
Reconstruction of Gaza held in Sharm-el-Sheikh in
March 2009.
The Prime Minister in his message on the occasion of the
International Day of Solidarity with the Palestinian People
stated that concerted and all round action is necessary to
invigorate the peace process with the objective of
achieving a durable, comprehensive and just settlement.

Terrorism
Strengthening international cooperation for prevention
and suppression of terrorism remained a key priority for
India’s engagement at the United Nations. In this context,
India continued its engagement with other countries
for early conclusion of negotiations on the
draft Comprehensive Convention against International
Terrorism (CCIT). External Affairs Minister
Shri S. M. Krishna, in his address to the 64th Session of
the UN General Assembly in October 2009, stressed the
importance of Comprehensive Convention in fight against
international terrorism and urged member states to finalize
and adopt the draft CCIT without further delay. India
continued to support the implementation of the Global
Counter Terrorism Strategy adopted by the UN General
Assembly in 2006 and the institutionalization of the UN
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force (CTITF).
India maintained close cooperation with UN agencies
dealing with counter-terrorism. Mr. Richard Barrett,
Coordinator of the Monitoring Team of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to UNSC
resolution 1267 on Al-Qaida and Taliban, visited India

111

Annual Report 2009 - 2010

in September 2009 to discuss cooperation in
implementation of counter-terrorism.

Peacekeeping
India participated actively in the policy debate on UN
peacekeeping and made three statements in the UN
Security Council during 2009 on peacekeeping related
issues. India also made a statement in a debate on
Protection of Civilians in UN Peacekeeping Operations
in the UN Security Council. In addition, India continued
its engagement with the UN Security Council Working
Group on Peacekeeping Operations as well as
participated in other plurilateral initiatives in the area of
peacekeeping.
India is one of the oldest, largest and consistent
contributors to the UN peacekeeping operations. In 2009,
India was the third largest troop contributor with around
8,760 military personnel deployed with nine UN
Peacekeeping missions. The largest Indian presence was
in the UN Mission in Democratic Republic of Congo
(4,547), followed by the UN Mission in Sudan (2,677).
The high standards of performance consistently
maintained by the Indian troops and policemen deployed
on UN Missions under challenging circumstances have
won them high regard world-wide.

UN Democracy Fund
India continued to play a prominent role in the UN
Democracy fund launched in 2005 to assist projects that
consolidate and strengthen democratic institutions and
facilitate democratic governance. India is one of founding
members and the second largest contributor to UNDEF
with US$ 20 million. Since its inception, UNDEF has
committed approximately US$ 80 million for around
271 projects in three rounds. During 2009, the Advisory
Board of the UNDEF met twice, in April and October. It
was recommended in the last Board meeting in
October 2009 to launch the fourth round of funding of
new projects. In the Advisory Board as well as in the
Expert group meetings, India has focused on effective
monitoring of projects and proper utilization and
disbursement of funds.

High Level UN Conference on SouthSouth Cooperation
Smt. Preneet Kaur, Minister of State for External Affairs
led the Indian delegation to the High Level United
Nations Conference on South-South cooperation at
Nairobi, Kenya from 1-3 December 2009. In her address
at the Conference on 2 December, 2009, she underlined

India’s steadfast commitment and efforts to advance the
collective cause of the South, bilaterally as well as in the
framework of regional and multilateral groupings. She also
urged the UN to expand South-South Cooperation and
facilitate enhanced triangular cooperation by bringing in
resources from the North and harnessing the Southern
capacities, expertise and experience.

Other International Organizations
Non Aligned Movement
Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh led the Indian
delegation to the 14 th Summit of the Non-Aligned
Movement (NAM) in Sharm-el-Sheikh, Egypt from
15-16 July, 2009. The two themes of the Summit were
‘The Current Economic and Financial Crisis’ and
‘International Solidarity for Peace and Development’. PM in
his statement at the Summit highlighted the importance
of NAM, particularly, in addressing global challenges of
food security, energy security, climate change and reform
of the international institutions. Expressing serious
concern on international terrorism, PM called for an early
agreement on the Comprehensive Convention on
International Terrorism (CCIT). External Affairs Minister
Shri S. M. Krishna led the Indian delegation to the NAM
Ministerial meeting held from 13-14 July, 2009 just before
the NAM summit. EAM also participated in the
Ministerial Meeting of the NAM Committee on Palestine
held on 13 July, 2009.
Shri E. Ahamed, the then Minister of State for External
Affairs, led the Indian delegation to the Ministerial
Meeting of the Non-Aligned Movement Coordinating
Bureau held in Havana, Cuba from 29-30 April, 2009 to
prepare for the NAM Summit. The Final Document
adopted by the NAM Ministerial meeting, inter-alia,
strongly condemned the heinous terrorist attack in
Mumbai from 26-29 November, 2008 and called for
international cooperation against the perpetrators,
organizers, financiers and sponsors of the reprehensible
attack.
The Commonwealth
Largest among the 54 member-states of the
Commonwealth, India is among the leading contributors
to its activities and fifth largest contributor to its budget.
India provides the largest number of technical experts after
UK under the Commonwealth Fund for Technical
Cooperation (CFTC) for providing assistance to
developing Commonwealth countries and contributed
US$ 1 million to the fund in 2009-10. India has also
committed Euro 1 million to the Commonwealth
Connects Special Voluntary Fund created at CHOGM

112

Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh addressing a Press Conference,
on the sidelines of the 15th NAM Summit, at Sharm El Sheikh, Egypt, on 16 July, 2009.
Union Minister for External Affairs, Shri S. M. Krishna is also seen.

Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh meeting the President of Egypt, Mr. Hosni Mubarak
on the sideline of the 15th NAM Summit, at Sharm El Sheikh, Egypt, on 16 July, 2009.

113

Annual Report 2009 - 2010

2005 in Malta to bridge the digital divide in the
Commonwealth Countries.
Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh participated in the
Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting
(CHOGM) held in Port of Spain, Trinidad and Tobago
from 27-29 November, 2009. External Affairs Minister
Shri S. M. Krishna took part in the pre-CHOGM Foreign
Ministers meeting held in Port of Spain from
25-26 November, 2009. The theme of CHOGM 2009 was:
‘Partnering for a more equitable and sustainable future’. The
Indian delegation played an active role in the finalization
of the 2009 CHOGM Communiqué and other stand alone
statements including one on Climate Change. During the
CHOGM 2009, Prime Minister announced the following
additional initiatives by India for the Commonwealth:
a)

A fully financed Diplomatic Training Module for
Commonwealth countries in the Foreign Service
Institute, New Delhi beginning in 2010.

b)

India will underwrite the cost of the first phase of
the Commonwealth Partnership Platform Portal
(CP3).

c)

As host to the Commonwealth 2010 Games, India
will fund the post of a Sports Development Adviser
in the Commonwealth Secretariat for four years.

d)

An additional 250 slots for training for the
Commonwealth countries under India’s
International Technical and Economic Cooperation
(ITEC) programme.

e)

A contribution of US$ 80,000 per annum for a newly
established Commonwealth Small States Joint
Office in Geneva.

f)

Doubling of India’s contribution to the
Commonwealth Media Development Fund to
US$ 120,000, spread over a period of two years.

g)

Support for Commonwealth Secretary General’s
initiative to convene a body of National Elections
Commissions to share experiences and learn lessons
from each other.

The Government of India announced several initiatives
and projects to mark 2009 as the 60th anniversary year of
the creation of the Modern Commonwealth, including
release of commemorative stamps and first day covers
and release of commemorative coins of Rs. 100 and
Rs. 5 denominations.

Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of
Somalia
India continued its participation in the deliberations of
the Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia

(CGPCS) established in January 2009 as an international
forum of countries and organizations interested in
combating piracy in the Gulf of Aden and off the coast of
Somalia. India is a founding member of CGPCS which
currently includes 45 countries and seven international
organizations (UN Secretariat, NATO, the European
Union, the African Union, the League of Arab States,
INTERPOL and International Maritime Organization)
along with two maritime industry groups, BIMCO and
INTERTANKO, who take part as Observers.

Community of Democracies
Minister of State of External Affairs Dr. Shashi Tharoor
represented India at the 5th Ministerial Conference of
Community of Democracies (CoD) hosted by Portugal as
the Chair of the group in Lisbon from 11-12 July, 2009.
The conference held three thematic sessions on
“Implications of the Current Financial and Economic Crisis
in Democratic Governance, Democratic Governance and
Development and Future Challenges for the Community of
Democracies”. India is a member of the Convening Group
of the CoD, which is a forum of democratic countries to
promote strengthening of the democratic form of
governance throughout the world.

Economic issues
External Affairs Minister Shri S. M. Krishna led
the Indian delegation to the General Debate
of the 64 th session of the UN General Assembly in
September 2009. In his address to the UN General
Assembly on 26 September, 2009, External Affairs
Minister stressed on the need for deeper introspection on
whether the United Nations and other global governance
structures are geared to effectively meet the challenges
that confront the current international system. He said
that the reform and restructuring of the global governance
architecture is the critical need of our times and the voice
of the developing world, including the small island nations
and of Africa, is of principal and core relevance, if we are
to have truly participatory and global responses to global
challenges.
External Affairs Minister said that in the face of the
current economic and financial crisis, hard-won gains in
alleviating poverty, hunger, illiteracy and disease are being
reversed and the achievements of the Millennium
Development Goals are seriously threatened. He added
that it is imperative that the United Nations act in concert
to coherently overcome these challenges. India, which is
actively engaged in the G-20 and other processes, has
always stressed that developing countries must receive
priority in any global response to the crisis.

114

United Nations and International Organizations

External Affairs Minister expressed India’s commitment
to negotiations in the Doha Development Round and
stated that India strongly favoured fair and equitable rulebased multilateral trade negotiations, which recognize and
address the legitimate demands of the developing
countries. He also recalled India’s efforts in resuming the
negotiations at an early date, in particular, the
international ministerial level conference held in
New Delhi on 3-4 September, 2009.
Minister of State for External Affairs Smt. Preneet Kaur, led
the Indian delegation to the United Nations Conference on
‘World Financial and Economic Crisis and its Impact on
Development’, held in New York from 24-30 June, 2009. She
addressed the Plenary on 25 June, 2009. India also participated
in the four roundtables held during the Conference.
India participated in the “Interactive Thematic Dialogue of
the UN General Assembly on the Global Food Crisis and the
Right to Food” held on 6 April, 2009 and the Interactive
Thematic Dialogue of the UN General Assembly on the
“Energy Efficiency, Energy Conservation and New and
Renewable Sources of Energy” held on 18 June, 2009 in
New York.
Ms. Praneet Kaur, Minister of State for External Affairs
also participated in the 64th Session of the United Nations
General Assembly and made a statement on the subject
of “Sports for Peace and Development: Building and Peaceful
and Better World through Sport and the Olympic Ideal.”
Dr. Shashi Tharoor, Minister of State for External Affairs
participated in the 64th Session of the United Nations
General Assembly and made a statement on the subject
of “New Partnership for Africa’s Development: Progress in
Implementation and International Support.”
Smt. Meira Kumar, Speaker, Lok Sabha attended the
Second Meeting of the Preparatory Committee of the
Third World Conference of Speakers of Parliaments held
in New York from 16-17 November, 2009.
Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC)
The 2009 substantive session of the Economic and
Social Council (ECOSOC) was held in Geneva from
6-30 July, 2009. Minister of State for External Affairs
Smt. Preneet Kaur, led the Indian delegation to the
Ministerial segment of this session. The Spring High-level
Meeting of the ECOSOC with the Bretton Woods
Institutions, the World Trade Organization and the UN
Conference on Trade and Development was held on in
New York on 27 April, 2009. Chief Economic Adviser,
Department of Economic Affairs Dr. Arvind Virmani,
represented India at the meeting.

Commission on Sustainable Development
India participated actively in the work of the Commission
on Sustainable Development, the high-level commission
within the UN system for sustainable development with
the role of reviewing and promoting the implementation
of Agenda 21 and Johannesburg Plan of Implementation.
MoS (Environment and Forests) Shri Namo Narain
Meena led the Indian delegation to the 17th session of the
Commission, held in New York from 4-15 May, 2009. This
was a policy session of the two-year implementation cycle,
and focused on the thematic cluster of Agriculture, Rural
Development, Land, Drought, Desertification, and Africa.

UN Forum on Forests
India participated in the Eighth session of the UN
Forum on Forests (UNFF 8), held in New York from
21 April-1 May 2009. India also participated in the special
session of UNFF 9, held in New York on 30 October, 2009.

Humanitarian Affairs/Disaster Risk
Reduction
India maintained a close contact with the two main
organizations based in Geneva in this area, namely, United
Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (UNOCHA) and United Nations International
Strategy for Disaster Reduction (UNISDR). A HighLevel delegation led by Shri. Mullappally Ramachandran,
Minister of State for Home Affairs participated in the
second session of the Global Platform for Disaster Risk
Reduction convened by UNISDR in Geneva from
16-19 June, 2009.
Ms. Margareta Wahlström, United Nations Assistant
Secretary-General and Special Representative for Disaster
Risk Reduction visited India at the invitation of the
National Institute of Disaster Management to attend the
second Disaster Management Congress of India from
4-6 November, 2009.
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR)
Mr. Antonio Guterres, UN High Commissioner for
Refugees visited India from 1-2 December, 2009. This was
his second visit to India, coming after his initial visit of
2006 and the first round of formal bilateral consultations
held at the UNHCR headquarters in Geneva in 2008.
The discussions were fruitful and presented an opportunity
to share India’s experience and expertise besides an
exchange of views on present challenges to the
international protection agenda.
India participated in the 60th session of the Executive
Committee of the UNHCR’s programme which was held
in Geneva from 28 September-2 October 2009.

115

Annual Report 2009 - 2010

Social and Human Rights Issues
India actively participated in the debate in the United
Nations General Assembly plenary on various agenda
items including report of the Human Rights Council,
follow-up to the commemoration of the 200th anniversary
of the abolition of the transatlantic slave trade, support
by the United Nations System of the efforts of
Governments to promote and consolidate new or Restored
Democracies, Results of the High-Level segment of the
52 nd Session of the Commission of Narcotic Drugs.
Interventions were also made on issues related to social
development, advancement of women, rights of the child,
elimination of racism and racial discrimination, right of
peoples to self determination, crime prevention and
criminal justice and report of the UN High Commissioner
for Refugees.
India also participated in the debate at the Third
Committee of the General Assembly, which examines
social, humanitarian affairs and human rights issues. The
Committee held interactive dialogues with 27 Special
Procedure mandate-holders, Chairpersons of Human
Rights Treaty Bodies and Chairpersons of Working Groups
of the Human Rights Council. UN High Commissioner
for Human Rights also briefed the Third Committee about
her office’s work and priorities.
Commission on the Status of Women
The Commission on the Status of Women (CSW) held
its fifty-third session from 2-13 March, 2009. India is a
member of the Commission since 2009 for a four year
period. Joint Secretary, Ministry of Women and Child
Development, among others, represented India in the
meeting. The priority theme this year was ‘equal sharing
of responsibilities between women and men, including
care-giving in the context of HIV/AIDS’. In addition to
the agreed conclusions, the Commission also adopted a
number of resolutions on issues related to women,
including the situation of and assistance to Palestinian
women; the girl child and HIV/AIDS.
Second meeting of the State Parties to the
Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities
India participated in the Second meeting of the State
Parties to the Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities held from 2-4 September, 2009. Additional
Secretary, Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment
represented India at the meeting. The focus of the meeting
was to encourage countries to become States Parties to
the Convention. Interactive discussions were also held
on the implementation of the Convention, especially in

the fields of physical accessibility, reasonable
accommodation, access to justice and decision making
process; as well as on the legislative measures for the
implementation of the Convention at national level. At
present there are 66 States Parties to the Convention.
Observance of the Third International Day of NonViolence at the UN
India commemorated the Third International Day of
Non-Violence in the UN which was marked by the
unveiling and issue of a commemorative stamp by the UN
Postal Administration. The one dollar stamp which was
issued by the UN Postal Administration depicts an artistic
rendition of Mahatma Gandhi and was designed by
Dr. Ferdie Pacheco. The souvenir card depicts a block of
the four new stamps and carries brief messages from
External Affairs Minister of India Shri S. M. Krishna and
the UN Secretary General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon.
Human Rights Council
The Human Rights Council maintained a busy schedule
during 2009, having successfully operationalized the
mechanisms outlined in the institution-building package
by the fourth year of its existence. Besides the three regular
sessions, the Council held four Special sessions (two on
the situation in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, one
on Sri Lanka and one on the impact of the global economic
and financial crisis on the enjoyment of human rights).
The Council also held three Universal Periodic Review
(UPR) sessions, reviewing the situation of human rights
in 48 countries. In addition to the sessions of the Advisory
Committee, Social Forum, Forum on Minority Issues and
the Expert Mechanism on Indigenous Peoples, the Council
held sessions on the Right to development and on the
elaboration of Complementary Standards as well as an
Optional protocol to the Convention on the Rights of
the Child. The Durban Review Conference on Racism
was held from 20-24 April, 2009, with several preparatory
as well as follow-up sessions of the Working Group held
during the year.
In keeping with its traditional commitment to human
rights and values, India actively participated in all sessions,
in a constructive and inclusive manner, with a view to
enhancing the effectiveness of the Council in promoting
and protecting human rights the world over. Our approach
was guided by our firm belief that the objectives of the
Council can be best pursued through dialogue and
co-operation. The salient aspects were as follows:

116

Ms. Navanetham Pillay, United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, visited India from
22-24 March, 2009, the first such visit in over a

United Nations and International Organizations

decade. The high-level discussions resulted in a
frank exchange of views and an open dialogue about
the situation of human rights in the country.
India was represented by Special Secretary (Political
& International Organizations) at the High-Level
segment of the Durban Review Conference held
from 20-22 April, 2009.
India actively contributed to the preparations for
the Durban Review Conference on racism,
inter-alia, as a Member of the Preparatory
Committee Bureau.
India served as a Rapporteur on the Troika for the
Universal Periodic Review of China, Bhutan and
Vanuatu; and chaired the Troika for both China and
Bhutan.
India served as the Regional Coordinator of the
Asian Group on human Rights issues till
October 2009.
Mr. Okechukwu Ibeanu, Special Rapporteur on the
Adverse Effects of Movement and Dumping of Toxic
and Dangerous Products and Waste visited India
from 11-21 January, 2010.
A number of eminent Indians continued to serve with
distinction as members of important Treaty Monitoring
Bodies and human rights mechanisms. These include
Shri P. N. Bhagwati (Member, Human Rights Committee),
Shri Chandrashekhar Dasgupta (Member, Committee on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights), Shri Dilip Lahiri
(Member, Committee on Elimination of Racial
Discrimination), Ms. Indira Jaisingh (Member, Committee
on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women) and
Shri Arjun Sengupta (Chairperson, Inter-Governmental
Working Group on the Right to Development).
Shri Anand Grover continued to discharge his mandate
as Special Rapporteur on the right of everyone to the
enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of physical
and mental health.
Elections
After a successful campaign, India won the election as a
member of the Executive Council of the IOC at the
elections to be held during the 25th Session of the IOC
General Assembly from 16-25 June, 2009 at UNESCO in
Paris.
After a successful campaign, India won the election to
the council of the International Maritime Organization
(IMO) under Category ‘B’ during the 26th Session of the
Assembly of the IMO to be held in London from
23 November-4 December 2009.

India was appointed as the External Auditor for the
International Organization for Migration for the period
2010-12, after a successful campaign.
Climate Change Negotiations and United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change
(UNFCCC)
India has taken initiative in facilitating international
dialogue and discussion on critical climate change issues
that are important for developing countries. In
this context, in the area of technology transfer,
India hosted a high-level global conference on “Climate
Change: Technology Development and Transfer” from
22-23 October, 2009 in New Delhi in collaboration with
the United Nations. The conference brought together
governments, experts, industry representatives and civil
society from a number of countries to help formulate a
roadmap for technology in the context of climate change
mitigation and adaptation to support the multilateral
negotiations under the UN Framework Convention on
Climate change (UNFCCC). The conference provided
important inputs to the ongoing UNFCCC negotiations.
External Affairs Minister attended a High Level Event
on Climate Change, described as “Summit on Climate
Change”, hosted by the UN Secretary General at the
sidelines of the UN General Assembly in New York on
22 September, 2009, where leaders from all over the world
were invited to deliberate on the issue of climate change.
The objective of the Summit was to mobilize the political
will and vision needed to reach an ambitious agreed
outcome based on science at the ongoing multilateral
negotiations under UNFCCC. It was not a negotiating
forum. EAM was assisted during the meeting by
MoS (Environment & Forests) and Special Envoy of
Prime Minister Shri Shyam Saran on Climate Change.
A large Indian delegation comprising officials,
Parliamentarians, civil society members and youth
attended the 15 th meeting of Conference of Parties
(COP-15) on climate change held at Copenhagen from
7-18 December, 2009. While MoS (Environment &
Forests) and Special Envoy of Prime Minister on Climate
Change led the Indian side during the negotiations at
COP-15; the high-level segment of the conference, which
was held from 16-18 December, 2009 and saw the
participation of Heads of States/Governments of almost
120 countries, was attended by Prime Minister
Dr. Manmohan Singh on 18 December, 2009. The
conference witnessed continued sharp division between
developed and developing countries. As a result,
COP-15 could not achieve the conclusion of negotiations

117

Annual Report 2009 - 2010

on the twin tracks of AWG-LCA (Ad-hoc Working Group
on Long Term Cooperative Action – relating to enhanced
implementation of UNFCCC under Bali Action Plan) and
AWG-KP (Ad-hoc Working Group on further
commitments for Annex-I Parties under the Kyoto
Protocol – relating to emission reduction commitment of
the Annex-I Parties for the second commitment phase of
the Kyoto Protocol), as mandated by the Bali Roadmap.
However, the COP-15 took decisions to mandate the
continuance of this twin-track negotiating process started
at the Bali Conference to reach an agreed outcome at the
16th Conference of Parties (COP-16) to be held in Mexico
in November-December 2010.
In a parallel development at COP-15, in a “Friends of the
Chair” process, where India was a participant, convened
by the Danish hosts among 25-30 countries, a
“Copenhagen Accord” was finalized, which deals with the
various elements of the Bali Action Plan relating to the
issues of mitigation, adaptation, financing and technology,
without setting any legally binding targets. However, the
Conference of Parties did not adopt the Copenhagen
Accord as initially expected and merely “took note of” it,
due to continued reservations of a few countries. The
Accord thus is neither legally binding nor constitutes a
mandate for any new negotiating process under the
UNFCCC.
India was represented at official level in the climate change
negotiations at AWG-LCA and AWG-KP under the
UNFCCC preceding COP-15 at Copenhagen. These
included meetings of AWG-LCA and AWG-KP in Bonn
(29 March-8 April 2009 and 10-14 August, 2009),
Bangkok (28 September- 9 October 2009) and Barcelona
(2-6 November, 2009).
India hosted Ministerial-level consultation of four major
developing economies (Brazil, South Africa, India and
China – also known as the BASIC group) in New Delhi
on 24 January, 2010 to take stock of the Copenhagen
outcome and the direction of future negotiations under
the UNFCCC.
In addition, India actively participated in a number of
major international forums with focus on climate change
and related issues. Prime Minister attended the summit
meeting of Major Economies Forum on Energy and
Climate (MEF) comprising 17 major economies of the
world, held at L’Aquila (Italy) on 9 July, 2009, on the
sidelines of the G-8+five Summit (group of eight most
industrialized countries – USA, UK, France, Germany,
Italy, Canada, Japan and Russia, and their outreach
interaction with group of five major developing economies

– India, China, Brazil, Mexico and South Africa). India
was represented at official level, including representative
from MEA, in the Asia Pacific Partnership on Clean
Development and Climate (APP) – a voluntary
partnership of seven Asia-Pacific countries (Australia,
China, India, Canada, Japan, Republic of Korea, and
United States) to accelerate the development and
deployment of clean energy technologies – held in
Shanghai from 26-27 October, 2009.
Migration
India continued to enhance its engagement at the
international level on migration issues, ever since
becoming a Member of the International Organization
on Migration (IOM) in June 2008. IOM is already
undertaking several projects in India in collaboration with
the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs which are aimed
at improving conditions for Indian workers abroad.
India conducted a successful campaign resulting in the
election of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
(CAGI) by a large majority for the post of the External
Auditor of IOM for the period 2010-2012.
A delegation led by India’s Permanent Representative to
United Nations Offices in Geneva represented India at
the third meeting of the Global Forum on Migration and
Development (GFMD) held in Athens from
4-5 November, 2009. India became a Member of the
Steering Group of GFMD in 2009 and attended the
preparatory meetings of the Friends of the Forum as well
as the Steering Group in Geneva.
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC)
Additional Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs led the
four member delegation to attend the 18th session of
Commission of Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice,
which was held in Vienna from 16-24 April, 2009.
United Nations Educational Scientific and
Cultural Organization (UNESCO)
As a founder member of UNESCO India plays a key role
in all its core mandates and is often a bridge between
developed and developing countries in its role as
negotiator, facilitator and consensus builder.
The most significant achievement from India’s perspective
was the adoption by consensus of India’s proposal for the
establishment of the Mahatma Gandhi Institute of
Education for Peace and Sustainable Development in New
Delhi, India as a UNESCO Category-1 Institute. The
Institute is the first to be established in the Asia Pacific
Region and only the Third in a developing country.

118

Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh addressing the 15th United Nations Climate Change Conference,
at Copenhagen on 18 December, 2009.

Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh alongwith the Heads of Commonwealth countries with the Queen Elizabeth II, at
CHOGM 2009, in Port of Spain on 27 November, 2009.

119

Annual Report 2009 - 2010

India was re-elected as a member of the Executive Board
where India has been continuously a Member since 1947.
Our victory was due to our high profile in UNESCO
especially on issues of concern to developing countries,
India’s role as a bridge between North and South on key
issues and our democratic, pluralistic, multi-cultural and
secular credentials. Dr. Karan Singh was nominated by
Government of India as India’s representative to the
Executive Board.
At our invitation the outgoing Director General of
UNESCO, Mr. Koichiro Matsuura paid his fifth official
visit to India from 10-11 November, 2009. This was a
special gesture as this was his last official visit before
demitting office on 15 November, 2009. The new Director
General, Ms. Irina Bokova also accepted India’s invitation
to make her first official visit as Director General to India
from 11-14 January, 2010.

Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU)
The 121st Assembly of the IPU was held in Geneva from
19-21 October, 2009. An Indian delegation of
Parliamentarians headed by Speaker of Lok Sabha
Smt. Meira Kumar participated in the deliberations.
Important items of agenda included (i) Debate of emergency
item (ii) Briefing and debate on progress of UN reform
followed by an update on UN Climate Change Conference
and discussion (iii) Launch of Handbook of Missing Persons
(iv) Discussion on UN Development Cooperation Forum
and Implementation of UPU Resolution on Foreign Aid
(v) Panel discussion on HIV/AIDS – Universal Access to
Prevention Treatment and Care.
A one-member Parliamentary delegation led by
Shri P. C. Chacko, MP Lok Sabha visited Geneva to attend
the 19th Session of the Parliamentary Conference on the
World Trade Organisation from 28-30 September, 2009.
Main topics of agenda included (i) Current state of
multilateral trade negotiations and possible scenario for
the conclusion of the Doha Round (ii) Exchange of views
concerning WTO Public Forum 2009. The title of the
theme was “Global Problems, Global Solutions: Towards
Better Global Governance”.
A two-member delegation comprising Dr. (Smt.) Bocha
Jhansi Lakshmi MP and Smt. Jayanthi Natarajan, MP
visited Geneva to attend the Fourth Conference of the
members of Parliamentary Committees on the Status of
Women and other Committees dealing with Gender
Equality from 28-29 September, 2009.

UN Commission on Science, Technology and
Development (CSTD)
The 12 th Annual Session of the UN Commission on
Science, Technology and Development (CSTD) was held
in Geneva from 25-29 May, 2009. The Session included a
Ministerial segment and reviewed the progress made in
the implementation of the outcomes of the World Summit
on Information Society (WSIS), while considering two
priority themes, “Development-oriented policies for an
inclusive information society” and “Science, technology and
engineering for innovation and capacity- building in education
and research”. India was represented in the meeting and
participated actively in discussions on identifying ways to
narrow the global digital divide and integrating science,
technology and innovation policies into national
development plans.

World Meteorological Organisation
(WMO)
A delegation of officials and scientists led by Secretary,
Ministry of Earth Sciences attended the World Climate
Conference-3 (WCC-3) which was held in Geneva from
31 August-4 September 2009. Main items of the agenda
included (i) Economic and social benefits of climate
information (ii) Advancing climate prediction science
(iii) Round table discussion on Climate adaptation and
the Copenhagen process (iv) Climate extremes, warning
systems and disaster risk reduction.

World Health Organization (WHO)
India participated in the 62nd World Health Assembly from
18-22 May, 2009. India was elected to the Executive Board
of WHO for a three-year term starting 2009. India
continued to emphasize on the need for focusing on
primary healthcare, improving health services, promoting
access to essential medicines, and encouraging full use of
Trade Related aspects of Intellectual Property Rights
(TRIPS) flexibilities to address public health concerns in
the WHO forum.
India remained engaged with the Inter-Governmental
process for finalization of the Pandemic Influenza
Preparedness Framework (PIPF). In the context of the
A/H1N1 pandemic (Swine Flu), the framework has
acquired increasing relevance. India continued to
emphasize that both benefit-sharing and access to pandemic
influenza material should be equitably addressed in the
framework to ensure availability of vaccines and medicines
to all affected populations. We have been engaged in the
ongoing consultations for formulating a global strategy on
reducing the harmful effects of alcohol and have called for
evolving the strategy through the prism of public health

120

United Nations and International Organizations

concerns. India has also been taking part in the ongoing
Inter-Governmental negotiations for a protocol on illicit
trade in tobacco products under the umbrella of Framework
Convention on Tobacco Control (FCTC).

International Labour Organization (ILO)
India participated in the 98th Session of the International
Labour Conference (ILC) of ILO from 3-19 June, 2009,
which endorsed the Global Jobs Pact as an employmentfocused policy tool for addressing the labour consequences
of the ongoing economic crisis. Shri Mallikarjun Kharge,
Minister of Labour and Employment participated in the
deliberations of the high-level segment of the ILC from
15-16 June, 2009 and spoke of the labour oriented social
policies in India. India showcased the various initiatives
undertaken to address the economic crisis and the focus being
given to the social segments of economic activity. In that
context, the social protection and unemployment benefits
to protect the vulnerable sections of society that were
launched in India have been welcomed in the ILO. The
National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (NREGS),
as an important social safety net; the Rashtriya Swasthya
Bima Yojana (RSBY) as a national health insurance scheme
for below poverty line families in the unorganized sectors;
the National Skills Development Policy (NSDP); the New
Pension Scheme (NPS) as a voluntary social security net
have gained recognition as important social protection
measures within the ILO constituents.

Follow-up to the World Summit on
Information Society (WSIS)
The Fourth Annual Meeting of the Internet-Governance
Forum (IGF) was held in Sharm-el-Sheikh, Egypt, from
15-18 November, 2009. A delegation from the Ministry
of Information & Technology represented India in this
meeting whose theme was “Internet-Governance - Creating
Opportunities for All”. It examined issues such as access
and diversity, security, openness and privacy, internetgovernance and managing internet resources. The
meeting recognized the internet as an enabler for
economic growth and social development, and emphasized
the need for bridging the digital divide.

International Standards Organisation
(ISO)
The 45th Meeting of the ISO Technical Management
Board (TMB) was held in Geneva from 9-11 June, 2009.
Additional Director General, Bureau of Indian Standards,
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public
Distribution participated in the Meeting.

International Telecommunication Union
(ITU)
Shri A. Raja, Ministry of Communications and I.T. led
the official delegation to the “ITU Telecom World 2009”
which was held in Geneva from 5-9 October, 2009.
A delegation led by Secretary, Ministry of
Communications and IT visited Geneva to finalize signing
of a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) relating to
hosting of an ITU Conference in Hyderabad next year.
The MoU was signed on 20 October, 2009 by Secretary,
Ministry of Communication and IT and the Vice
Chairman of the ITU.

Legal and Treaties Division
The important activities of the Legal and Treaties Division
for the year 2009 were as follows:
Investments Agreements
During the current year, a bilateral investments promotion
and protection agreement (BIPA) with Colombia has been
signed and BIPAs with Libya, Myanmar, Mozambique and
Bangladesh have been ratified. Instruments of ratifications
in respect of BIPAs with Jordan and Serbia have been
exchanged in Delhi for bringing the Agreement into force.
Negotiations with Canada have been completed and final
text is ready for signing. The exploratory talks with United
States of America are completed and negotiations with
Iran, Uganda, Tunisia, Namibia, Nepal, Estonia and
Slovenia are underway.
Cabinet Notes
During the year, the draft Cabinet Notes regarding
Bilateral Investment Promotion Agreements (BIPA) with
Colombia, Lithuania and Seychelles have been circulated
and approved. Similarly, draft Cabinet Notes in respect
of Air Services Agreement with Bhutan and Air Services
Agreement with Bosnia & Herzegovina have been
examined and conveyed the concurrence of the Ministry.
Further, this Division has also examined and cleared
Cabinet Notes on Defence Cooperation with Ecuador,
Sweden, Vietnam and UK and Cabinet Notes relating to
MoU between Ministry of Panchayat Raj and Ministry of
Foreign Affairs, Switzerland regarding proposal to accede
to Convention on Control and Marketing of Articles of
Precious Metals, proposals to sign Social Security
Agreements between India and Switzerland, Denmark and
kingdom of Luxembourg. The Division has also examined
Cabinet Notes relating to climate change and Clean
Development Mechanism projects with Denmark,
Norway, Finland and Austria.

121

Annual Report 2009 - 2010

During this year, Legal and Treaties Division has examined
a number of agreements and tender documents on various
projects in India and abroad; gave its opinions on various
court cases involving service matters, various passport and
consular issues; and also gave inputs and offered legal
opinions on a number of RTI requests addressed to the
MEA. The Division has processed for the payment of
India’s annual contribution to the international
organizations like Hague Academy of International Law,
Permanent Court of Arbitration, International Institute
for the Unification of Private Law (UNIDROIT), Hague
Conference on Private International Law (HCCH) and
Asia Africa Legal Consultative Organisation (AALCO).
Social Security Agreements
This division has actively participated in the negotiations
of Social Security Agreements with various countries like
Germany, Australia, France, Norway, Canada, Denmark,
Korea, Luxembourg and Hungary.

SAARC
This division has proposed the draft Headquarters
Agreement between the Government of India and the
SAARC Museum of Textiles and Handicrafts. Pursuant
to the Headquarters Agreement, the museum will be
functional in Delhi and the Agreement will also confer
certain privileges and immunities on the basis of functional
necessity. Further, during the third intergovernmental
meeting on South Asian University held in Kathmandu
in October 2009, the modalities pertaining to academic
plan, business plan and financial outlay has been discussed.
This division has also participated in the third meeting of
the Regional Task Force to implement SAARC
Convention relating to Trafficking in Women and
Children and Promotion of Child Welfare in South Asia.

Extradition and other International
Judicial Assistance
The Legal and Treaties Division has participated in
bilateral negotiations for concluding extradition treaties,
agreements on mutual legal assistance in criminal and in
civil matters with foreign countries. Following successful
negotiations of Extradition Treaties with Mexico,
Tajikistan and Portugal, the procedure for their entry into
force and effectiveness was completed in the year
2009. Extradition Treaties were negotiated and finalized
with Morocco and Israel. Negotiations were also initiated
on Extradition Treaties with Saudi Arabia and Azerbaijan.
In addition, the Legal and Treaties Division has examined
the draft texts of extradition treaties proposed by Colombia
and Serbia

The Legal and Treaties Division has participated in
negotiations on treaties on mutual legal assistance in
criminal matters with Bangladesh, Israel and Azerbaijan.
As a result, treaties with Bangladesh and Israel were
finalized. The division participated in negotiations with
Saudi Arabia, Israel and Iran on Agreements on Transfer
of Sentenced Persons and the texts of all these treaties
were finalized.
The Legal and Treaties Division has examined extradition
requests and other requests for international cooperation
received from the domestic as well as foreign jurisdictions
and rendered legal advice therein.

Environmental Law
During the last year the Legal and Treaties Division
examined a number of agreements relating to cooperation
in the field of environment and natural resources, MoUs
between Wildlife Life Research Institutes, marine
pollution, climate change and clean development
mechanism
The division participated in the following negotiations
relating to biosafety, access to genetic resources and
climate change. With respect to biosafety the division was
represented at the First Meeting of the “Group Friends of
the Chairs” concerning Liability and Redress in the context
of the Cartegena Protocol on Biosafety (Article 27) in
February 2009. This meeting adopted three documents:
a legally binding ‘administrative approach’ on liability
resulting from the damage to the conservation and use of
the biological diversity from transport, transit, handling
and use of Living Modified Organisms, originating in a
transboundary context; a non-legally binding principles
on civil liability (although some core elements were
inserted in the administrative approach on account of the
strong pressures by developing countries); and
supplementary financial mechanisms. These instruments
are to be further negotiated at the second meeting slated
in February 2010. As regards access and benefit sharing
relating to genetic and biological resources, the division
was represented at the: First Meeting of the Group of
Technical and Legal Experts established by CoP-9 to the
Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD), for drawing
up an international regime on Access and Benefit Sharing
(ABS), in January 2009; and the Seventh Meeting of the
Ad Hoc Open-ended Working Group on Access and
Benefit Sharing (ABS), held in April 2009; and the Eighth
Meeting of the Ad Hoc Open-ended Working Group
on Access and Benefit Sharing (ABS), held on
15 November, 2009. These meetings have produced what
is called the Montreal Annex which contains the basic
negotiating text on access and benefit sharing of genetic

122

United Nations and International Organizations

and biological resources. This Annex contains the core
elements on access and benefit sharing of genetic and
biological resources.
The division was also represented at the two UN Climate
Change Negotiations in Barcelona in November 2009;
and CoP 15 of the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change, in Copenhagen held in December
2009. These two meetings and earlier ones held in 2009
were instrumental in achieving what is now called the
“Copenhagen Climate Change Accord’.

Tobacco Protocol
The division was represented at WHO negotiation
meetings on a Protocol on Illicit Trade in Tobacco
Products. The meetings attended were the: Third Session
of the Intergovernmental Negotiating Body (INB-2) on a
Protocol on Illicit Trade in Tobacco Products, held in June
2009; First Meeting of the Drafting Group Two to the
Intergovernmental Negotiating Body (INB) on Illicit
Trade in Tobacco Products, Geneva, held in October
2009; and the Second Meeting of the Drafting Group Two
to the Intergovernmental Negotiating Body (INB) on
Illicit Trade in Tobacco Products, held in November 2009.
The Protocol as it now stands contains a negotiating text
with most elements finalized that include the entire
supply-chain control and the legal remedies/sanctions for
illicit trade in tobacco products.

Water Resources
The division participated at the Meeting of the Permanent
Indus Commission held in New Delhi, in May-June 2009.
The division was also involved in providing inputs and
participating in the preparation of the Draft Report of
the Inter-Ministerial Group (IMG) regarding Brahmaputra
water diversion by China. We also provided inputs/
comments on the Ganges River Treaty and concerns raised
on the Tipaimukh dam in Manipur. The division also
provided numerous comments on various objections raised
by Pakistan on the construction of the Kishenganga
Hydroelectric Project. .

Antarctica
The Division was represented at the Legal and
Institutional Group Meeting of the 32nd Antarctic Treaty
Consultative Committee Meeting (ATCM), held in
April 2009, in Baltimore, USA.

UN and International Law
Measures to Eliminate International Terrorism:
No breakthrough could be achieved in this year’s meeting

of the Ad hoc Committee on Terrorism that is negotiating
the Comprehensive Convention on International
Terrorism (CCIT). While there is considerable support
for the new text proposed by the Facilitator that seeks to
address the issue of impunity as well as delineation
between this Convention and IHL, some delegations did
not find the new elements fully reflective of their concerns.
In this session the Chairman, to facilitate the discussions,
consolidated in a single text the different proposals that
have been in circulation for a number of years.
Counter Terrorism Strategy: India continues to support
the United Nations Global Counter Terrorism Strategy
and participated actively in its biennial review last year.
India welcomes the institutionalization of the Counter
Terrorism Implementation Task Force which will bolster
United Nations system’s ability to “deliver as one” and
ensure overall coordination and coherence in the counterterrorism efforts of the United Nations system
Special Committee on the Charter of the UN and on
the Strengthening of the Role of the Organization: The
Special Committee considers specific proposals made by
Member States with a view to enhancing the ability of
the United Nations to achieve its purposes, as well as other
suggestions for the more effective functioning of the
United Nations that might not require amendments to
the Charter. The main focus during the meeting in 2009
also remained on the Russian Federation’s working
document on “Basic conditions and standard criteria for the
introduction and implementation of sanctions imposed by the
United Nations”. The Rio Group withdrew the proposed
agenda item entitled “consideration of legal aspects of
the reform of the United Nations”. Cuba submitted a
revised working paper on the proposal submitted by it at
the 1997 session entitled “Strengthening of the role of the
Organization and enhancing its effectiveness”.
Administration of Justice at the United Nations: The
Sixth Committee continued the examination of the legal
aspects of the topic “administration of justice at the United
Nations”, a new internal justice system for the staff of the
United Nations and finalized the draft Statutes of the
United Nations Dispute Tribunal and United Nations
Appellate Tribunal. The General Assembly in March 2009
appointed five judges to serve on the United Nations
Dispute Tribunal, and seven for the United Nations
Appeals Tribunal key bodies created in 2007 to help bolster
the world body’s system of dealing with internal grievances
and disciplinary cases. As on 1 July, 2009, the United
Nations has a two-tier judicial system to address
work-related disputes. However, to avoid unnecessary

123

Annual Report 2009 - 2010

litigation, the new system will also promote the informal
resolution of conflicts, with strengthened ombudsman and
mediation services.
Oceans and Law of the Sea
Fish Stocks Agreement: The eighth round of Informal
Consultations of States Parties (ICSP) to the Agreement
for the Implementation of the Provisions of the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea relating to
the Conservation and Management of Straddling Fish
Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks (UNFSA) was
held from 16-19 March, 2009. The substantive theme of
this year’s meeting was “Continuing Dialogue,” focusing
on promoting wider participation in the Agreement.
During the session, participants also discussed the scope
of the review to be undertaken at the Review Conference
that would resume in 2010.
UN Open-Ended Informal Consultative Process on
Oceans and the Law of the Sea: The theme of the tenth
meeting of the UN Open-Ended Informal Consultative
Process on Oceans and the Law of the Sea was
“Implementation of the outcomes of the Consultative Process,
including a review of its achievements and shortcomings in its
first nine meetings”.
Delegations exchanged views on the implementation of
the outcomes of ICP since its inception in 1999, including
a review of its achievements and shortcomings;
inter-agency cooperation and coordination; and
identification of issues that could benefit from future work
of the UNGA on oceans and the law of the sea. It was
decided in the meeting that the ICP should discuss topics
linked to sustainable development issues in the context
of Law of the Sea.
Meeting of the States Parties to the UN
Convention on the Law of the Sea
The 19th Meeting of the States Parties to the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea was held from
13-20 June, 2008. The States parties were given
comprehensive briefings by the heads of the three
bodies - the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea,
the International Seabed Authority and the Commission
on the Limits of the Continental Shelf and reports on the
Tribunal’s external audits and budgetary matters.
The Chairman of the Commission on the Limits of the
Continental Shelf highlighted the practical difficulties in
managing the Commission’s increased workload, noting
that it had received 51 submissions, including joint and

partial submissions and 43 sets of preliminary information.
In view of the large number of submissions, the Chairman
informed, at the present strength of Members and
schedule of meetings, the Commission would be able to
exhaust the present list only by 2030. (India’s claim will
come up in 2027). To address this situation, he said it was
necessary that the members of the Commission were
available for extended periods of time in New York.
As regards the issue of allocation of seats in the
Commission on the Limits of Continental Shelf and the
International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea, the West
European and Other Groups (WEOG) relinquished their
one seat in each of the two bodies which will now be a
floating seat available to candidates from Asia, Africa and
WEOG. Separately Asian-African States came to a mutual
understanding to present a joint Asian African candidate
alternately for each of the bodies and support each other
to ensure that there is no possibility of WEOG candidate
being elected.
The Legal and Treaties Division examines issues related
to the law of the sea on agenda of different international
forums. At its 64th session, the United Nations General
Assembly (UNGA) has adopted two resolutions 64/71 and
64/72 on the agenda items “Oceans and Law of the Sea”
and “Sustainable fisheries, including through the 1995
Agreement for the Implementation of the Provisions of the UN
Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December, 1982
relating to the Conservation and Management of Straddling
Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks, and related
instruments.” The Division was actively involved in
advising on issues which came up during the finalization
of resolutions.
The Legal and Treaties Division participated in the
Meeting of Group of Experts for review and finalization
of the Draft Guide to the Implementation of the Provisions
of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea,
relating to Marine Scientific Research, held at New York
from 20-24 April, 2009.

Contact Group on Piracy Off the Coast
of Somalia
L&T Division has actively participated in the Working
Group II on Legal Issues of the Contact Group on Piracy
Off the Coast of Somalia. This Working Group has
accomplished the assigned tasks such as continuous
exchange of information on legal challenges arising from
piracy off the coast of Somalia, examination on the
possibility of establishing additional mechanism for
prosecution of suspected pirates, establishment of

124

United Nations and International Organizations

international legal network consisting of legal experts,
developing ‘legal tool box’ containing check-lists of steps
states may take to ensure that they are able to prosecute
suspected pirates, list of impediments and terms of
reference for the International Trust Fund. The Working
Group was also involved in the compilation of the
international legal basis for prosecution, and developing
a generic templates on evidentiary standards, “ship rider”
agreements, and for drafting a MoU on the conditions of
transfer of suspected pirates and armed robbers.
UNCITRAL: This Division has participated in the
meeting of the 42 nd Session of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL)
and also the meetings of the UNCITRAL Working Group
V and VI dealing with Insolvency Law and Security
Interests, respectively. This year the Commission has
adopted UNCITRAL Notes on Cooperation,
Communication and Coordination in Cross Border
Insolvency proceedings. The draft UNCITRAL Model
Law on Public Procurement and the Annex to the
UNCITRAL Legislative Guide on Secured Transactions
are progressing well in their respective Working Groups
and will ripe for adoption in 2010. Although Indian
membership to UNCITRAL expires on 20 June, 2010,
India has been re-elected to UNCTIRAL for a six years
term beginning on 21 June, 2010 in an election held in
General Assembly on 3 November, 2009.

UNESCO
This Division has participated in the 15th Session of the
UNESCO Inter-governmental Committee for promoting
the return of Cultural Property to its country of Origin
and also participated in the Legal Committee Meeting
held during the 35th Session of the UNESCO’s General
Conference in Paris.

biological, chemical and nuclear substances; Threats to
commit any of these acts; and acts contributing to such
acts including abetment, participation, organizing,
delivering etc. would be punishable as offences prohibited
under the Convention.
In 2009, a Diplomatic Conference at Montreal was
convened during April-May 2009 and the Conference
adopted the Draft Convention on Compensation for
Damages caused by Aircraft to Third Parties, in the case
of Unlawful Interference (Unlawful Interference
Convention) and also the Draft Convention on
Compensation for Damage Caused by Aircraft to Third
Parties (General Risks Convention) with a view to
approving a final draft on each Convention. The texts as
finalized during the 33rd Session would be adopted at the
Diplomatic Conference to be held at Montreal on 2010.
The L&T Division has actively participated in various
multilateral conferences leading to the adoption of various
international conventions which include: The
International Convention on Compensation for Damages
caused by Aircraft to Third Parties, in the case of Unlawful
Interference (Unlawful Interference Convention); the
International Convention on Compensation for Damage
Caused by Aircraft to Third Parties (General Risks
Convention); the Hong Kong International Convention
for the Safe and Environmentally Sound Recycling of
Ships, 2009, that was adopted in May 2009.

Hague
Conference
International Law

on

Private

International Civil Aviation Organization
(ICAO)

The Hague Conference on Private International Law held
a meeting of Special Commission on the practical
operation of the Hague Apostille, Service, Evidence and
Access to Justice Conventions at The Hague from
2-12 February, 2009. The Legal and Treaties Division
participated actively in the Meeting of the Special
Commission.

This division has actively participated in the 34th Session
of the ICAO Legal Committee Meeting held in Montreal
from 9-17 September, 2009 to discuss and finalize the
proposed amendments to the Hague Convention,
1970 and the Montreal Convention, 1971. The
amendments, in essence, reflect the idea of advancing
both counter-terrorism and counter-proliferation goals.
It is proposed to add various acts which States would have
to make punishable under their domestic laws. This
includes: Use of civil aircraft as a weapon; Use of civil
aircraft to unlawfully spread biological, chemical and
nuclear substances; Attacks against civil aviation using

India is a Member of the Hague Conference and a Party
to three out of four conventions (except the Access to
Justice Convention) examined in the Meeting. In addition
to the examination of the provisions of the Conventions,
the Meeting discussed the practices and procedures
followed by States for implementing these Conventions.
The interaction at the Meeting enhanced our
understanding of the system prevailing in different States
and its utility in the effective implementation of the
Conventions in States Parties. The Legal and Treaties
Division participated actively in the Meeting of the Special
Commission.

125

Annual Report 2009 - 2010

The division has examined a number of defence
co-operation agreements, agreements on international
co-operation on peaceful uses of nuclear energy, science
and technology agreements, during the year. The Division
has vetted International Agreements/MoUs on
Cooperation in Drug Control and Prevention of Illicit
Trafficking in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances
and Precursor Chemicals and Related Matters, Economic,
Scientific and Technical Cooperation in the field of
Agriculture, Cooperation in the fields of Education,
Information Technology, Health and Medicine,

Traditional Medicine, Tourism, Cooperation in the field
of Civil Services, Personnel Management and Public
Administration, Aid for the establishment of the Centre
for Excellence in the field of IT in various Countries and
Cultural Exchange Programmes.
India has signed/ratified many multilateral/bilateral
treaties/agreements with foreign countries during the year.
A comprehensive list is placed at Appendix-X. A list of
Instruments of Full Powers issued during the year 2009 is
at Appendix-XI and a list of Instruments of Ratification
is at Appendix-XII.

126

Disarmament and
International Security Affairs

Introduction

I

ndia continued to reaffirm its long-standing and
consistent advocacy of global non-discriminatory and
verifiable nuclear disarmament as one of the highest
priorities for the international community. India felt
encouraged by some positive signs which indicated that
nuclear disarmament is back on the international agenda.
This included US President Mr. Barack Obama’s speech
in Prague in April 2009 and negotiations between US and
Russia to negotiate a successor agreement to START-1
for further reducing their nuclear arsenals. India supported
the adoption of a Programme of Work, including on a
Fissile Material Cut-off Treaty (FMCT), in the Conference
on Disarmament (CD) after a decade of hiatus.

United Nations General Assembly
(UNGA)
During the First Committee meeting of the General
Assembly, India underlined its commitment to nuclear
disarmament and expressed its belief that the goal of
nuclear disarmament can be achieved through a step-bystep process underwritten by a universal commitment to
achieve the complete elimination of nuclear weapons.
India suggested a set of practical measures to stimulate
debate and promote consensus on the way forward. These
measures had already been put forward in General
Assembly and the Conference on Disarmament and
include:
Reaffirmation of the unequivocal commitment of
all nuclear-weapon States to the goal of complete
elimination of nuclear weapons;

th

At the 64 UN General Assembly in New York, India
reiterated its proposal for a Nuclear Weapons Convention
for banning the development, production, stockpiling and
use of nuclear weapons and providing for their complete
elimination within a specified time frame. The proposal
is consistent with India’s long-standing commitment to
nuclear disarmament as articulated in the Rajiv Gandhi
Action Plan of 1988. India also recalled its other proposals
on nuclear disarmament, including a Working Paper
presented to the UN in 2006, proposing elements to
fashion a new global consensus on disarmament and
non-proliferation.
During the year, India participated constructively in
various multilateral meetings on disarmament including
inter alia those related to Biological Weapons Convention
(BWC), Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC) and
Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons. India also
participated actively in the meetings of ASEAN Regional
Forum and Conference on Interaction and Confidence
Building Measures in Asia. Regular contacts were
maintained with non-governmental organizations in the
field of disarmament to disseminate India’s views on
various issues. India continued to maintain dual-use
related export control regulations and their effective
implementation, including through outreach activities
with the Indian industry and other stakeholders and
appropriate coordination efforts.

10

Reduction of the salience of nuclear weapons in the
security doctrines;
Taking into account the global reach and menace of
nuclear weapons, adoption of measures by nuclearweapon states to reduce nuclear danger, including
the risks of accidental nuclear war,
de-alerting of nuclear weapons to prevent
unintentional and accidental use of nuclear weapons;
Negotiation of a global agreement among nuclearweapon States on ‘no-first-use’ of nuclear-weapons;
Negotiation of a universal and legally-binding
agreement on non-use of nuclear- weapons against
non-nuclear-weapon states;
Negotiation of a convention on the complete
prohibition of the use or threat of use of nuclear
weapons;
Negotiation of a nuclear weapons convention
prohibiting the development, production,
stockpiling and use of nuclear weapons and on
their destruction, leading to the global,
non-discriminatory and verifiable elimination of
nuclear weapons with a specified time-frame.
As in past few years, India tabled three resolutions in the
First Committee, viz. ‘Measures to Prevent Terrorists from

127

Annual Report 2009-2010

Acquiring Weapons of Mass Destruction’, ‘Convention
on the Prohibition of Use of Nuclear Weapons’ and
‘Reducing Nuclear Danger’. India’s resolution on
‘Measures to Prevent Terrorists from Acquiring Weapons
of Mass Destruction (WMDs)’, which was first introduced
in 2002, was again adopted by consensus, highlighting
the unanimity in the international community on the need
to avert such a danger. The resolution called upon UN
Member States to take measures aimed at preventing
terrorists from acquiring WMDs and underlined that the
international response to this threat needed to be
inclusive, multilateral and global. This year, the resolution
was co-sponsored by 71 States showing the importance
the international community accorded to this resolution.
The resolution ‘Convention on the Prohibition of Use of
Nuclear Weapons’ reiterated the call on the Conference
on Disarmament to commence negotiations to reach
agreement on an international convention on prohibiting
the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons under any
circumstances. India’s resolution on ‘Reducing Nuclear
Danger’ highlighted the importance of de-alerting and
other measures required to mitigate the accidental use of
nuclear weapons. The resolution called for a review of
nuclear doctrines, as also immediate steps to reduce the
risk of unintentional or accidental use of nuclear weapons,
including through the de-alerting and de-targeting of
nuclear weapons and requests the Nuclear Weapon States
to take measures to implement the suggested steps. Both
these resolutions were adopted with the support of a large
majority of countries. The First Committee and the
General Assembly also adopted without a vote a draft
decision proposed by India on “Role of Science and
Technology in the Context of International Security and
Disarmament”.

India is committed to participating constructively in the
FMCT negotiations in the CD as part of its Programme
of Work.

UN Disarmament Commission (UNDC)
The three week 2009 Session of the UNDC was held in
New York from 13 April-1 May 2009. The UNDC, as per
its mandate, functions as a subsidiary body of the UN
General Assembly and deliberates and makes
recommendations on disarmament issues. The 2009
session was the beginning of a new three-year cycle of the
UNDC. It adopted a three item agenda for the new cycle:
“Recommendations for achieving the objective of nuclear
disarmament and non proliferation of nuclear weapons’,
“Elements of a draft declaration of the 2010 as the fourth
disarmament decade’, and “Practical Confidence Building
Measures in the field of conventional weapons, upon
conclusion of elements of draft declaration (preferably by
2010 but in any case not later than 2011)”. Substantive
discussions on the first two agenda items took place during
the 2009 session. India participated constructively in the
negotiations on finalizing the Agenda of the new cycle of
UNDC. While reaffirming the importance of
multilateralism, India called upon members of UNDC to
redouble efforts to give a positive impulse to global
non-discriminatory disarmament.

Biological Weapons Convention (BWC)

Conference on Disarmament (CD)

In pursuance of the decision of the sixth BTWC Review
Conference held in 2006, the meeting of States Parties to
the BTWC was held in Geneva from 7-11 December, 2009
and the Meeting of Experts from 24-28 August, 2009.
These meetings were held under the chairmanship of
Canada and discussed international cooperation in the
fields of disease surveillance, detection, diagnosis and
containment of infectious diseases.

Conference on Disarmament (CD) is the single
multilateral disarmament treaty negotiating body. During
its 2009 Annual session, the CD reached consensus on a
Programme of Work after more than a decade of impasse.
On 29 May, 2009, the Conference adopted by consensus
the document CD/1864, entitled “Decision for the
establishment of a Programme of Work for the 2009
session”. India supported the adoption of the Programme
of Work. India stated that it was willing to join a
non- discriminatory, multilaterally negotiated and
internationally verifiable FMCT as and when it is
concluded in the CD, provided it meets India’s national
security interests. The CD, however, was not able to
commence substantive work on the basis of decision
contained in CD/1864 during the 2009 Annual session.

India participated constructively in both the Meeting of
States Parties and the Meeting of Experts. At the Meeting
of States Parties, India submitted a Working Paper on its
experience in international cooperation and capacity
building in surveillance, detection, diagnosis and
containment of infectious diseases in the context of Article
ten of the BWC. The Indian delegation also made a
presentation on India’s experience in dealing with the
H1N1 outbreak. India took a lead in the negotiations of
the final document of the Meeting of States Parties. Earlier,
at the Meeting of Experts India made two presentations,
one on international cooperation in the context of Article
ten of BTWC, and the second on disease surveillance in
India.

128

Disarmament and International Security Affairs

Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC)
India played an active role at the Organization for the
Prohibition of the Chemical Weapons (OPCW) at The
Hague. India continued to fulfil its obligations under the
Convention in line with its commitments. India was widely
commended for fulfilling its commitments under CWC,
including successful completion of destruction of its
chemical weapons stockpiles as per its obligations under
the CWC.
India participated actively in the 14th Conference of the
States Parties to the CWC held at The Hague from
30 November-4 December 2009. It played a key role at
the 56th, 57th and 58th sessions of the 41-member Executive
Council, where it has been an active member since the
inception of the Organization in 1997. India highlighted
all issues of interest and concern to it and to other
developing countries in these meetings. India also actively
participated in various subsidiary bodies of the
Organization, including the Scientific Advisory Board and
the Advisory Body on Administrative and Financial
Matters. As part of its commitment to promoting
international cooperation in peaceful uses of chemistry
under Article XI, India is the only developing country to
have hosted Associate Programme for the second year in
a row for foreign participants. India has also emerged as a
major provider of mass spectra to the OPCW Central
Analytical Database. At specially convened meetings on
the sidelines of the Executive Council meetings, India
also gave presentations on chemical industry, verification
and administrative & financial issues to delegations of
interested States Parties.

Convention on Certain Conventional
Weapons (CCW)
India is a High Contracting Party to the Convention on
Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain
Conventional Weapons Which may be Deemed to be
Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects
(CCW) and has ratified all its protocols, including the
Amended Protocol II on Prohibitions or Restrictions on
the use of Mines, Booby Traps and other Devises and
Protocol V on Explosive Remnants of War. India has also
ratified the Amendment to Article I of the Convention.
The annual meeting of the High Contracting Parties to
the Convention on CCW was held at Geneva from
12-13 November, 2009. The 2008 CCW Meeting had
requested a Group of Governmental Experts (GGE) to
negotiate a proposal to address urgently the humanitarian
impact of cluster munitions, while striking a balance
between military and humanitarian considerations and

present it before the 2009 meeting. The GGE met in two
formal and one informal session for a total of three weeks
in 2009. It was not able to conclude its negotiations. The
annual meeting decided that the GGE would continue
its negotiations and make every effort to conclude it as
rapidly as possible and report to the next meeting of High
Contracting Parties (2010). The GGE was mandated to
meet for up to two weeks in 2010 for this purpose.
The Third Annual meeting on Protocol V of CCW on
Explosive Remnants of War, which entered into force in
November 2006, was held from 9-10 November, 2009 in
Geneva. Permanent Representative of India to the CD
Ambassador Hamid Ali Rao was elected as the President
of the Third Annual Meeting. The meeting discussed and
agreed on ways and means to strengthen the
implementation of the Protocol. Progress was achieved
with regard to a guide for national reports and
establishment of a website under UN auspices to act as a
platform for electronic sharing of information under
Protocol V. Thirteen countries including US, Pakistan and
Canada became States Parties to Protocol V before the
Third Conference.
The Annual Meeting of the States Parties to the Amended
Protocol II to the “Convention on CCW on Prohibitions
or Restrictions on the Use of Mines, Booby Traps
and Other Devises” was held at Geneva on
11 November, 2009. The meeting discussed the issue of
Improvised Explosive Devices (IEDs) and decided to
continue discussion on the issue, including practical steps
to address the challenges posed by IEDs in 2010 Meeting
of Experts. India underlined that it has fulfilled all its
obligations with regard to Amended Protocol II and has
undertaken measures to address the humanitarian
concerns arising from indiscriminate use of landmines with
regard to the international humanitarian law. India also
highlighted the problems of frequent use of IEDs by
terrorists and non-State actors and the trans-border
dimensions of the supply chain for procurement of IEDs
by them.
India shares the vision of the United Nations of a minefree world, and is ready to replace landmines when
alternative technologies become available. India attended
the second Review Conference of the Convention held
in Cartagena from 30 November-4 December 2009 as an
Observer. Likewise, India also participated in the Standing
Committee Meetings of the Convention held in Geneva
from 25-29 May, 2009 as an Observer. However, India is
not a State party to the “Convention on the Prohibition
of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of AntiPersonnel Mines and Their Destruction” or the Ottawa

129

Annual Report 2009-2010

Convention as it continues to regard landmines,
when used responsibly by States, as a legitimate tool for
defence.

Small Arms and Light Weapons
The United Nations Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and
Light Weapons in All Its Aspects (UNPOA) adopted in
July 2001 provides for a comprehensive set of national,
regional and global measures to achieve its goal. India
has supported international co-operation to achieve this
goal multilaterally, regionally and bilaterally.
India remained committed to the goal of transparency in
armaments and participated in the 2009 Group of
Governmental Experts on UN Register of Conventional
Arms. The Register’s operation and further development
is reviewed every three years by a GGE.

International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA)
India signed an Additional Protocol to the Agreement
between India and IAEA for the Application of Safeguards
to Civilian Nuclear Facilities on 15 May, 2009.
India participated in the 53rd IAEA General Conference
held from 14-18 September, 2009. The Indian delegation
was led by Shri Anil Kakodkar, Chairman, Atomic Energy
Commission and Secretary, Department of Atomic Energy.
The General Conference adopted several resolutions on
the subjects of nuclear safety, security, safeguards, nuclear
applications and nuclear power.
On 16 September, 2009 India submitted to the IAEA the
Declaration to place voluntarily its civilian facilities under
Agency safeguards in a phased manner in accordance with
the provisions of Para 13 of the India-IAEA Safeguards
Agreement. Following this, India filed notifications on
16 October, 2009 and 19 October, 2009 for the facilities
to be put under IAEA safeguards.

Nuclear Suppliers Group (NSG)
India and the NSG troika held two rounds of meetings
during the year. The first meeting was held in New Delhi
on 11 May, 2009 and the second meeting was held in
Vienna on 17 September, 2009. These meetings took place
in the context of the September 2008 NSG decision,
enabling its members to engage in full civil nuclear
cooperation with India. The discussions included an
exchange of views on future cooperation in areas of mutual
interest.

Conference on Interaction and
Confidence Building Measures in Asia
(CICA)
India continued its active and constructive participation
in the meetings of CICA. It participated in the CICA
Special Working Group (SWG)/Senior Officials
Committee (SOC) meetings held in June 2009 and
January 2010 in Almaty and in October 2009 in Beijing.
India also participated in the Experts Meetings held on
various subjects including inter alia energy security and
cyber-security. India’s participation in the CICA process
continues to be guided by its view that CICA can help
contribute to the development of a cooperative and
pluralistic security order in Asia, based on mutual
understanding, trust and sovereign equality, mindful of
the diversity and the heterogeneity integral to the Asian
identity.

ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF)
India hosted a meeting of the ASEAN Regional Forum
Inter-sessional Support Group (ARF-ISG) on Confidence
Building Measures and Preventive Diplomacy in New
Delhi from 9-11 November, 2009. The meeting was held
pursuant to an announcement made by External Affairs
Minister Shri S. M. Krishna at the 16th ARF Ministerial
Meeting held in Phuket, Thailand in July 2009. Vietnam
was the ASEAN co-Chair for the ISG meeting. This was
the second occasion when India hosted the ARF-ISG;
the first one being in 2001. India would co-Chair the next
ARF-ISG meeting scheduled to be hosted by Vietnam in
March 2010.
India’s decision to be the co-Chairs for the ISG was
reflective of the importance India attaches to its
membership in the ARF. India believes that as a premier
political and security forum for dialogue in the
Asia-Pacific, ARF continues to be a central pillar of the
security architecture in the region. Since its formation in
1994, ARF has played an important role in building trust
and confidence among its members and maintaining peace
and stability in the Asia-Pacific and has evolved into a
key mechanism for exchange of views on regional and
international security issues. India also participated in
various other ARF activities including the Inter-Sessional
Meetings (ISMs) on disaster relief and non-proliferation
and disarmament.

Strategic Exports Control
India continued to exercise control over exports of
sensitive goods and technologies which can have direct
or indirect application for weapons of mass destruction

130

Disarmament and International Security Affairs

or their means of delivery. The Ministry encouraged and
participated in various outreach activities with the
industry, relevant departments and other stakeholders
pursuant to the Weapons of Mass Destruction and their
Delivery Systems Act 2005.

Other Issues
A India-US Strategic Security Dialogue was held on
13 November, 2009 in New Delhi. The Indian and
US delegations were led by Foreign Secretary
Smt. Nirupama Rao and US Under Secretary of State
for Arms Control and International Security

Ms. Ellen Tauscher respectively. The talks followed
upon a decision taken by External Affairs Minister
Shri S. M. Krishna and US Secretary of State
Ms. Hillary Clinton in New Delhi in July 2009 on a new
dialogue architecture. The Dialogue covered global
and regional strategic issues as well as developments
in multilateral forums on disarmament and
non-proliferation.
India participated in the Fifth Plenary meeting of the
Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism held at
The Hague from 16-17 June, 2009. India had joined the
Global Initiative at its Madrid meeting in June 2008.

131

11

Multilateral Economic Relation

I

ndia’s multilateral economic engagement further
widened and deepened during the year. Global
Economic and Financial crisis, food security and climate
change continued to occupy the focus of discussions in
multilateral fora. Highlights of this year’s multilateral
engagement were Prime Minister’s participation in the
G-8 – Outreach Summit for the fifth successive time, the
first formal Summit of the Leaders of Brazil, Russia, India
and China [BRIC] in Russia, India-ASEAN Summit and
East Asia Summit. India’s hosting, in September 2009, of
the WTO Ministerial Conference to develop a broadbased consensus to remove the impediments coming in
the way of multilateral discussions and to provide clear
directions to negotiators to re-energise the multilateral
process at the WTO was another important milestone
during the year.
Engagement with other key regional groupings such as
ACD, ASEM, BIMSTEC, MGC, IBSA, G-15, IOR-ARC
and others also consolidated during the year. External
Affairs Minister Shri S. M. Krishna represented India at
the Ministerial Meetings of BRIC, G-5 and IBSA. BRIC
Finance Ministers also met in the context of
G-20 Summits to coordinate positions on various issues.

Asia – Europe Meeting (ASEM)
India continued to actively participate in various ASEM
meetings and initiatives. Shri N. Ravi, Secretary (East),
Ministry of External Affairs, led the Indian delegation to
the Ninth ASEM Foreign Ministers’ Meeting, held in
Hanoi from 25-26 May, 2009. The Chairman’s Statement
issued at the end of the Meeting inter alia welcomed the
applications of Australia and Russia to join ASEM and
asked the Senior Officials to work out modalities in this
regard to enable both the countries join ASEM at the
Eighth Summit to be held in October 2010 in Brussels.
India, as the coordinator for North East and South Asia
subgroup under ASEM, hosted the meeting of the Senior
Officials of the Asian member countries of ASEM in New
Delhi, in September 2009, to facilitate discussions
among the Asian members on the key issue of ASEM
expansion.

BRIC [Brazil, Russia, India and China]
Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh visited
Yekaterinburg, Russia from 15-17 June, 2009 to attend
the first formal Summit of the Leaders of Brazil, Russia,
India and China [BRIC]. This was Prime Minister’s first
visit abroad in his second term in office.
At the Summit, among other issues, the Leaders focused
on the state of global economic and financial crisis. The
Leaders stressed the need to intensify cooperation in the
quadrilateral BRIC format on economic matters, to seek
implementation of G-20 decisions of interest to developing
countries, and reform of present systems of global
governance and the international financial system. The
Summit adopted a Joint Statement of BRIC Leaders and
a Joint Statement on Global Food Security.
BRIC Finance Ministers also met before the G-20 Summits
of London and Pittsburgh to coordinate positions on issues
of mutual interest. National Security Adviser
Shri M. K. Narayanan attended the first meeting of BRIC
National Security Advisers hosted by Russia, in end May
2009. India also participated in the meeting of BRIC
Competition Authorities held in Kazan, Russia on
1 September, 2009.
External Affairs Minister, Shri S. M. Krishna, represented
India at the BRIC Foreign Ministers’ meeting held on
24 September, 2009 on the sidelines of the 64 th UN
General Assembly in New York. The Ministers discussed
issues regarding the global economic and financial crisis,
BRIC Institutionalization, Energy, climate change and
other issues.

G-8 Outreach and the G-5 summits
Prime Minister attended the G-8 Outreach and the
G-5 Summits in the Italian city of L’Aquila from
8-10 July, 2009. This was Prime Minister’s fifth successive
G-8 Summit since 2005.
The agenda of the G-5 leaders meeting included global
economic and financial crisis – its implications for
developing countries with special focus on MDGs, green
recovery, Doha Round, reform of international financial

132

Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh with the leaders of G-5 countries, in L’Aquila, Italy on 8 July, 2009.

Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh with the German Chancellor, Ms. Angela Merkel,
before the G-8 Summit, in L’Aquila, Italy on 9 July, 2009.

133

Annual Report 2009 - 2010

institutions, food security, climate change and future
direction of G-5 cooperation. Prime Minister, in his
intervention, emphasized that future growth has to be
inclusive and the countries need to guard against
stagflation. The G-5 Leaders issued a Political Declaration
after the Meeting. Noting that the G-8 declaration on
the Doha Round was rather weak, the G-5 leaders also
issued a separate statement on this issue.
At the Summit of G-8/G-5 countries plus Egypt (invited
by the Italian hosts), discussion was focused on global
economic crisis and the issues of global governance. The
G-8/G-5 Leaders issued a Joint Declaration, “Promoting
the Global Agenda” after the Summit.
Prime Minister also attended meetings of the Major
Economies Forum (MEF) held within the framework of
G-8/G-8 Outreach Summit in L’Aquila. The first session
of the MEF, on 9 July, 2009 focused on Doha Round and
the Second Session focused on Climate Change issues.
The G-8 Presidency for 2009, Italy, invited India and other
Outreach countries to attend various Ministerial meetings
in the run-up to 2009 G-8 Summit. Speaker Lok Sabha,
Smt. Meira Kumar, attended the meeting of G-8 Outreach
Speakers in Rome in September 2009. This was the first
meeting of Speakers of G-8 and the Outreach countries.
External Affairs Minister Shri S. M. Krishna, attended
the G-8 Outreach Meeting on Afghanistan. Other
G-8 Outreach Ministerial meetings which were attended
by India include the meetings of Labour Ministers,
Agriculture Ministers, Environment Ministers, and Energy
Ministers. Conference of G-8 and Outreach Ministers on
Destabilizing Factors and Trans-national Threats, held in
Rome in April 2009, was attended by Secretary (Economic
Relations), Ministry of External Affairs.

G-5 Foreign Ministers’ Meeting
G-5 Foreign Ministers met on the sidelines of the
64th UNGA in New York on 22 September, 2009 to discuss
the changing international geometry, institutionalization
of the G-20, and future coordination among G-5. External
Affairs Minister, Shri S.M. Krishna, represented India at
the Meeting.

BIMSTEC (Bay of Bengal Initiative for
Multi-sectorial Technical and Economic
Cooperation)
External Affairs Minister Shri S. M. Krishna, led the Indian
delegation to the 12th meeting of BIMSTEC Foreign
Ministers held in Nay Pyi Taw, Myanmar from
10-11 December, 2009. The Ministerial Meeting was

preceded by a Senior Officials’ Meeting on
10 December and a Preparatory Meeting from
8-9 December, 2009. At the 12th Ministerial Meeting, India
handed over the Chairmanship of BIMSTEC to Myanmar.
The Meeting saw signing of the BIMSTEC Convention
on Cooperation in Combating International Terrorism,
Trans-National Organized Crime and Illicit Drug
Trafficking. India is the Lead Country in this area of
cooperation.
Climate Change was adopted as the 14 th area of
cooperation at the 12th BIMSTEC Ministerial Meeting.
All members endorsed the BIMSTEC Transport
Infrastructure and Logistics Study conducted by Asian
Development Bank (ADB), which would facilitate further
growth of overall cooperation in BIMSTEC.

WTO Ministerial Conference
India hosted the WTO Ministerial Conference, in
September 2009, bringing together groups from across the
spectrum of interests and positions in the Doha
negotiations, as an endeavour to give a determined push
to the multilateral trade negotiations under WTO. At
the Conference, there was a unanimous affirmation on
the need to conclude the Doha Round within 2010. There
was a strong re-affirmation that development remains at
the heart of the Doha Round. The participants recognized
that differences subsist on issues and intensifying
negotiations was the first step towards bridging these gaps.

World Intellectual Property Organisation
(WIPO)
Director General, WIPO, Dr. Francis Gurriy visited India
from 9-14 November, 2009. During the visit he was
received by the Prime Minister, Minister for Commerce
& Industry, Minister of Human Resource Development,
Minister of State for External Affairs, Minister of State
for Environment and Forests, Minister of State for
Commerce and Industry and Deputy Chairman, Planning
Commission. The visit was in connection with the Fifth
International Forum on Creativity and Inventions,
International Conference on Traditional Knowledge and
a Round Table on the Entertainment Sector. The events
were hosted by the Department of Industrial Policy and
Promotion, Ministry of Commerce and Industry in
collaboration with the Federation of Indian Chambers of
Commerce and Industry.
Association for South East Asian Nations
(ASEAN)
India’s focus on a strengthened and multi-faceted
relationship with ASEAN is an outcome of the significant

134

Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh with the Heads of States/Governments at
the 4th East Asia Summit (EAS), in Hua Hin, Thailand on 25 October, 2009.

Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh in a group photo with the leaders of the ASEAN before the
7th India-ASEAN Summit, at Hua Hin, in Thailand, on 24 October, 2009.

135

Annual Report 2009 - 2010

changes in the world’s political and economic scenario
since the early 1990s and India’s own march towards
economic liberalisation. India’s search for economic space
has resulted in our ‘Look East’ policy. ASEAN’s economic,
political and strategic importance in the larger Asia-Pacific
Region and its potential to become a major partner of
India in trade and investment is a significant factor in our
policy paradigms. ASEAN’s steady expansion westward
to include Myanmar has also brought it to our land
boundaries. It now provides a land bridge for India to
connect with the Asia-Pacific- centred economic
crosscurrents shaping the 21st century market place.
ASEAN, on its part, seeks access to India’s professional
and technical strengths. Our traditional friendship with
the CLMV (Cambodia, Laos, Vietnam, Myanmar)
countries also makes India a valuable ally for promoting
the Initiative for ASEAN Integration (IAI).
India and ASEAN have convergence in their security
perspectives. We have vital stakes in peace and stability in
the region, including the security of the sea-lanes of the
Indian Ocean for smooth flow of raw materials, merchandise
and energy supplies. Since 1996, India has been an active
participant in the ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF).
The ASEAN-India Trade-in-Goods Agreement was
signed on 13 August, 2009 at ASEAN Economic
Ministers-India Meeting at Bangkok after six years of
intensive negotiations. The agreement will pave way for
tariff reductions to stipulated levels and creation of a
market of over 1.5 billion people in the region. The next
step is for conclusion of negotiations on Trade-in-Services
and Trade-in-Investment Agreements in near future, to
complete the India-ASEAN FTA.
The annual ASEAN Summit with Dialogue Partners and
the East Asia Summit took place in October 2009 in
Thailand. The India-ASEAN Summit and EAS Summit
were held from 24-25 October, 2009 at Cha-am Hua Hin,
Thailand. Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh
announced several new initiatives at the India-ASEAN
Summit to further strengthen and reinforce the growing
India-ASEAN partnership. At the EAS Summit, India
participated in the discussions on the issues of Disaster
Management, Climate Change, Education, Finance,
Energy and Pandemics. Indian proposal for revival of
Nalanda University was prominently focused with the
issue of a Joint Press Statement.

with a wide diversity of languages, cultures and religions
from 18 countries. The Ninth IOR-ARC Council of
Ministers (CoM) Meeting was held in Sana’a, Yemen on
25 June, 2009. Minister of State for External Affairs
Dr. Shashi Tharoor led the Indian delegation for the CoM.
The major outcomes of the Ministerial Meeting were
setting up of the Regional Centre for Science and Transfer
of Technology (RSSTT), Fisheries Support Unit and
Maritime Transport Council. India took over as Vice Chair
from Yemen which became the Chair of IOR-ARC for a
period of two years. India would be taking over as Chair
in 2011.

India, Brazil and South Africa (IBSA)
IBSA, a Forum of three developing country democracies
from three different continents, has become an important
mechanism for strengthening coordination on
international and regional issues, fostering South-South
cooperation to amplify the collective voice of the South
and deepening mutually beneficial trilateral cooperation,
based on common experiences, complementarities and
resources.
The Sixth IBSA Ministerial Meeting was held in
September 2009 in Brasilia. External Affairs Minister
Shri S. M. Krishna led the Indian delegation. The
14th Focal Points Meeting was held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
from 15-16 July, 2009. Several working group meetings in
areas such as Agriculture, Culture, Education,
Environment, Human Settlements, Information Society,
Revenue Administration, Social Development, Trade,
Public Administration and Governance, Transport and
preparatory meeting of the IBSA Women’s Forum were
held during the year.
IBSA undertook projects in Guinea Bissau, Haiti, Burundi,
Laos, Cape Verde, Cambodia and Palestine under IBSA
Facility Fund for Alleviation of Poverty and Hunger
established to enhance activities related to poverty
eradication and the achievements of the Millennium
Development Goals.

Asia Cooperation Dialogue (ACD)

Indian Ocean Rim Association for
Regional Cooperation (IOR-ARC)

ACD is a unique Pan Asian grouping of 31 countries
focusing on economic dialgoue and cooperative projects.
ACD’s goal is to build a united, strong, competitive and
prosperous Asian Community through consolidating
Asia’s strengths and leveraging Asia’s diversity for the
mutual benefit of the region and its peoples.

India is one of the founders and key members of
IOR-ARC. Indian Ocean Rim is a heterogeneous area

The Eighth Asia Cooperation Dialogue (ACD)
Ministerial Meeting was held in Colombo, Sri Lanka, on

136

Multilateral Economic Relations

15 October, 2008. Smt. Preneet Kaur, Minister of State
for External Affairs led the Indian delegation. The theme
of the Meeting was “Global Economic Recovery and
Development Prospects”.
It was agreed that emphasis should be given to cooperation
in the clusters of tourism, trade and transport, which have
the potential to create enhanced people-to-people contact

in the region. 18 June was designated as ‘ACD Day’ to
mark the establishment of ACD.
India would be organizing the Fourth ACD Tourism
Business Forum on 24 March, 2010 and the first meeting
of think-tanks, as part of the Track II process, from
11-12 February, 2010.

137

12

SAARC Division

T

he impetus provided by India during the 14th SAARC
Summit hosted in New Delhi in April 2007, has been
largely responsible for the gradual and irreversible
transition of SAARC from declaratory to implementation
phase. This phenomenon has been further complemented
by India’s commitment to discharge its responsibilities in
an asymmetric and non-reciprocal manner, coupled with
the increasing needs of other member states to look to
SAARC for solutions for their domestic developmental
challenges.

The SAARC region, in recent times, has been witnessing
increasing cooperation on security issues. The 31st Session
of the SAARC Council of Ministers (Colombo,
27-28 February, 2009) adopted the ‘SAARC Ministerial
Declaration on Cooperation in Combating Terrorism’ to forge
deeper collaboration to address the growing menace of
terrorism in the region. The Declaration states that
Member States will ensure that their respective territories
are not used for terrorist training camps or organization
of terrorist acts. The SAARC Terrorist Offences
Monitoring Desk (STOMD) and SAARC Drug Offences
Monitoring Desk (SDOMD) based in Sri Lanka will
enable exchange of information on terrorist and drug
related cases. The infrastructure for the desks is being
strengthened with financial assistance from the
Government of India. Similarly, an internet based network
among police authorities of Member States is being set
up by India for exchange of open/unclassified information.
In another significant achievement, the Standard Operating
Protocol on Trafficking of Women & Children has also been
finalized at the Third Meeting of the Regional Task Force
to Implement the SAARC Conventions relating to
Trafficking in Women & Children and Promotion of
Child Welfare in South Asia held in Shimla from
28-29 May, 2009.
The most visible manifestation of this new dynamism in
SAARC has been the early operationalization of the
SAARC Development Fund (SDF), pending establishment
of its permanent premises in Bhutan in 2010. India is the
only SAARC Member State to have transferred its full
commitment of US$ 189.9 million to the SDF. Two
regional projects are currently being implemented under

the aegis of the SDF with technical assistance from
India - project on women’s empowerment and maternal
and child health care. The third project proposed by India
on providing bio-mass cooking stoves and solar lanterns
is also on the anvil.
Cooperation in the field of higher education is set to touch
a new horizon with the establishment of the South Asian
University (SAU) in New Delhi in the near future. The
prestigious project is on schedule with the establishment
of the Project Office, finalization of its international legal
contours by the South Asian University Act 2008, grant
of privileges and immunities as per UN Immunities and
Privileges Act 1947 and funding as per “Principles of
Regional Centres”. The total cost of establishing the SAU
and to make it fully functional as per the agreed parameters
will be US$ 308.91 million. India will be contributing
US$ 229.11 million to the project which will include
bearing 100% of the capital cost. The University is
expected to be fully established by 2015.
In a bid to preserve the rich textile and handicraft
traditions of the South Asian region, at the 13th SAARC
Summit held in Dhaka, in November 2005, Prime Minister
had proposed the establishment of a SAARC Museum of
Textiles and Handicrafts in New Delhi. The Museum would
be an Intergovernmental Body on the lines of the other
SAARC Regional Centres and will be housed in Delhi
Haat, Pitampura. The Second Inter governmental
Steering Committee Meeting to finalize the legal and
financial contours of the proposed SAARC Museum was
hosted in New Delhi from 29-30 September, 2009.
Taking forward the theme of creating greater physical
connectivity, the Second Meeting of the Transport
Ministers held in Colombo (24-25 July, 2009) decided to
convene a Special Meeting of the Expert Group to
negotiate the two Draft Regional Agreements on Motor
Vehicles and Railways (proposed by India) in a time-bound
manner, preferably to finalize them for signing at the
16th SAARC Summit. The ferry service between India
and Sri Lanka through the Colombo-Cochin route and
direct air links between New Delhi- Male are expected to
be resumed shortly. Member States have agreed to hold

138

SAARC Division

trilateral consultations in order to operationalize the
Akhaura-Agartala Corridor.
Commendable progress has taken place for the full
implementation of South Asian Free Trade Agreement
(SAFTA) in letter and spirit. Member states have
appreciated India’s gesture to give zero duty access to
LDCs from 1 January, 2008, one year ahead of target date
and unilateral reduction of its Negative List with respect
to LDCs from 744 to 480. India continues to revise its
Sensitive Lists and, as of now, has 740 items outside its
ambit for the LDCs and 868 for the Non-LDCs. A draft
Agreement on Trade in Services is also in final stages of
negotiation. Taking note of the effects of the global
recession on SAARC economies, the 31st Session of the
SAARC Council of Ministers held in Colombo
(27-28 February, 2009) adopted the ‘SAARC Ministerial
Statement on Global Economic Crisis’ calling for a
coordinated regional approach to address the crisis. It was
decided that mechanisms must be developed for creating
bilateral arrangements in the region to address short-term
liquidity difficulties. It underlined the need for global
initiatives to protect the interests of developing
economies, that should include a moratorium on the
repayment of debt to multilateral aid agencies and other
development partners.
India also hosted two crucial SAARC Meetings. The
eighth Meeting of the SAARC Environment Ministers
was held in New Delhi from 19-21 October, 2009.
Welcoming the proposal of the Government of Bhutan to
adopt Climate Change as the theme of the 16th SAARC
Summit in April 2010, the Meeting issued the Delhi
Statement on Environment, directing Member States to
identify regional projects based on the concept papers
circulated by India on Biodiversity, Solid Waste
Management etc. and discussed the establishment of
50 weather stations for advance storm warning systems
in SAARC Member States with the help of Government
of India, starting with Nepal, Bhutan and Bangladesh.
The draft Regional Environment Treaty was also
circulated by India for consideration of Member States.
The growing synergies in SAARC also found expression
in a “cooperative position on Climate Change” presented on
behalf of Member States of SAARC to the UNFCCC
Secretariat before the Copenhagen Summit.
SAARC Cabinet Secretaries from all Member States met
in New Delhi from 13-14 November, 2009 and had a call
on the Prime Minister. The Meeting exchanged

information and best practices on areas where significant
administrative reform initiatives had taken place within
SAARC with the aim of accelerating the process of
eradication of poverty in the region. Member States noted
with appreciation the presentation by India of two
Concept Papers on Performance Management and
Evaluation and Sharing of Best Practices in Information
Technology and expressed the desire for enhanced
cooperation.
The strengthening of regional cooperation was pursued
through Meetings of other SAARC mechanisms viz the
Fifth SAARC Intergovernmental Steering Committee on
Establishment of the SAU (Delhi, 7-9 January, 2010) and
the Meeting to Negotiate the Draft SAARC Treaty on
Environment (Delhi, 18-19 January, 2010). Movement
towards greater trade liberalization is expected to be
achieved during the upcoming Meeting to finalize the
Draft SAARC Agreement on Trade in Services scheduled
to be held in Kathmandu from 8-10 February, 2010. The
resolve of the Member States to operationalize better
transport connectivity in the region will be pursued in
the First Expert Group Meeting to negotiate the SAARC
Regional Agreements on Motor Vehicles and Railways to
be held in Kathmandu from 1-2 February, 2010. The issue
of funding development projects in the region will be taken
up at the Seventh Meeting of the Governing Board of the
SDF to be held in Kathmandu from 3-5 February, 2010.
Furthermore, the Third Meeting of the SAARC Home
Ministers and its preceding meetings is being hosted in
Islamabad from 16-20 February, 2010 and will deal with
the entire gamut of police cooperation, combating drug
trafficking, immigration and other security related issues.
People-to-people activities in the SAARC region, have
also witnessed a phenomenal increase. India hosted the
hugely successful Second SAARC Bands Festival in New
Delhi, SAARC Festival of Literature in Agra and the
Second SAARC Folklore Festival in Chandigarh.
Furthermore, India has funded projects in the areas of
telemedicine, tele-education, environment friendly
projects such as solar rural electrification, rainwater
harvesting, seed testing laboratories and shuttle breeding
of pulses using a hub-and-spoke approach, with India as
the hub and member states as spokes. The projects are in
various stages of implementation. With increasing
economic interdependence among Member States,
therefore, SAARC will undoubtedly metamorphose into
the core vehicle for enhanced economic cooperation in
South Asia.

139

13

Technical & Economic Cooperation and
Development Partnership

T

he Indian Technical and Economic Cooperation
(ITEC) Programme and the Special Commonwealth
Assistance for Africa Programme (SCAAP), centred on
the sharing of experiences, transfer of technology and
capacity building, formed an important component of
India’s development partnership and cooperation with the
developing world. The usefulness and relevance of these
cooperative interactions in different countries was
reflected in the increasing number of participants in the
ITEC programme which has acquired a brand name in
the developing world. Starting on a modest scale in 1964,
ITEC has grown over the years and is today a major
component and dynamic part of India’s bilateral assistance
programme manifesting itself in diverse areas of
cooperation. It is demand-driven and response-oriented.
There are 158 ITEC/SCAAP partner countries (list at
Appendix-XIV).

ITEC and SCAAP continue to draw large numbers of
participants to the training courses conducted by
institutions in India, both Government and in the private
sector, under the civilian and defence training
programmes. The existing ITEC website was re-designed
and activated at new address: itec.mea.gov.in. It is now
more user-friendly and specifically targeted to the needs
of ITEC participants in terms of making it easier for them
to access details relating to empanelled institutions and
approved courses as well as to download forms, etc. A
brochure - an annual compendium of ITEC/SCAAP
courses and the training institutions - was brought out as
a reference document for both participating Governments
from 158 ITEC/SCAAP partner countries as well as
individual candidates interested in the courses. Alumni
networks have been encouraged including through the
annual ‘ITEC Day’ functions organized in Missions abroad.

Civilian Training Programme
Around 5000 civilian training slots were allotted during
2009-10 to 158 developing countries in areas of interest
and advantage to them. The civilian training programme,
fully sponsored by the Government of India with
42 institutions on the panel, conducted around 200
courses, primarily short-term, for working professionals

on a wide and diverse range of skills and disciplines. The
most sought after courses were in the field of Information
Technology and English language. Training was imparted
to Government officials in areas such as finance &
accounts, audit, banking, education, planning &
administration, parliamentary studies, crime records, etc.
Others availed of training facilities in technical/specialized
courses such as textiles, rural electrification, tool design
and ophthalmologic equipment. In addition, general
courses pertaining to rural development, SMEs and
entrepreneurship development also attracted many
participants. (List of institutions offering civilian training
courses under ITEC and SCAAP programmes of the
Ministry of External Affairs is at Appendix-XV).
The ITEC Programme is essentially bilateral. However,
in recent years the scope of ITEC’s activities has increased
and it has also been associated with regional and
multilateral organisations. These organisations and
groupings include the Association of South East Asia
Nations (ASEAN), G-15, Bay of Bengal Initiative for
Multi Sectorial Technical and Economic Cooperation
(BIMSTEC), Mekong Ganga Cooperation (MGC),
African Union (AU), Afro-Asian Rural Development
Organization (AARDO), Pan African Parliament,
Caribbean
Community
(CARICOM),
the
Commonwealth and World Trade Organisation (WTO).
As a follow up to the India-Africa Forum Summit held in
New Delhi in 2008 and in response to requests received
from ITEC partner countries, the following special courses
were conducted during the year: (i) Special Training-cumEnglish Proficiency Course for Sri Lankan Teachers; (ii)
Special Course for Afghanistan on ‘International
Programme on Rural Development, Management & Good
Governance’; (iii) Special Course for Africa on ‘Mineral
Exploration ’; (iv) Special Course for Africa on ‘Remote
Sensing and Digital Image Processing’; (v) Special Course
on ‘Narcotics Dog Training’ for Ghana; (vi) Special Course
on ‘Solar Energy Technology and Applications’;
(vii) Special Course for Namibia - Orientation Course
for Geologists-Zawar Module; (viii) Special Course
titled ‘Leadership Programme for Post Masters and
Managers’ for members of Pan-African Postal Union;

140

Technical & Economic Cooperation and Development Partnership

(ix) International Training Programme on ‘Wind Turbine
Technology and Applications’ and (x) Special Course for
Africa on ‘Geographic Information System’.

Defence Training
Growing interest in defence training was evident with the
three wings of the Defence Services, i.e. Army, Navy and
Air Force accepting 797 officers/trainees in various
defence training institutions, showing an increase from
757 participants in the previous year. The courses were
general and specialized in nature and included security
and strategic studies, defence management, electronics,
mechanical engineering, marine hydrography, counterinsurgency and jungle warfare as also foundation courses
for young officers in the three services. Applications to
the premier defence courses at the National Defence
College (NDC), New Delhi, and the Defence Services
Staff College (DSSC), Wellington, were oversubscribed
and saw officers from developed countries also attending
on a self-financing basis. The increasing interaction attests
to the importance attached to defence training in India
by developing and developed countries.

Deputation of Experts
At the request of Governments and international
organizations, 40 experts in the civilian and defence fields
were on deputation to advise and provide expertise in
areas including information technology, auditing, legal
expertise, diverse agricultural fields, pharmacology,
statistics and demography, public administration and
textiles. The services of defence teams were availed of by
Laos, Lesotho, Seychelles, Zambia, Ethiopia and Mongolia
in training and advisory capacities.
Study Tour
(i) At the request of Ethiopia, two experts from the
Department of Central Board of Excise & Customs
were deputed to Ethiopia to help Ethiopian Revenue
and Customs Authority (ECRA) in development of
customs value data base.
(ii) At the request of Kenya, a three member Kenyan
delegation visited India to study the system of
training of civil servants.
(iii) On the request of Indonesian Government, one
expert in the field of water management from IIT,
Roorkee visited Indonesia.

and Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs), civil
construction and vocational training. The focus of the
projects under the bilateral cooperation programme was
on setting up the requisite physical infrastructure and
capacity building to ensure long-term sustainability of the
projects under way.
The main projects under implementation included the
following
(i)

A project for conservation and restoration of Vat
Phou temple complex in Laos has commenced. A
team from Archeological Survey of India has set up
their camp at the site for implementing the project.

(ii) A project to strengthen capacity building in
Information Technology sector in Laos has made
considerable progress and is nearing completion.
(iii) A project on setting up of a Vocational Training
Centre at Aceh, Indonesia was awarded to HMT(I)
Limited and implementation of the project has
commenced.
(iv) A feasibility study was conducted for establishment
of an administrative staff college at Aceh, Indonesia.
The feasibility report received from Administrative
Staff College of India has been presented to the
Indonesian authorities.
(v)

Information Technology (IT) training centres in
El Salvador, Honduras and Nicaragua have been set
up and second year training is in progress. These
centres are in their final stage of completion. A
similar IT Centre has been established in Jamaica
and first year training has commenced.
Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) for setting
up IT centres in Ecuador, Costa Rica and Benin have
been signed. These centres aim at capacity building
as also strengthening the IT infrastructure in these
countries.

(vi) A project in the field of Small & Medium Enterprises
(SMEs) in Zimbabwe is at an advanced stage of
completion. Last phase of on-the-job training to
Zimbabwean personnel has commenced.

Feasibility Studies

Development Partnership & Projects
Cooperation

A feasibility study for sewerage water treatment plant in
Antigua & Barbuda conducted by Hyderabad Water
Supply and Sewerage Board has been completed and the
feasibility study report presented to the Government of
Antigua & Barbuda.

A number of bilateral projects were undertaken in 200910 notably in the field of Information Technology (IT)

Several other consultancy services for setting up
infrastructure projects are at various stages of

141

Annual Report 2009 - 2010

implementation, notably the feasibility studies for
construction of a deep water port as well as mining of
coal for production of sponge iron & steel, both in Guyana;
and for setting up a communication network in
Montenegro.

to countries like Lebanon, Bangladesh, Tajikistan,
Myanmar, Burkina Faso, El-Salvador, Guatemala and
Haiti affected by earthquakes or cyclones/floods. Request
for financial assistance from St. Lucia for reconstruction
of a hospital damaged by fire is under implementation.

Aid for Disaster Relief
India rendered relief assistance to countries affected by
natural calamities. Humanitarian assistance was extended

142

Investment and Technology Promotion

Lines of Credit

A

s part of its diplomatic strategy, the Government of
India extends concessional Lines of Credit (LoCs)
to developing countries in Africa, Latin America and Asia.
Aimed at promoting bilateral cooperation, these LoCs are
a form of soft lending that enable the borrowing countries
to undertake projects for infrastructure development and
capacity building.
123 Lines of Credit worth US$ 5.02 billion have been
extended by the Government of India to various
developing countries so far. During the current financial
year, 25 Lines of Credit amounting to US$ 1.03 billion
have been approved up to 22 January, 2010. This includes
LoCs of US$ 492 million to Sri Lanka for railway projects,
LoC of US$ 100 million to Syria for financing the Tishreen
Power Project, US$ 60 million to Belarus for
reconstruction of the Grodno-II Power Plant and
US$ 20 million to Mongolia for IT and livestock
vaccination. The remaining amount has been allocated
to countries in Africa and Latin America including
Angola, Benin, Burkina Faso, Cape Verde, Democratic
Republic of Congo, Eritrea, Ivory Coast, Lesotho, Mali,
Mauritania, Rwanda, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone,
Swaziland, Suriname and Tanzania. Projects approved
include a wide range of sectors such as IT, railways,
agriculture, water supply, electricity generation, industrial
parks, etc.
These LoCs have not only contributed to the socioeconomic development of the recipient countries and
generated considerable amount of goodwill for India, but
also helped project our growing economic strength in
various sectors and enabled Indian companies get project
contracts and orders for supply of goods and services.
Often times, these orders have helped Indian companies
generate additional business on a purely commercial basis.
To help countries which do not have the technical
expertise to undertake feasibility studies for identifying
viable projects under LoCs, an amount of Rs. five crores
has been earmarked for providing consultancy services to
them.
The ITP Division has been working closely with the

14

Department of Economic Affairs, EXIM Bank and Indian
Missions to ensure efficient implementation of the LoCs.
An exercise has also been undertaken to review GoI policy
relating to Lines of Credit with a view to introducing
greater efficiency and transparency.

Investment and Trade Promotion
The ITP Division carried out a detailed study on the
functioning of Commercial Wings abroad with a view to
making them more effective and responsive to the growing
demands of Indian industry and business. Noting that
financial resources acted as a major constraint, it has been
decided to allocate additional funds to the tune of
Rs. 9.09 crores to Indian Missions during 2009-10 based
on the volume of bilateral trade handled by them. These
funds are to be utilized by Commercial Wings to undertake
market expansion activities including market surveys,
seminars, workshops, exhibitions, buyer-seller meets, etc.
Several innovative proposals received from Missions have
been approved under this scheme.
The ITP Division continued to liaise with the Ministries
of Commerce, Finance, Civil Aviation, Shipping, etc. to
provide policy inputs; and RBI, EXIM Bank and
prominent industry organizations like FICCI, CII, etc. to
facilitate foreign investment and trade. It assisted trade
promotion bodies and visiting delegations in their external
interface. Trade and investment issues pertaining to export
of generic drugs, fertilizers and railways concessions were
actively taken-up during this period.
The ITP Division also worked closely with the Department
of Commerce to facilitate proposals from Missions under
the Challenge Fund set up by the Ministry of Commerce
to support their export promotion activities. It participated
in bilateral civil aviation talks conducted by the Ministry
of Civil Aviation including discussions with 17 countries
at the second International Civil Aviation Organization
Negotiations (ICAN) conference in Turkey.
ITP Division assisted CII in organizing the conference on
India-China “Drivers of the Asian Century in a Post Crisis
World” in March 2009. It will also partner with FICCI in
organizing the second India-Arab Investment Projects
Conclave in February 2010.

143

Annual Report 2009 - 2010

The Ministry’s website www.indiainbusiness.nic.in, that
provides comprehensive information on investment and
trade opportunities in various sectors of the Indian
economy as well as updated data on important economic
indicators, was revamped and upgraded with a better
layout to make it more user friendly. An updated edition

of ITP Division’s Annual Publication entitled “IndiaDynamic Business Partner” is under preparation and will
be widely disseminated to all Indian Missions and Posts
abroad. This booklet along with a CD-ROM provides
details of investment opportunities in India, both sectorwise and state-wise, for potential investors.

144

Energy Security

A

n Energy Security unit was first set up within the
ITP Division of the Ministry of External Affairs in
September 2007. Given the country’s increasing
dependence on energy imports and the growing reference
to energy security issues in the international affairs
narrative, it was decided in 2009 to upgrade the Energy
Security unit into a full-fledged division.
This new thematic division provided inputs to articulate
India’s position on energy security matters in various
multilateral fora like the UNGA, G-20, NAM, BRIC,
ASEM, IBSA, East Asian Energy Ministers Meeting,
CICA, Commonwealth, etc. The division played a key
role in the country joining the first-ever global body on
renewable energy sources – International Renewable Energy
Agency (IRENA). The Energy Security division was closely
associated with India’s membership of the International
Partnership for Energy Efficiency and Cooperation
(IPEEC) and also guided our growing engagement with
the world’s biggest energy consumer club - the
International Energy Agency (IEA).

15

As the nodal point in MEA for energy matters, the division
maintained close coordination with the energy line
ministries and facilitated their international engagements
on energy issues. Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas
was assisted in organizing the second India-Africa
Hydrocarbons Conference in December 2009. The
Division continued to coordinate with oil and
infrastructure PSUs through periodic meetings of the
Informal Working Group on Energy Security.
The Energy Security Division coalesced the country’s
various stakeholders on energy security, including the
private sector. An outreach programme was also begun
to involve private sector companies, especially in the
renewable energy sector, by organizing brainstorming
sessions on bio-diesel, ethanol, etc. Advice was extended
to corporates, chambers and think-tanks on energysecurity related matters. Energy Security related seminars
were co-sponsored and papers commissioned on subjects
relating to energy security.

145

16

Policy Planning and Research

T

he main activities of the Policy Planning and
Research Division include processing of Research
Projects and studies relating to foreign policy and global
affairs; preparation/updation of database of think tanks,
research bodies, universities etc. dealing with subjects
related to India’s foreign policy and international affairs;
interaction with the University Grants Commission
(UGC) and its affiliates and the area study centres of
different universities, specializing in research on different
regions of the world; and preparing the draft for Minister/
MoS if and when directed. In addition, the Policy Planning
and Research Division prepares and dispatches Monthly
Summary of important developments of the month, for
the Cabinet and senior officials of Government of India.
The Division also compiles, edits, prints and distributes
MEA’s Annual Report in a time bound manner. The
Report serves as a compendium of India’s relations with
the rest of the world and the views of the Government on
various issues of the international relations. The Division
also collates and compiles materials for "India & Abroad"
chapter of INDIA, published by Publications Division,
Ministry of Information & Broadcasting.
During this period, one of the major activity
of the Division was the organization of Heads of
Missions (HoMs) Conference in August 2009 which was
attended by about 120 Ambassadors and
High Commissioners. The HoMs were addressed by
Vice President Shri Mohammad Hamid Ansari, Prime
Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh, Minister of External
Affairs Shri S. M. Krishna, Finance Minister
Shri Pranab Mukherjee, Commerce Minister
Shri Anand Sharma, Minister of Overseas Indian Affairs
Shri Vayalar Ravi, National Security Advisor
Shri M. K. Narayanan, Deputy Chairman of Planning
Commission, Dr. Montek Singh Aluwalia, MoS for
External Affairs Dr. Shashi Tharoor and MoS for External
Affairs Smt. Preneet Kaur, Special Envoy of Prime Minister
Shri Shyam Saran, Rajya Sabha Member and Chairperson
IIC Smt. Kapila Vatsayan and Foreign Secretary
Smt. Nirupama Rao.
The National Interest Project (NIP) conducted by Indian
Council of Research in International Economic Relations
(ICRIER) has been funded and monitored by the PP&R

Division. The NIP has already been completed and almost
20 papers have been produced on important issues which
have direct bearing on India’s national interest and foreign
policy.
The Policy Planning Division has co-coordinated and
monitored the establishment of the Institute of Foreign
Policy Studies in the Calcutta University which has been
established with the financial assistance of the Ministry
of External Affairs. Its programmes include introduction
of M.Phil courses and undertaking research/projects in
India’s foreign policy with a focus on East Asia and South
Asian countries. The Policy Planning and Research
Division has been mandated together with the MER
Division of the Ministry to prepare a project paper on
IOR-ARC (India Ocean Rim Association for Regional
Cooperation).
During the period, foreign policy consultations were held
with China and Japan. On both occasions, JS [PP&R]
led the Indian delegation.
A list of Seminars, Conferences, meetings and Studies
partly funded by the Policy Planning and Research
Division during the period is given at Appendix-XIII.
The Policy Planning and Research Division also looks after
the work of the Situation Room and Boundary Cell. All
their administrative issues and substantial works are
looked after by the Division. The Division was responsible
for scrutinizing the depiction of India’s external boundaries
in the foreign publications imported into our country and
offered its advice to the Ministries dealing with this matter.
It coordinated the supply of map-sheets to various
government and semi-government offices and research
scholars for use in their official work with the Survey of
India. The Division also dealt with the requests from
research scholars for access to the old records of the
Ministry.

Boundary Cell
The functions of Boundary Cell, established as part of
PP&R division, are enumerated as under:
a)

146

Examine all aspects of India’s external boundaries
and scrutinise map sheets involving international

Policy Planning and Research

boundaries of India in coordination with the Survey
of India, for publication.
b)

Provide cartographic advice and technical support
on border related matters to Territorial Divisions.

c)

Assist in collection, collation and digitization of the
available cartographic strip/Basis maps.

d)

e)

f)

Liaise with Survey of India/State Governments
regarding joint boundary survey work including
maintenance/repairs of boundary pillar and on
reports of any encroachment into Indian Territory
(maintaining database etc.).
Assist in the collection and digitization of
information pertaining to the maritime boundary,
Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) and delineation of
the Continental Shelf.
Scrutinise restricted map sheets in coordination
with the Ministry of the Defence requested by
various Government and semi-Government
Organisations, for the purpose of development work.

g)

Liaise with the Naval Hydrographic Office and
Ministry of Earth Sciences.

h)

Be a repository of all maps/documents/information
pertaining to India’s international borders.

(j)

Scrutinize inaccurate maps published in foreign
magazines, journals and atlases and take necessary
action for getting these maps corrected.

Boundary Cell has participated in various Internal/Interministerial meetings on International Land and Maritime
Boundary of India as given below:
a)

Participated in Inter-ministerial meeting on Baseline
system of India.

b)

Provided inputs for Gazette notification for Baseline
System of India.

c)

Organized lecture for IFS Probationers on
“Surveying and Mapping trends and technologies”
and conducted visit to Boundary Cell and Survey
of India for field duties.

d)

India-Nepal Boundary Technical Level Meeting held
at Dehradun.

e)

Provided Cartographic and Technical Inputs to all
Territorial Divisions on various aspects of
International Boundary (Land and Maritime).

f)

Authentication of location of Gandak Bund Project
in Nepal near India-Nepal International Boundary
for North Division.

g)

Provided comments with relevant inputs to FSO in
response to Directorate General of Central Excise
Intelligence, Ahmadabad Zonal Unit regarding
investigation of survey and exploration activities in

Krishna Godavari Basin to ascertain the basis of
leviability of service tax.
h)

Assam-Nagaland Boundary meetings convened by
MHA and supplied relevant information and maps
to BSM Division.

i)

Attended Government level meeting on IndiaBhutan Boundary talks as part of the Indian
delegation.

j)

Authentication of International Boundary on OSM
and DSM Maps (12 sheets) submitted by SoI
through PP&R Division.

k)

Building database for Boundary Strip Maps covering
the External Boundary of India.

l)

Archival and Digitization of Boundary Strip Maps.

m)

Archival of Topographical Maps in digital and hard
copy form, published by Survey of India covering
International Boundary of India.

Situation Room
General
Situation Room is a multifaceted, multi facility state of
the art complex of the Ministry. Set up in 2007, it has the
requisite communication connectivity and display panels
which would be required for handling any crisis situation.
Besides its primary role as a Crisis Management Cell of
the Ministry, the complex has been effectively utilized by
all Divisions for various purposes such as presentations &
conferences including telephone /video conferences etc.
Role
The role of Situation Room is as given below:
(a)

Act as a multi facility complex facilitating
conferences, presentations, periodic briefings, video/
telephone conferences with Head of Missions,
discussions on maps and images as required by
various Divisions of the Ministry.

(b)

Act as a Crisis Management Cell (Control Room)
in case of crisis.

Activities During the Period of the Report
Establishment of Video Conferencing Facility in Missions.
In consonance with the vision of Foreign Secretary to add
a new dimension of communication in the Ministry, video
conferencing facility is being established in selected
Missions in a phased manner. As part of Phase I of the
project, facility was installed in six Missions in 2008.
During the period of this report, Phase II of the project
was completed and work on Phase III was initiated. Process
of installing this facility in Missions at Thimphu, Vienna,
Kathmandu and Kabul is under progress. The facility has
been installed in following Missions till date:

147

Annual Report 2009 - 2010

Sl. No.

Mission

Installed in Month

Phase I
1.

Embassy of India, Paris

June 2008

2.

Embassy of India, Brussels

June 2008

3.

High Commission of India, London

June 2008

4.

High Commission of India, Dhaka

November 2008

5.

High Commission of India, Colombo

November 2008

6.

Embassy of India, Beijing

December 2008

Phase II
7.

PMI to the UN, New York

April 2009

8.

Embassy of India, Washington

April 2009

9.

Embassy of India, Moscow

June 2009

10.

High Commission of India, Male

June 2009

11.

PMI to the UN, Geneva

June 2009

12.

CGI Shanghai

June 2009

Phase III

148

Protocol

T

here were 95 visits (73 incoming and 22 outgoing)
during the April 2009-March 2010 period at the level
of Head of State, Vice President, Head of Government
and Foreign Minister. Three countries (Burundi, Gambia
and Georgia) opened resident missions during this period
bringing the total number of resident missions in
New Delhi to 140. Opening of new Consulates General
in Mumbai were approved for Ethiopia and New Zealand
in 2009. Five countries got permission to open trade offices
and nineteen were granted permission to open honorary
consulates in Indian metro cities. Honorary Consul of

17

Hungary in Mumbai and Honorary Consul of Ireland in
Bengaluru
were
upgraded
to
Honorary
Consul Generals in January and February 2010
respectively. 157 new posts were created by foreign
missions and international organisations in the period
April 2009- February 2010. The keen interest evinced in
India as witnessed in the large numbers of VVIP visits;
opening of new missions, consulates, and trade offices; as
well as the creation of numerous additional posts by
diplomatic missions – was reflective of India’s active and
multifaceted engagement with the world.

State Visits by Head of State/Government and Equivalent Level
S.No.

Dignitary

Dates

2009
1

H.E. Mr. Hifikepunye Pohamba, President of Namibia

30 August-3 September

2

H.E. Mr. Tsakhiagiin Elbegdorj, President of Mongolia

13-16 September

3

H.E. Dr. Cristina Fernandez de Kirchner, President of Argentina

4

H.M. Jigme Khesar Namgyel Wangchuk, King of Bhutan

13-15 October
21-26 December

2010
1

H.E. Ms. Sheikh Hasina, Prime Minister of Bangladesh

10-14 January 10-14

2

H.E. Dr. Olafur Ragnar Grimsson, President of Iceland

11-17 January

3

H.E. Dato Sri Mohd Najib Tun Abdul Razak, Prime Minsiter of Malaysia

19-23 January

4

H.E. Mr. Lee Myung-bak, President of Republic of Korea

24-27 January

5

H.E. Mr. Horst Kohler, President of Germany

1-7 February

6

H.E. Mr. Abdullah Gul, President of Turkey

7-12 February

7

H.E. Dr. Ram Baran Yadav, President of Nepal

8

H.E. Mr. Vladimir Putin, Prime Minister of Russian Federation

15-18 February
12 March

Official/Working visits by Head of State/Government/Vice President and Equivalent Level
2009
1

H.E. Lyonchen Jigmi Y. Thinley, Prime Minister of Bhutan

28 June-3 July

2

H.E. Mr. Madhav Kumar Nepal, Prime Minister of Nepal

18-22 August

149

Annual Report 2009 - 2010

3

H.E. Mr. Lars Lokke Rasmussen, Prime Minsiter of Denmark

11-12 September

4

H.E. Madam Nguyen Thi Doan, Vice President of Vietnam

5

H.M. King George Tupou, King of Tonga

11-20 September

6

H.E. Mr. Lars Lokke Rasmussen, Prime Minister of Denmark

11-12 September

7

H.E. Mr. Mizengo K Pinda, Prime Minister of the United Republic of Tanzania

13-17 September

8

H.E. Mr. Fredrik Reinfeldt, Prime Minsiter of Sweden – India EU Summit

5-7 November

9

H.E. Mr. Jose Manuel Barroso, President of European Commission – India EU Summit

6-8 November

10

H.E. Mr. Kevin Rudd, Prime Minsiter of Australia

11-13 November

11

H.R.H. Prince Felipe of Austurias, Crown Prince of Spain

10-12 November

12

H.E. Mr. Stephen Harper, Prime Minsiter of Canada

15-18 November

13

H.E. Mr. Yukio Hatoyama, Prime Minsiter of Japan

27-29 December

30 September-4 October

2010
1

H.E. Mr. Mahmoud Abbas, President of Palestinian National Authority

11-12 February

2

H.E. Dr. Mohammed Waheed Hassan, Vice President of Maldives

19-28 February

3

H.R.H. Prince Philippe, Crown Prince of Belgium

22-26 March

Official Visits by Foreign Minister and Equivalent Level
2009
1

H.H. Sheikh Abdullah Bin Zayed Al Nahyan, Foreign Minister of UAE

11-12 June

2

H.E. Mr. Yu Myung-hwan, Minister of Foreign Affairs of Republic of Korea

22-24 June

3

H.E. Hillary Rodham Clinton, Secretary of State, USA

17-21 July

4

H.E. Samuel T Abal, Minister of Foreign Affairs of Papua New Guinea

23-29 July

5

H.E. Dr. Rangin Dadfar Spanta, Minister of Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan

25-28 July

6

H.E. Dr. Ahmed Shaheed, Minister of Foreign Affairs, of Maldives

27-30 July

7

H.E. Mr Dai Bingguo, SR of China

8

H.E. Ms. Sujata Koirala, FM of Nepal

9

H.E. Dr. Dipu Moni, Foreign Minister of Bangladesh

10

H.E. Mr. Stephen Smith, Minister of Foreign Affairs of Australia

12-16 October

11

H.E. Mr. Alexis Thambwe Mwamba, Foreign Minister of Congo

27-30 October

12

H.E. Mr. Sergey Sobyanin, Deputy Chairman of the Government of Russian Federation

8-12 November

13

H.E. Mr. Jaime Bermudez Merizalde, Foreign Minister of Colombia

9-11 November

14

H.E. Ms. Maite Nkoana Mashabane, Minister for
International Relations of South Africa

6-9 August
10-14 August

150

7-10 September

12-16 November

Protocol

15

H.E. Mr. Manocheher Mottaki, Minister of Foreign Affairs of Iran

16-17 November

16

H.E. Mr. Jose Brito, Minister of Foreign Affairs of Cape Verde

18-22 November

17

H.E. Mr. Carlos Tini, Foreign Minister of Sao Tome and Principe

18

H.E. Mr. Vygaudas Usackas, Foreign Minister of Lithuania

19

H.E. Mr. Lee Kuan Yew, Minister Mentor of Singapore

14-17 December

20

H.E. Mr. Kasit Piromya, Foreign Minister of Thailand

22-27 December

29 November-2 December
2-5 December

2010
1

H.E. Dr. Tonia Borg, Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign Minister of Malta

6-11 January

2

H.E. Dr. Peter Baltazs, Foreign Minister of Hungary

3

H.E. Lyonpo Ugyen Tshering, Foreign Minister of Bhutan

27 January-1 February

4

H.E. Dr. Thong Loun Sisoulith, Foreign Minister and
DPM of People’s Democratic Republic of Lao

31 January-3 February

17-21 January

5

H.E. Shaikh Khalid Bin Ahmed Al-Khalifa, Foreign Minister of Bahrain

12 February

6

H.E. Sergei S. Sobyanin, Deputy Prime Minister of Russia

15 February

7

H.E. Mr. Jonas Gahr Store, Foreign Minister of Norway

8

H.E. Dr. N. Hassan Wirajuda, Foreign Minister of Indonesia

2 March
24 March

Private/Transit visit of Heads of State/Government/Vice President and First Ladies and Equivalent
Level/FM
2009
1

H.R.H. Maha Vajiralongkorn, Crown Prince of Thailand

30 May, Mumbai

2

H.R.H. Maha Vajiralongkorn, Crown Prince of Thailand

30 June, Mumbai

3

H.E. Mr. Kevin Rudd, Prime Minister of Australia

12 July, Chennai

4

H.R.H. Maha Vajiralongkorn, Crown Prince of Thailand

5

H.E. Mr. Aneerudh Jugnauth, President of Mauritius

15 August, Mumbai
29 November-9 December

2010
1

H.E. Mr. James Alix Michel, President of Seychelles

2

H.M. Ashi Dorji Wangmo Wangchuck, Queen Mother of Bhutan

3

H.E. Mr. Mohammed Nasheed, President of Maldives

4

H.R.H. Maha Vajiralongkorn, Crown Prince of Thailand

5

H.E. Mr. Danilo Türk,President of the Republic of Slovenia for DSDS

4-7 February

6

H.E. Mr. Anote Tong,President of the Republic of Kiribati for DSDS

4-7 February

7

H.E. Mr. Jigmi Yoser Thinley, Prime Minister of Bhutan for DSDS

4-7 February

8

H.E. Mr. Matti Vanhanen, Prime Minister of Finland for DSDS

4-7 February

151

8-11 January, Chennai
18-25 January
22-24 January, Chennai
21 January, Mumbai

Annual Report 2009 - 2010

9

H.E. Mr. George Papandreou, Prime Minister of the Hellenic Republic of Greece for DSDS

4-5 February

10

H.E. Mr. Jens Stoltenberg,Prime Minister of Norway for DSDS

4-7 February

11

H.E. Dr. Ahmed Rashid Beebeejaun, G.C.S.K., Deputy Prime Minister &
Minister of Renewable Energy and Public Utilities, Republic of Mauritius for DSDS

4-7 February

H.E. Jean Charest, Premier of Quebec (Canada) for DSDS

4-7 February

12

Visits Abroad of President/Vice President/Prime Minister of India
2009
1

Vice President to Kuwait

6-8 April

2

President to Spain and Poland

20-27 April

3

Vice President to South Africa

8-10 May

4

Prime Minister to Russian federation for SCO & BRIC

5

Prime Minister to Italy for G-8

6

Prime Minister to France & Egypt for NAM

7

President to Russia & Tajikistan

8

Prime Minister to Pittsburgh – G-20

9

External Affairs Minister to Moscow, Russia and Tashkent, Uzbekistan

20-24 October

10

Prime Minister to Thailand (7th ASEAN-INDIA Summit)

23-25 October

11

President to UK and Cyprus

12

External Affairs Minister to Kabul, Afghanistan

18-19 November

13

External Affairs Minister to Washington, USA

21-25 November

14

Prime Minister to USA & Port of Spain [CHOGM 26-28]

21-28 November

15

External Affairs Minister to Port of Spain, Trinidad & Tobago

26-29 November

16

External Affairs Minister to Nay Pyi Taw, Myanmar

10-11 December

17

Prime Minister to Copenhagen (Climate Summit)

17-18 December

15-17 June
7-11 July
13-17 July
2-8 September
23-27 September

26 October- 1 November

2010
1

Vice President to Zambia, Malawi, Botswana

2

External Affairs Minister to London, UK

3

External Affairs Minister to Kuwait

4

Prime Minister to Saudi Arabia

5

External Affairs Minister to Iran

5-12 January
26-31 January
3-4 February
27 February-1 March
30 March

List of Foreign Ambassadors/High Commissioners who Presentedtheir Credentials during the
Period 1 April 2009 to 31 March 2010
Name

Presentationof Credentials

H.E. Mr. Abdul Azeez Yoosuf
High Commissioner of Maldives

12 June, 2009

H.E. Mr. Felix Badji
High Commissioner of Gambia

12 June, 2009

152

Protocol

H.E. Mr. El Khidir Haroun Ahmed Abdulrazia
Ambassador of Sudan

12 June, 2009

H.E. Mr. Marian Tomasik
Ambassador of Slovak Republic

15 July, 2009

H.E. Mr. Faisal Hassan Trad
Ambassador of Saudi Arabia

15 July, 2009

H.E. Mr. Mohammed Ghali Umar
High Commissioner of Nigeria

15 July, 2009

H.E. Mr. Timothy J. Roemer
Ambassador of U.S.A

11 August, 2009

H.E. Mr. Krit Kraichitti
Ambassador of Thailand

11 August, 2009

H.E. Mr. Ahmad Traiq Karim
High Commissioner of Bangladesh

11 August, 2009

H.E. Mr. Javier Manuel Paulinich Velarde
Ambassador of Peru

24 September, 2009

H.E. Mr. Peter Joseph Noozhumurry Varghese
High Commissioner of Australia

24 September, 2009

H.E. Ms. Nafsika Chr. Krousti
High Commissioner of Cyprus

24 September, 2009

H.E. Ms. Terhi Hakala
Ambassador of Finland

24 September, 2009

H.E. Mr. Janez Premoze
Ambassador of Slovenia

24 September, 2009

H.E. Mr. Adli Shaban Hassan Sadeq
Ambassador of Palestine

24 September, 2009

H.E. Mr. Sami Mohammad S.M. Al-Sulaiman
Ambassador of the State of Kuwait

24 September, 2009

H.E. Mr. Julio De La Guardia Arrocha
Ambassador of Panama

11 November, 2009

H.E. Mr. Genaro Vicente Pappalardo Ayala
Ambassador of Paraguay

11 November, 2009

H.E. Mr. Jovan Mirilovic
Ambassador of Serbia

11 November, 2009

H.E. Mr. Thomas Matussek
Ambassador of Germany

11 November, 2009

H.E. Mr. Gudmundur Eiriksson
Ambassador of Iceland

11 November, 2009

H.E. Mr. Jaime Virgilio Nualart Sanchez
Ambassador of Mexico

20 November, 2009

H.E. Mr. Jose Maria de Silva Vieira Morais
High Commissioner of Mozambique

20 November, 2009

H.E. Mr. Ara Hakobyan
Ambassador of Armenia

20 November, 2009

153

Annual Report 2009 - 2010

H.E. Mr. Alexander Mikhailovich Kadakin
Ambassador of Russia

20 November, 2009

H.E. Mr. Robert Tachie-Menson
High Commissioner of Ghana

20 November, 2009

H.E. Mr. Petar Jovanovski
Ambassador of Macedonia

21 December, 2009

H.E. Mr. Rukma Shumshere J.B. Rana
Ambassador of Nepal

21 December, 2009

H.E. Mr. Prasad Kariyawasam
High Commissioner of Sri Lanka

21 December, 2009

List of the Heads of Missions who left India during the period from 1 April 2009 to 31 March 2010
Name

Date of Departure

H.E. Mr. Bernd Mutzelburg
Ambassador of Germany

28 April, 2009

H.E. Mr. Vuk Zugic
Ambassador of Serbia

1 May, 2009

H.E. Mr. Khalaf Abass Khalaf Al-Foudari
Ambassador of the State of Kuwait

8 May, 2009

H.E. Mr. Liaquat Ali Choudhury
High Commissioner of Bangladesh

13 May, 2009

H.E. Mr. Alexander Ilascik
Ambassador of Slovak Republic

1 June, 2009

H.E. Mr. Osama Musa
Ambassador of the State of Palestine

8 June, 2009

H.E. Mr. Manuel Ernesto Picasso Botto
Ambassador of Peru

25 June, 2009

H.E. Mr. Kemal Muftic
Ambassador of Bosnia and Herzegovina

2 July, 2009

H.E. Mr. Carlos Agostinho Do Rosario
High Commissioner of Mozambique

20 July, 2009

H.E. Mr. Alberto J. Pinzon M.
Ambassador of Panama

30 July, 2009

H.E. Mr. Vyacheslav I. Trubnikov
Ambassador of Russian Federation

31 July, 2009

H.E. Dr. Hynek Kmonicek
Ambassador of Czech Republic

5 August, 2009

H.E. Mr. John Mc Carthy
High Commissioner of Australia

10 August, 2009

H.E. Mr. Ashot Kocharian
Ambassador of Armenia

16 August, 2009

H.E. Mr. Asko Numminen
Ambassador of Finland

19 August, 2009

H.E. Mr. Andreas Zenonos
High Commissioner of Cyprus

31 August, 2009

154

Protocol

H.E. Mr. Raouf Chatty
Ambassador of Tunisia

1 September, 2009

H.E. Mr. Kairat Umarov
Ambassador of Kazakhstan

28 September, 2009

H.E. Mr. C. R. Jayasinghe
High Commissioner of Sri Lanka

30 September, 2009

H.E. Ms. Patricia Figueroa Rodriguez
Ambassador of El Salvador

1 October, 2009

H.E. Dr. Noureddine Bardad-Daidj
Ambassador of Algeria

6 November, 2009

H.E. Mr. Fahd Salim
Ambassador of Syrian Arab Republic

7 December, 2009

H.E. Archbishop Pedro Lopez Quintana
Apostolic Nuncio of Apostolic Nunciature (Ambassador of Holy See)

30 December, 2009

H.E. Dr. Sayed Makhdoom Raheen
Ambassador of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan

15 January, 2010

H.E. Francisco L. Benedicto
Ambassador of Philippines

2 February, 2010

Following Countries Opened their Resident Missions in New Delhi during the Period from
1 April 2009 to 31 January 2010
1

Burundi

2

Gambia

3

Georgia

List of Trade Offices/Consulate Generals/Honorary Consulates of Foreign Countries in India approved
in 2009
Trade Offices Approved in 2009
1

Mexico

Mumbai

2

Canada

Hyderabad, Kolkata, Ahmedabad

3

Greece

Mumbai

4

Indonesia

Chennai

5

Denmark

Ahmedabad

Consulate Generals Approved in 2009
1

Ethiopia

Mumbai

2

New Zealand

Mumbai

Honorary Consulates Approved in 2009
1

Benin

Bengaluru

2

Dominican Republic

Mumbai

3

El Salvador

Mumbai
155

Annual Report 2009 - 2010

4

Ethiopia

Kolkata

5

Equador

Mumbai

6

Finland

7

Gabon

Chennai

8

Latvia

Chennai

9

Lithuania

Mumbai

10

Luxemburg

Kolkata

11

Lao PDR

Kolkata

12

Macedonia

Kolkata

13

Malta

14

Paraguay

15

State of Samoa

16

Seychelles

17

Spain

18

Suriname

Mumbai, Kolkata

19

Mongolia

Bengaluru

Hyderabad

Chennai
Mumbai, Kolkata
New Delhi
Kolkata,Chennai
Bengaluru

Honorary Consul of Hungary in Mumbai upgraded to Honorary Consul General in the Month of January 2010.
Honorary Consul of Ireland in Bengaluru upgraded to Honorary Consul General in February 2010.
Honorary Consul of Hungary in Mumbai upgraded to Honorary Consul General in the Month of January 2010.
Month-wise Details of the Newly Created Posts in Foreign Missions/Posts in India during the Period
from April to January 2010
Month

No. of new posts approved

April 2009

22

May 2009

29

June 2009

12

July 2009

13

August 2009

16

September 2009

14

October 2009

14

November 2009

12

December 2009

10

January 2009

4

February 2010 (upto 22 February, 2010)

11

Total

157

156

Consular, Passport and Visa Services

there are 463 DPCs. The passport applications are
also received through the network of 1096 Speed
Post Centres. One Speed Post Centre was added
during the year at Chavakkad post office, District
Thrissur, Kerala.

Passport Offices

T

here are presently 37 Passport Offices and 15 Passport
Collection Centres in India. All Passport Offices are
computerized and they issue machine-printed and
machine-readable passports as per the guidelines laid
down by the International Civil Aviation Organization.
Passport applications are being scanned and stored
electronically.

(b) Online Applications
Online submission of passport applications has been
introduced in all Passport Offices. The District
Passport Cells referred to above and Speed Post
Centres have also been allowed to file applications
on-line and transfer the data to the Passport offices
which facilitates quicker turnaround in the issuance
of passports.

Passport Services
There has been a significant increase in the number of
passports issued over the years. The growth in the number
of passports issued is enumerated in the table, below:
Year

1979-80 1989-90 1999-2000 2009

No. of
passports
issued in
lakhs

8.51

15.58

25.80

50.28

% increase

-

83 %

66%

94%

18

(c) Infrastructure
During 2009, Passport office at Bhubaneshwar
shifted to newly constructed Government owned
building. Construction is nearing completion in
respect of the Passport office at Vishakhapatnam and
the office is expected to shift in 2010. Construction
for the new office at Mumbai is expected to begin
by early 2010.

The number of passports issued in 2008 by the 37 Passport
Offices was 53.10 lakh. However, during the year 2009,
the growth has stabilized, in issue of 50.28 lakh passports.
The total revenue generated through the Passport and Visa
services during the period April 2009-20 January 2010 are
Rs. 685.5 crores & Rs. 924.41 crores respectively.
The Ministry has been taking a number of measures to
make the passport issuance system simpler and speedier
for the comfort and convenience of the public. Some of
the important steps are delineated as under:
(a) Decentralization through District Passport Cells
and Speed Post Centres
With a view to taking the passport issuance and
related services nearer to the doorsteps of the
applicants, District Passport Cells (DPCs) have been
opened at the district level where the office of the
District Magistrate/Superintendent of Police
receives passport applications and after scrutiny and
police verification, forwards them to the concerned
Passport Office for issuance of passports. Currently,

(d) Centralized Printing of Passports
In respect of 140 non-computerized Missions/Posts
abroad, the Ministry has so far issued 170196
passports up to 31 December, 2009 after successfully
implementing the project for centralized printing of
Machine Readable Passports (MRP) at CPV
Division, New Delhi.

RPOs Conference
A conference of 16 Regional Passport Officers from the
Southern and Western regions was convened at
Thiruvananthapuram on 10 August, 2009. Another
conference of 17 Regional Passport Officers from the
Northern, Central and Eastern Regions was organized at
Kolkata on 31 October, 2009. Both the conferences were
chaired by the Minister of State for External Affairs
Dr. Shashi Tharoor.

Public Grievance Redressal Mechanism
Steps have been taken to strengthen the public grievance
redressal mechanism in all Passport Offices. Facilitation

157

Annual Report 2009 - 2010

Counters and Help Desks have also been set up to assist
applicants and also to attend to grievances/complaints
expeditiously. A public grievance redressal mechanism has
also been set up in the CPV Division under the close
supervision of the Joint Secretary (CPV) and Chief
Passport Officer. In addition, all the Passport offices handle
public grievances through the CPGram website of the
Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions.

to modernizing and upgrading the passport/visa issuance
system. These are as follows:
(i)

The President of India Smt. Pratibha Devisingh Patil
launched the issuance of e-passports, also known
as bio-metric passports on 25 June, 2008. All
diplomatic and official passports are now being
issued as e-passports as part of a pilot project. The
evaluation of global PQB applications for
procurement of ICAO compliant electronic
contactless inlays along with its operating systems
for manufacture of e-passports by the India Security
Press Nashik was taken up on 16 October, 2009.
The full roll-out of e-passports is expected by
September 2010.

Passport Adalats
Passport Offices have been holding Passport Adalats
periodically to redress the grievances of passport
applicants. These Adalats have been very useful in
disposing of old cases.

Right to Information Act (RTI)
A Central Public Information Officer and Assistant Public
Information Officers have been appointed in every
Passport office to provide information to applicants under
the RTI. A total of 932 RTI applications and RTI
363 appeals were received and disposed off by the Division.

(ii) Passport Seva Project
On approval of the Union Cabinet in
September 2007, the Ministry embarked on the
prestigious Passport Seva Project. The Project aims
at delivering all passport related services to the
citizens in a timely, transparent, more accessible and
reliable manner.

Website
The website of CPV Division http://passport.gov.in, which
was established in 1999, is being updated from time to
time to make it more user-friendly. It has detailed
information on passports, status enquiry and links to
various passport offices and also has downloadable forms.

The Project envisages setting up of 77 Passport Seva
Kendras (PSKs) across the country where the
non-sovereign functions, involved in the passport
issuance process, such as initial scrutiny of the
application forms, acceptance of fee, scanning of the
documents, taking photos, etc. will be performed
by Tata Consultancy Services Limited, the Service
Provider. The sensitive activities such as granting
will be performed by the Government staff. The
Project is expected to result in the issue of passports
within three days, and where police verification is
required, within three days after completion of the
verification process.

Issuance of Visas
Over the years, the procedure for grant of visas by our
Missions and Posts has been simplified including
computerization of the issuance system. Most Missions
and Posts grant visas either across the counter on the same
day or at the most within 48 hours.

Visa-Waiver Agreements

Launch of the Project at seven Pilot sites under
Regional Passport Office Bangalore and Chandigarh
is expected to be announced after Ministry is
satisfied with testing of the application software
developed by the Service Provider. Later, the Project
will be implemented in three waves to cover the
entire country.

India has Visa-Waiver Agreements with 48 countries by
which diplomatic/official passport holders are exempted
from requirement of visa. During the current year, an
agreement has been signed with Namibia.

Issuance of Diplomatic/Official Passports
CPV Division issued 2659 diplomatic and 22594 official
passports in 2009, as compared to 2775 diplomatic and
22948 official passports in 2008. CPV Division issued
7173 visas to foreign diplomatic and official passports
holders in the year 2009.

Issuance of E-Passports

(iii) Outsourcing of Visa Work

New Projects
The Ministry has embarked on several projects with a view
158

Fifty five Indian Missions/Posts abroad have been
authorized to outsource visa application collection
work. 18 Indian Missions/Posts abroad commenced
the outsourcing working during the year. The total
number of Indian Missions/Posts abroad which have
outsourced the visa work now stand at 48.

Consular, Passport and Visa Services

(iv) Launch of Apostille Convention Project
During the year, 317078 personal and educational
documents and 227625 commercial documents were
attested by the Ministry. In addition,
124661 documents were apostilled for use abroad
in the apostilled members’ countries.
(v) Extradition Cases and Legal Assistance
The Ministry has been pursuing actively with various
countries for negotiating bilateral agreements to
provide a legal and institutional framework to
combat international terrorism, organized crime
including financial frauds and drugs trafficking.
These consular agreements include Treaties on
Extradition, Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal
Matters, Mutual Legal Assistance in Civil and
Commercial Matters and Transfer of Sentenced
Prisoners.

159

During the visit of the President of Kazakhstan to
India, an Extradition Treaty was signed between the
two countries on 24 January, 2009. During the year,
an Indian official delegation visited Morocco,
Azerbaijan and Israel to negotiate Extradition,
Mutual Legal Assistance Treaty in Criminal Matters
and Mutual Legal Assistance Treaty in Civil &
Commercial Matters. Official delegations from
Vietnam and Bosnia and Herzegovina also visited
New Delhi to negotiate Extradition treaty and
Mutual Assistance Treaty in Criminal Matters with
India.
During the year, two persons were extradited from
India to the United Kingdom and United States of
America and four people were extradited from
foreign countries to India. The Government of India
received request for extradition of four persons from
various countries.

19

Administration and Establishment

Administration

T

here are 173 resident Indian Missions and Posts
abroad. In the year reported upon, two new Missions
were opened, namely, Embassy of India, Bamako and
Embassy of India, Niamey. Another Mission in Guatemala
City will be opened shortly.
With a view to streamline the administrative machinery,
constant efforts are on to achieve greater decentralization
of decision-making and simplification of process. The
Rules in respect of Home Leave Fares have further been
liberalized: an additional set of fares has been provided
for officers adjusted in the same Mission for additional
three years also and five more stations have been included
in the list of airports upto which travel under HLFs/
Emergency Passage is permitted. List of Missions enjoying
heating concession during winters has been expanded.
Rules relating to Ex-India Leave have also been liberalized.
With the revision of the Rules regulating various
allowances in the wake of Sixth Pay Commission, norms
have been evolved for equitable application of revised rules
in respect of officials deployed in Indian Missions/Posts
abroad. Cases, where relaxation of Rules was necessary,
have been processed and relief provided to deserving
officials after obtaining approval of the competent
authorities, keeping in view the human and welfare
approach to their problems.
Indents for fresh recruitment were placed on time and
review of deployment of manpower at all levels was
conducted periodically. A comprehensive exercise to
review deployment of manpower in all Missions and Posts
was initiated and is currently underway.
Management of different Cadres in the Ministry was
undertaken through regular Departmental Promotion
Committee meetings and through implementation of
provisions under Modified Assured Career Promotion
Scheme.
The current strength of Ministry is 3414. Details are given
in Appendix I. These personnel are deployed in India and
in 173 Missions/Posts abroad. This includes officials from
Indian Foreign Service (IFS), Indian Foreign Service,

Branch “B”, Interpreters’ Cadre, Legal and Treaties Cadre
and the Library Cadre, but excludes Group ‘D’ and
ex-cadre posts.
Recruitment made to various groups in the Ministry on
1 April-30 November 2009, through methods of Direct
Recruitment (DR), Departmental Promotion (DP) and
Limited Departmental Examination (LDE), including
against reserved vacancies, are given in the table at
Appendix-II.

Gender Issue
Gender equality has been a key element of Ministry’s
overall policy. In keeping with this, equal opportunities
are provided to women officers to take up important
responsibilities. There 52 officers of the rank of Director
and above in the Ministry(23 at headquarters and 29 at
Missions/Posts abroad). Out of 29 lady officers posted
abroad, 17 are HoMs/HoPs.

Persons with Disability
Ensuring adequate opportunity to persons with disability
and to have suitable representation of persons with
disability among its personnel is an important objective
of the Ministry. Towards this goal, the Ministry has
identified posts suitable for appointments of persons with
disability, including in Indian Foreign Service.

Establishment Division
The charge of the Establishment Division primarily
includes renting and maintenance of properties, fixation
of foreign allowance and representational grant, purchase
supply and maintenance of office equipment, furniture
and official vehicles, supply of Object d’ Arts, management
and maintenance of MEA housing complexes and hostels,
maintenance of Toshakhana and purchase and supply of
stationery. During the year, new initiatives were taken to
streamline the rules, regulations and procedures,
governing some of these issues in order to make them
simple and transparent.
Annual review of the foreign allowance was undertaken
under the indexation scheme by a joint team of the

160

Administration and Establishment

Ministry of External Affairs and the Ministry of Finance.
For the first time, foreign compensatory allowance was
introduced for the non-Representational Officers deputed
abroad under various bilateral and other programmes.
Property Team visited Melbourne and Port Moresby to
improve the conditions of our Missions in these places by
relocating them to larger and better locations.
As part of the inspection of Indian Missions, our Missions
in Lisbon, Georgetown, Caracas and Bogotá were
inspected by a high level team of inspectors. Their reports
have helped considerably in streamlining the functional
as well as administrative issues in these Missions. Follow
up actions were taken on the reports of inspections
undertaken during the last financial year.
Renovation of External Affairs hostel at Gole Market has
been completed. B&C Blocks of the Hostel at Kasturba
Gandhi Marg have been handed over to NBCC for
renovation. As a result, considerable improvements have
taken place in the living conditions in these hostels. In
K. G. Marg Hostel, a newly built block of six suites, to be
used by visiting Heads of Mission, has been made
functional. Repair and renovation works in MEA pool
accommodation in Pushp Vihar, has been completed. With
the improvement in the living conditions in the Housing
Complex, Dwarka, the occupancy rate has gone past 93%.
Chanakyapuri Housing Complex of MEA became
functional from March 2009. This has considerably helped
the Ministry in addressing the housing needs of its officers.
A system of annual physical verification of Od’A items
was introduced to increase accountability. The exercise
initiated for digitalization of Od’A items in the Ministry
is nearing completion. CCTV was installed to cover all
rooms where Od’A items are stored/handled. Complete
physical verification of all items in Toshakhana was
undertaken.
Delegated powers of Missions for repair and maintenance
of official vehicles have been enhanced to reduce
unnecessary references to the Ministry. Satellite phones
have been provided to selected missions to ensure smooth
communication during emergency situations. Armoured
vehicles were supplied to selected high risk countries to
provide protection against security threats.
The Division also introduced a new system for better
maintenance of Government as well as rented properties
abroad to avoid unnecessary litigation and financial loss
to the Government. New policy guidelines on these issues
were issued to all Missions and Posts. Rental ceilings for
several Missions were revised to facilitate better
housing.

Further steps were taken at Headquarters to improve
cleanliness and maintenance of Government Offices,
particularly South Block, Akbar Bhawan and Patiala
House. Steps were also taken to further streamline the
purchase and maintenance of office equipments for all
MEA offices.

Projects Division
Projects Division is responsible for construction of
properties and purchase of built-up properties in India
and abroad for use of Ministry of External Affairs for its
offices and residences for employees. Proposals relating
to repairs/renovation of Government owned properties
in stations abroad are also handled by the Projects
Division. As of now, Government owns 80 Chancery
Buildings in 77 stations abroad, residences for Heads of
Missions/Posts in 91 stations abroad and 635 residences
for officers/staff in 47 stations abroad. In addition,
government also owns property for Cultural Centres in
two stations and a Liaison Office in one station. Currently
53 construction projects including major renovation/
re-development projects are at different stages of
implementation.
Amongst projects abroad, construction work for the
Indian Embassy Complex in Muscat and Tokyo (Embassy
Residence and other Residences) have been completed.
Construction on major projects such as Chancery and/or
Residences in Kabul, Kathmandu, Beijing, London,
Islamabad, Singapore and Budapest are making progress.
Projects in Dhaka, Brasilia, Tashkent and Warsaw are
likely to go into construction phase in the next few
months. Renovation work is in progress at Beirut, Brussels
and Dublin. Renovation projects in Damascus and Paris
are likely to be awarded in the next few months.
Built-up properties have been purchased for Embassy
Residence in Hamburg and Dublin. The Ministry is
making vigorous efforts to acquire built-up properties in
high-rental stations. Major proposals under process for
purchase of built-up properties include Chancery in Hong
Kong and Rabat, Embassy Residences in Dubai,
Birmingham, Paramaribo, Sao Paulo and Vancouver and
Cultural Centres in Sao Paulo, Paris and Washington. In
addition, a number of purchase proposals from different
Indian Missions/Posts are also under consideration. MoU
has been signed for exchange of properties between
Vietnam and India. After evaluation of two buildings for
Chancery and Embassy Residence in Hanoi, these will be
exchanged for a plot of land in Delhi for Embassy of
Vietnam.
Amongst projects in India, construction work for
Jawaharlal Nehru Bhavan, the future Headquarters of the

161

Annual Report 2009 - 2010

Ministry of External Affairs, is in progress and likely to be
completed in June 2010. The Chanakyapuri Residential
Complex for officers of the Ministry of External Affairs,
the Transit Accommodation project at Canning Lane and
the Foreign Service Institute Complex in New Delhi have
been completed.
The work in AALCO Complex being built in New Delhi
for the Asian African Legal Consultative Organization
and ICCR Cultural Centre, Kolkata has also been
completed.
Sale of surplus properties at Lagos and Dublin are also
under process in the Ministry.
An allocation of Rs. 400 crores has been made under
Capital Outlay during 2009-2010. Budget estimates for
2010-2011 have been kept at Rs. 683.64 crores, to provide
for a number of projects expected to go into construction
phase in the next financial year.

Welfare Division
Welfare Division deals with all matters relating to general
welfare of serving officers and members of staff of the
Ministry and in Missions abroad. Specifically, this include
giving of emergency first aid, transmission of telegraphic
messages in respect of deceased personnel or cases of
death.
(i)

Educational Matters
Welfare Division facilitates admission of Ministry of
External Affairs children in Kendriya Vidyalayas
against 60 seats allotted to this Ministry by Kendriya
Vidyalaya Sangathan. Welfare Division also assisted
children of the officials of the Ministry at
Headquarters in securing admission in colleges. Also
Welfare Division has processed applications for
admission in Medical/Engineering Courses. In
2009-2010 students were selected from about
15 applications for admission to five Medical Degree
Courses and from 85 applications 52 children were
accorded admission in Engineering courses.

(ii) Staff Benefit Fund
Welfare Division operates a staff Benefit Fund
formed over the years by contributions from officers
and members of staff of the Ministry. This is mainly
used to give financial assistance of Rs.15,000 per
death case to meet the funeral expenses in the case
of death of members of staff of MEA. On the
recommendation of Welfare Division External
Affairs Spouses Association (EASA) presented
cheques amounting to Rs. 10,000-Rs.20,000

respectively to each of the dependents of deceased
employees of the Ministry of External Affairs.
(iii) Compassionate Appointment
Whenever a member of the staff passes away, Welfare
Division examines the financial status of the
surviving family members and examines if spouse or
any children of the deceased person is educationally
qualified to be recruited in any Group ‘C’ or Group
‘D’ posts. A list of such persons is maintained in the
Welfare Division strictly on the basis of financial
position of the family.
(iv) Grant In-Aid
Welfare Division controls Grant in-Aid to all Indian
Missions abroad and to all Regional Passport Offices
in India for recreation facilities and sports activities.
The Division also arranges and financially supports
inter-Ministry sports activities.
(v) Family Disputes
Though rare, Welfare Division extends its help in
settlement of family disputes by listening to their
grievances, differences, complaints and consoling
them to continue a reasonably happy family life.
(vi) Flag Days
Welfare Division arranged for celebration of different
Flag Days like Red Cross Day, Communal Harmony
Day, Armed Forces Day and collected funds for these
organizations.
(vii) Canteens
Welfare Division administered MEA Departmental
Canteens located in Akbar Bhawan, South Block
and Patiala House. As usual canteens provided
quality products and professional services to the
officers and staff of the Ministry. In addition,
Canteens were also able to provide excellent service
to visiting Diplomatic Corps, International visitors
and VIP’s. To further augment and improve canteen
services a canteen under Indian Railway Catering
& Tourism Corporation Ltd.(IRCTC) has also been
started in South Block from November 2006.
(vii) General
As and when officers and members of the staff
returned from Missions to Headquarters, they faced
difficulties in getting admission in various public/
private schools, gas connection, ration card and
telephone connections. Welfare Division issued
letters to Schools, MTNL etc. which helped them
in getting these domestic facilities faster. The
Welfare Division is headed by a Joint Secretary and

162

Administration and Establishment

assisted by a Director, an Under Secretary, a Section
Officer, an Assistant, a LDC and Group ‘D’ staff.

administered the pledge prescribed by the Central
Vigilance Commission.

Vigilance

e-governance and IT

Annual report of Vigilance Unit, Ministry of External
Affairs for the year 2009-2010

During the year, computerization of Passport & Visa
services at Indian Missions & Posts at Kuwait, Toronto,
Madrid and outsourcing of visa and passport services at
Embassy of India, Moscow and Vancouver were
completed.

No. of cases pending as on 31 March, 2009: 134
No. of cases received during the period
1 April 2009-30 November 2009: 20
Total number of cases up to 30 November, 2009
= (134+20): 154

Right To Information & Chief Public
Information Office

Number of cases closed with imposition of formal
penalty up to 30 November, 2009: 14

“A total of 804 applications under the RTI Act, 2005
have been received by the Ministry during the period
1 April -31 December, 2009. Applications covered subjects
such as administration, personal grievances, Haj
pilgrimage, Kailash-Manasarovar Yatra, Gulf War
compensations, foreign policy, economic issues etc. Out
of these applications, 238 appeals have been filed by the
applicants to the Appellate Authority of the Ministry
during the same period. Further, the CPIO and Nodal
Officers of the Ministry have been attending the hearings
held at the Central Information Commission, as and when
required, to respond to the queries raised by the
Commission. Efforts are being made to ensure full
implementation of the provisions of the RTI Act, 2005”

Number of cases closed without imposition of formal
penalty, on account of VRS, death, etc. up to
30 November, 2009: 12
Total number of cases closed
30 November, 2009 = (14+12): 26

up

to

Total number of cases pending as on
30 November , 2009 = (154-26): 128
Vigilance Awareness week was observed from
3-7 November, 2009. All Indian Missions/Posts aboard
and various departments in Ministry of External Affairs

163

20

Coordination

C

oordination Division consists of three wings viz.
Parliament Section, Coordination Section and
Education Section.

Parliament Section
Coordination Division functions as the nodal point of the
Ministry of External Affairs for all work relating to
Parliament including questions-answers, assurances,
debates on foreign relations and laying of reports on the
Table of both Houses of Parliament. The Division has also
the responsibility to organize the meetings of the
Consultative Committee on External Affairs, and
coordinates the work relating to the Parliamentary
Standing Committee on External Affairs and other
Parliamentary Committees.

Coordination Section
Coordination Section processes all proposals for grant of no
objection from the political angle for the foreign visits of
Governors, Speaker of the Lok Sabha, Deputy Chairman of
Rajya Sabha, Union Ministers, Ministers in the State
Governments, Members of Parliament, Members of State
Legislative Assemblies, Members of the Judiciary, government
officials, etc. Political clearance is accorded by the Ministry
of External Affairs after taking into consideration the
guidelines laid down by the government for the purpose, the
political and functional justification for the visit, meetings
arranged and the recommendation of the Indian Mission/
Post concerned. During the current year, Coordination
Division has issued 2706 political clearances for such visits
as against 2539 during the corresponding period in 2008.
The Section also handled work relating to grant of diplomatic
clearances for foreign non-scheduled flights and visits by
naval ships. During the current year, the Division issued
996 clearances for foreign non-scheduled flights as against
971 during the same period in 2008.
Coordination Section had processed a large number of
approvals for participation of Indian sports teams and
sportsmen in international events abroad and visits of
foreign sports persons / teams to India. The Section also
examines requests for grant of no objection for holding
international conferences, seminars, workshops, grant of
Amateur W/T Licence under the Indian Telegraph Act
1885, grant in aid to Indo-foreign cultural friendship and
cultural societies located in foreign countries.

Coordination Section coordinates the work relating to
grant of Padma Awards to foreign nationals. The
nominations are obtained by the Coordination Division
from Indian Missions/Posts abroad and the
recommendations of the Ministry are conveyed to the
Ministry of Home Affairs.
Observance of Anti-Terrorism Day ( 21 May), Sadbhavana
Divas (20 August) and Quami Ekta Week/Diwas
(19-25 November) in the Ministry and Missions/Posts
abroad were also undertaken by the Coordination
Division; pledges were administered to the officials, both
at Headquarters and in Missions/Posts abroad.
Coordination Section has been assisting the Ministry of
Defence in interaction with the Ministry and the Indian
Missions/Posts abroad for the forthcoming DEFEXPO
India – 2010 to be organized by the Ministry of Defence
in February 2010.
Coordination Section represented and gave Ministry’s
input at various inter-ministerial meetings on divergent
issues. Similarly, the Coordination Section collated inputs
from various Divisions of the Ministry in preparation of
documents, notes and briefs on important subjects.

Education Section
Education Section deals with the selection, nomination
and admission of foreign students from 63 friendly,
neighbouring and developing countries for MBBS, BDS,
BE, B.Pharmacy and diploma courses in various
institutions in India under the Self Financing Foreign
Students Scheme against seats allocated to this Ministry
by the Ministries of Health & Family Welfare and Human
Resource Development respectively. Political clearances
of foreign students seeking admission to Graduate and
Post-Graduate courses in Engineering, Medicine,
Management, other technical and professional courses
including elective training/internship in various medical
institutions and research courses were also processed by
the Education Section.
For the academic year 2008-09, Education Section
received and processed 52 and 83 applications for
admission to the MBBS/BDS and B.E/B.Pharmacy courses
respectively. In addition, during the current year
1345 foreign applicants were granted no objection from
the political angle to pursue various courses in India.

164

External Publicity

E

xternal Publicity (XP) Division of the Ministry of
External Affairs (MEA) continued to articulate the
views/positions of the Government of India on various
national and international issues through interaction with
Indian and international media. This was done through
regular and special press briefings, statements,
backgrounders and postings on MEA’s website. The main
activities of the Division were focused on dissemination
of information on India’s relations with its immediate
neighbours as also with key countries of the world.
Following the barbaric terrorist attacks of 26/11 at
Mumbai, a sustained publicity drive to project India’s
concerns on terrorism emanating from across our borders
was undertaken. Besides this, as part of our new initiatives,
a series of new projects to reach out to African countries
were undertaken, including the flagship ‘India Africa
Connect’ ‘website which was launched by External Affairs
Minister. The Division also hosted a number of groups of
foreign journalists as part of its Outreach Programme,
besides also reaching out to the Urdu and other
non-English media.

Press Coverage of Incoming VVIP Visits
India’s robust engagement with international community
was marked by a number of high level visits to India.
Notable among them were the Heads of States/
Government of Bhutan, Russian Federation, Denmark,
Argentina, Canada, Australia, Japan, Bangladesh, ROK,
Malaysia, Turkey, Germany and Nepal. A number of other
important dignitaries like the US Secretary of State also
paid official visits. The Division used the opportunities
provided to highlight India’s position on important
bilateral, regional and international issues. The Division
also arranged joint press interactions with the visiting
dignitaries during these visits. Special briefings by the
Official Spokesperson and other senior officials of the
Ministry were also held regularly to keep the media briefed.

Press Coverage of Indian Dignitaries’
Visits Abroad
All logistical arrangements, including setting up and
operating fully equipped Media Centres for journalists,
media briefings and other facilitation for the media

21

accompanying the President, Vice President,
Prime Minister and the External Affairs Minister on their
visits abroad, formed an important part of work of the
Division to ensure suitable media coverage. During the
year, media teams accompanied President on her visit to
Spain, Poland, Russia, Tajikistan, UK and Cyprus; Prime
Minister to UK (G-20 Summit), Russia (BRIC & SCO
Summits), Italy (G-8, G-5 Summits), France and Egypt
(Non Aligned Movement Summit), USA (G-20 Summit),
Thailand (Association of South East Asian Nations and
East Asian Summits), USA (State Visit) and Port of Spain
(Commonwealth Heads of Government Meet Summit);
the Vice President to Kuwait and South Africa and the
External Affairs Minister to Japan, Bhutan, Thailand,
Nepal, Australia, Kuwait and Afghanistan.

Liaison with National and International
Media
The official spokesperson’s office liaised with the Indian
and foreign media throughout the year by conducting
regular briefings on major developments having a bearing
on India’s foreign policy, incoming and outgoing high level
visits and important day-to-day development. During the
year (up to 21 January 2010) 187 press releases, 63 press
briefings and 34 joint press statements and 60 media
advisories were issued by the Division on various issues of
concern. Interviews with the Prime Minister, External
Affairs Minister and other dignitaries were arranged with
Indian and international newspapers and TV
organizations. These were also placed on the Ministry’s
website.

Official Spokesperson’s Office
The Official Spokesperson’s Office functioned as the hub
for information dissemination on day-to -day
developments related to the conduct of India’s foreign
policy. The Office arranged regular media briefings by the
Spokesperson, which were duly supplemented by
press releases, briefing points and statements. From
9 April-21 January 2010, about 58 press briefings were
organized by Official Spokesperson’s office. In addition,
more than 187 press releases and statements were issued
during this period. These were circulated to the media

165

Annual Report 2009 - 2010

through emails and simultaneously placed on the
Ministry’s website. The Division actively used the medium
of SMS alerts for informing the media about briefings and
updates to the website. During the year, External Affairs
Minister, Foreign Secretary and other senior officials of
the Ministry addressed special media briefings on
important issues. Additionally, constant efforts were made
to communicate the position and perspective of the
Government on various significant issues by providing
background briefings to media persons. Interviews with
the Prime Minister, External Affairs Minister, Ministers
of State for External Affairs and other dignitaries were
arranged with Indian and international newspapers and
TV organizations.

MEA Website
Ministry of External Affairs’ website continued to serve
as a useful instrument in the dissemination efforts of the
Division. The press section of the website was regularly
updated with the speeches/interviews/statements on
foreign policy by the Prime Minister, Minister(s), press
releases, briefings by the Official Spokesperson and other
Senior Officers. The website is widely accessed both inside
and outside India and is hyperlinked to the websites of
Indian Missions / Posts abroad and various Ministries. The
Division continued to use the Ministry of External Affair’s
Notice Board to provide the Missions/Posts abroad with
professionally written features on various aspects of India
for publicity purposes in local media. News clippings of
interest from national newspapers were also uploaded on
daily basis on the Board for use by our Missions/Posts
New Initiatives on MEA Website
a) Revamping of MEA Website: The project for
revamping the MEA website to make it more userfriendly and further improve its look and feel has
been initiated. Genpact, has been entrusted with
the project, which is likely to be completed soon.
b)

c)

Hindi Section of Ministry’s website: Hindi section
of the website has been continuously updated to
make it identical with the English section, as far as
possible. Since almost all original text is in English,
updation of the Hindi section of the website is
completely dependent on translation work, which
has been outsourced to a panel of professionally
qualified Hindi translators. Members of general
public and Hindi lovers, including representatives
from Indian media, have much appreciated the
Hindi section of website.
Urdu translations: For the first time, arrangements
have been made with ANI to post Urdu translations

of MEA press releases on its Urdu website. A link
has been provided to the site on MEA website.

India-Africa Connect Website
External Affairs Minister Shri S. M. Krishna launched the
‘India-Africa Connect Website’ on 17 August, 2009 in
New Delhi. The website was jointly developed by
XP Division along with Indian Association of News
Services and is devoted to promoting relations with our
African counterparts, and hosts news, features and
essential information on India and African countries, with
special emphasis on development cooperation. The
website was launched with the aim of facilitating closer
cooperation between India and Africa The website can
be accessed at http://www.indiaafricaconnect.in and a link
is also available on MEA website home page.

Logistical Support to Foreign Media
Based in India
Over 300 foreign media representatives based in India
were provided necessary facilitation to enable their smooth
functioning, through provision of necessary information
and access, regular interactions, as well as, assistance in
matters of credential documents, visas and residence
permits. Visa extensions and/or accreditation facilities
were also extended to them.

Familiarization Visits by Foreign
Journalists
Familiarization visits by foreign journalists to India
constitute a key element of the Division’s efforts to expose
them to different facets and views of modern India. It
enables them to gain first-hand impressions of Indian
politics, foreign policy, economy, culture and science and
technology. Based on the recommendations of Indian
Missions/Posts abroad, the Division organized the
familiarization visits of over 90 foreign journalists to India
from the period April 2009-January 2010. During these
visits, all logistical arrangements to enable the journalists
to visit important institutions and centres of excellence
in India were made by the Division. The Division also
organized meetings for visiting foreign journalists with
Ministers, Senior Officials, Academicians, Intellectuals
and Business Representatives and site visits to select
centres of industrial excellence in India.

Documentaries and Films
An important area of work of the Division pertains to the
clearance of documentaries by foreign audio-visual
agencies. An exercise to streamline the procedure for
granting approval for making documentary films in India

166

External Publicity

by foreign producers was undertaken by the Division. As
a result of inter-ministerial consultations, the process has
largely been streamlined. During the year, over
400 proposals for making documentaries by foreign
producers from USA, UK, Japan, Australia, France,
Sweden, Italy, South Africa, Malaysia and China were
cleared by the Division.

Training, Workshops, Conferences and
Special Events
The Division, on recommendations of the concerned
Territorial Divisions, organized specialized training
programmes and other events for media from neighbouring
countries like Afghanistan. 19 journalists (Eight AV and
11 Print) from 10 Anglo phone African countries were
also invited, for a three week specially designed course,
in consultation with Jamia Millia Islamia University. The
division also hosted journalists from Bangladesh,
Sri Lanka, Nepal, China, Kazakhstan, Ethiopia and from
Gulf countries during this period. Meetings for them were
organized with senior officials and academics, as well as
visits to centres of excellence. The Division also facilitated

the placement of correspondents from IANS and Press
Trust of India in select African countries to enhance
mutual understanding and bridge the information gap.

Booklet on General Elections
To disseminate accurate information about General
Elections in April-May 2009, which have been hailed as
the world’s largest democratic exercise, the Division
published a compact and colourful handbook, containing
useful statistics and detailing the manner in which
elections are conducted in India. This served as a handy
reference for foreign readership and journalists in
particular. A web link to the booklet was also placed on
the MEA website.

Administration/Housekeeping
In order to improve the general working environment and
create an aesthetically pleasant appearance, a major
renovation exercise of XP Division at Shastri Bhawan was
concluded recently. Display of select historical
photographs, along with a liberal splash of green plants,
has made the area more presentable and attractive.

167

22

Public Diplomacy

T

he mandate of the Public Diplomacy Division
includes, inter-alia, the production of print and audio
visual material that enables our missions to project the
diverse facets of India more effectively. In addition, the
division also organizes a wide range of outreach activities
that are aimed at creating a greater understanding of India
and its foreign policy concerns both within India and
abroad. To achieve these objectives, the division partners
with major domestic and international think tanks and
research organizations to organize seminars and conferences
on subjects that are relevant to our concerns. The division
hosts delegations from various countries and organizations
to provide them with a broad-based exposure to India. In
addition, the division organizes lectures and other events
within India with the objective of fostering a more informed
discourse on India’s foreign policy.

Outreach Activities
The division organized a number of outreach activities
including delegation visits, seminars, conferences,
engagement with universities and other educational
institutions, distinguished lecture series and screening of
films to highlight major issues related to India’s foreign.
These include:Incoming Visits
Visit by the Friends of India Group of the UK Conservative
party in July 2009. Apart from meetings with Speaker Smt
Meira Kumar, Minister of Human Resource Development,
Shri Kapil Sibal, Chairman of the Unique Identification
Authority and MoS for Rural Development, the delegation
was briefed by senior officials of MEA and the National
Security Council Secretariat. The delegation also visited
Kochi where they had meetings with the State
Government and visited the Naval establishment.
A delegation of the Liberal Democratic Friends of India
Group from UK was hosted in September 2009. In addition
to their meetings with Deputy Chairman of Rajya Sabha
and Minister for Road Transport & Highways, the
delegation was briefed by senior officials of MEA, the
National Human Rights Commission, the National
Security Council Secretariat, Center for Policy Research,
and business and industry representatives. The delegation

also visited the National Defence Academy and the Film
and Television Training Institute of India.
A delegation visit of the Indo-Slovene Parliamentary
Friendship Group from Slovenia visited in
November 2009. Apart from meeting with
MoS Smt.Preneet Kaur, Minister of Overseas Indian
Affairs Shri Vayalar Ravi and Mayor of Delhi, the
delegation also interacted with FICCI and IBEF and
visited business organizations specializing in IT and
biotechnology. The delegation also witnessed the
proceedings of Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha.
A 26-member delegation of PIO journalists from
15 countries was organized during PBD 2010 in January.
In addition to participation in PBD the journalists were
briefed by CII, IDSA and the Planning Commission on
India’s economy, our security scenario and efforts to foster
inclusive development and economic growth in India. The
group also visited Mumbai Stock Exchange and Film City.
The visit of a six member delegation of Permanent
Representatives of Pacific Small Island Developing States
was organized on 23-31 January, 2010. The delegation
witnessed the Republic Day Parade, attended President’s
‘At Home’ and witnessed Beating Retreat in addition to
meetings with External Affairs Minister Shri S. M. Krishna,
Minister for Environment and Forests Shri Jairam Ramesh
and a short briefing by CII on the economic scenario in
India. The delegation also visited business organizations
specializing in irrigation and energy resources relevant to
their countries. The delegation was also briefed on the
developments in Indian Space Research at ISRO.
Outgoing Visits
A visit by Prof. Sudarshan Iyengar, Vice Chancellor, Gujrat
Vidyapeeth to Slovenia to deliver lectures on Mahatma
Gandhi and his legacy was organized in September.
Prof. Iyengar also participated in an International
conference on Mahatma Gandhi, held in Slovenia.
Seminars/Conferences/Bilateral Dialogues
PD Division partnered with a diverse range of organizations
to facilitate seminars and conferences related to different
facets of India’s foreign policy. These included:

168

Public Diplomacy

i)

The Eighth India-Korea Dialogue from
20-21 May, 2009 jointly organized by Indian Council
for Research on Economic Relations and the Seoul
Forum of International Affairs.

ii)

An international seminar titled ‘Society, Culture and
Politics in the Karakoram Himalayas’ from
23-24 July, 2009 organized by Himalayan Research
and Cultural Foundation.

iii)

An international seminar on ‘Peace and Stability in
Afghanistan: the Way Ahead’ from 6-7 October, 2009
organized by The United Service Institution of India.

iv)

The Fourth Sustainability Summit organized by CII
from 25-26 November, 2009

v)

An International seminar on Indo-Bangladesh
relations organized by Centre for Rural Research and
Industrial Development, Chandigarh in
December 2009

vi)

Seminars on India-GCC relations was organized in
partnership with the Dubai based Gulf Research
Centre and the Indian Study Group were organized
in Dubai in June 2009 and in New Delhi in
January 2010.

vii) The Third IISS-MEA Foreign Policy Dialogue held
in London on 22 February, 2010 where the keynote
address was delivered by the Foreign Secretary.
viii) A seminar on Indo-Nepal relations organized in
Patna from 25-27 February, 2009 in collaboration
with the Bihar state government
ix)

x)

An international seminar titled ‘Women Guiding the
Destiny of South Asia’ (a) Media Perspective by
Women Journalists (b) Women as Partners in
Development’ jointly organized by CRRID and Jamia
Millia Islamia University from 13-14 March, 2010
in Chandigarh.
A seminar on ‘Indian Foreign Policy in the 21st Century:
Challenges and Prospects’ by Deptartment of Political
Science, Punjab University from 24-25 March, 2010
in Chandigarh.

Distinguished Lecture Series
The “Distinguished Lecture Series on India’s Foreign Policy”
was launched at Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi on
17 February, 2009 with the lecture ‘India’s Emergence as a
Global Power: Prospects and Challenges’. The lecture was
delivered by Amb. (Retd.) A. N. Ram and is part of a new
initiative aimed at taking the discourse on key foreign
policy issues to university campuses around the country.
Outreach to Universities/think tanks
JS (PD) has visited the campuses of Mumbai university,
Jadhavpur University and Guru Nanak Dev University

to conduct interactive sessions with students and faculty
on themes related to India’s foreign policy and to create a
platform for the Distinguished Lecture series and other
initiatives.
Other Outreach Activities
With support from PD Division, the International Day of
Non Violence was celebrated by a number of Missions
and Posts. The programmes included lectures, seminars,
conferences, photo exhibitions, film festivals, debates,
competitions for school children and cultural shows.
Screening of the PD Division documentary ‘Negotiating
Justice’ highlighting India’s position on climate change was
organized at the India International Centre, the United
Services Institute and other prestigious venues. At USI,
the screening on 4 February, 2010 was also accompanied
by a panel discussion aimed at creating greater awareness
of India’s position at the Copenhagen summit.
Screening of the PD division documentary ‘Indian
Elections: A Mammoth Democratic Exercise’ was organized
on several occasions, including on January 24 to mark
the 60th anniversary of the Election Commission.
An exhibition of rare archival photographs on evolution
of Indo -Bhutan relations and some remarkable
photographs taken by His Majesty Jigme Khesar Namgyel
Wangchuk, The King of Bhutan was organized at the
National Gallery of Modern Art, Delhi in December 2009.
The exhibition was inaugurated by Dr. Karan Singh,
President of ICCR in his presence.

Audio-Visual Publcity
As in the past, the division continued to commission
documentaries to promote and project India’s image abroad.
Participation in film festivals and Indian film weeks abroad,
organizing cultural and photo exhibitions were the other
audio-visual publicity activities undertaken by the division.
Several documentaries were completed during the year
including:
(a)

Can You Hear Me (a film on the Community Radio
revolution).

(b)

Through Lens Clearly : Raghu Rai’s India.

(c)

Indian Elections - A Mammoth Democratic Exercise.

(d) Kashmir Elections 2008.
(e)

Spirit of India ( a short film to showcase different
facets of India).

(f)

Religious Linkages Between Bhutan & Ladakh.

(g)

Watering the Grassroots (a film on microfinance).

(h) Negotiating Justice (a film on India’s position on
Climate Change).

169

Annual Report 2009 - 2010

(i)

Cinema with a Purpose (a film on communication
of values and tradition through Cinema).

(j)

Mast Qalandar (a film on three Sufi saints).

(k)

Partners in Progress : Indo-US Relations.

(l)

India in the Moon (Chandrayan-1).

(m) Soldiers of Peace (a film on engagement of men in
uniform with civilians in peace time).
(n) Fragments of History (a film on life of
M. S. Subhalakshmi).
The Missions/Posts were supplied audio-visual material
in the form of Betacam cassettes, CD-ROMs, audio and
video CDs, DVDs, 35mm format films and Cassettes for
use in library, participation in film festivals and for
presentation purposes.

India Perspectives Magazine
India Perspectives the flagship magazine of the Ministry
has grown in popularity, over the years. The magazine
focuses on a wide range of subjects such as the growth
story of India, its rich cultural heritage, literature, wildlife,
film industry, information technology, health care etc. The
magazine is published in 17 languages including Arabic,
Bahasa, Indonesia, Bengali, English, French, German,
Hindi, Italian, Pashto, Persian, Portugese, Russian,
Sinhala, Spanish, Tamil and Urdu and distributed to all
corners of the globe.

Several documentaries were telecast/screened by foreign
TV channels/Doordarshan and in international film
festivals, including:

The Hindi edition “Bharat Sandarsh” was awarded the
first prize under the Griha Patrika Puraskar Yojana of the
Government of India by the President of India. The
magazine was distributed at the Book Fair at Frankfurt,
International Book Fair at Turin, film festivals in Italy,
Russia, Argentina, Paraguay, Uruguay and also at the
London Book Fair where India was the market focus
country.

(a)

Books and Other Publications

Documentaries “Timeless India” and “The Jewel in
the Lotus” screened in Phnom Penh on
19 March, 2009 on ITEC Day.

(b)

Screening of documentaries “India Wins Freedom”
and “Quit India” by Sri Lankan TV channel on the
occasion of India’s Republic Day. Documentaries
“Sufi traditions of India”, “Beating Retreat” and
“Bismillah & Benaras” were also telecast by
Sri Lankan TV in the month of August 2009.

(c)

Telecast of documentaries “Indian Elections – A
Mammoth Exercise” and “Spirit of India” were telecast
by Doordarshan in May/July 2009.

(d) Screening of PD Division’s documentaries by HCI
Bogotá at the Bogotá International Film Festival in
October 2009.
(e)

(f)

Telecast of documentaries “Commonwealth Games
2010”, “The Sky is not the Limit”, “Dismantling the
Digital Divide”; “Friends for evermore” and “Beyond
Tradition” on Tanzanian TV channel ‘Smart’ in
September 2009.
Screening of documentary “The Story of Gitanjali”
at the Short Film Center in the International Film
Festival of India in November/December 2009 in
Goa.

In addition our Missions/Posts in Accra, Ho Chi Minh
City, Mexico City, Amman, Reykjavik, Tel Aviv, Minsk
& Paris organized film festivals/screening with
35mm Hindi films sent by the division.

Projecting India’s image through books and publications
is an integral part of the Division’s publicity strategy
abroad. Books on Indian economy, foreign policy, art &
culture, history & science and technology etc. were
supplied to Missions abroad for presentation purpose and
use in their libraries. Many of our Missions celebrated
Mahatma Gandhi’s birthday on 2 October, 2009 as the
International Day of non-violence. The division has
supplied books on Mahatma Gandhi to these Missions
for distribution on this occasion. Various Journals &
magazines were also dispatched to Missions/posts abroad.
The following books/publications were printed by the
division during the period:
(a)

A Coffee table book titled “Himalaya with Lens &
Passion” capturing the beauty of Himalayan region
by Mr. Ashok Dilwali.

(b)

A Coffee table book titled ‘India for a billion reasons’
featuring articles and photographs on diverse aspects
of India by eminent contributors.

(c)

A booklet on Climate change “The Road to
Copenhagen: India’s position on Climate Change issues”.

(d) Booklet on Prime Minister’s visit to USA & France.
The division also extended financial support to our
Missions/posts in Berlin, Slovenia, London, Sofia, Bogotá,
and Minsk for bringing out publications such as “The Story
of My Experiments with Truth”, in Slovene language, and
for “Glimpses of World History” in Bulgarian language.

170

Foreign Service Institute

Training of Indian Foreign Service (IFS)
Probationers

O

ne of the primary activities of the Foreign Service
Institute is the training of IFS Probationers. The
Probationers undergo a one-year long training programme
at FSI to prepare them to handle the wide range of tasks
that they would be required to perform during their
professional careers, both at Headquarters and in Missions
and Posts abroad.
At the completion of the training of IFS Probationers of
the 2007 batch, the Bimal Sanyal Gold Medal for the Best
Probationer of the Batch was awarded to
Ms. Satwant Khanalia and the Silver Medal for Best
Dissertation was awarded to Dr. N. Nandakumar. The
medals were presented at a function held at FSI on
26 May, 2009.
The IFS Probationers of 2008 batch have been attending
their training programme at FSI since December 2008.
The year-long training programme was implemented
through lectures as well as attachments to various
institutions. It included modules on a large number of
subjects such as international relations and foreign policy,
international law, defence and security, economic
diplomacy, cultural diplomacy and social development,
etc. The programme also included modules on practical
skills relating to administration, establishment, accounts,
protocol, reporting skills, official language policy, external
publicity, representational skills, etc. A module on India’s
cultural heritage was introduced for the first time for the
Probationers.
The training also included attachment with the Indian
Army and Air Force, visits to Western Naval Command
and Mazagon Dockyard Ltd. in Mumbai, and interactive
sessions with leading financial institutions and industrial
establishments. In order to develop their skills in
management, leadership techniques and economic issues,
a two-month long training course was specially organized
for the Probationers at Indian Institute of Management,
Bangalore.
The Probationers went on a ‘Bharat Darshan’ tour with a
view to acquaint themselves with the rich cultural

23

diversity, heritage, and economic and tourism potential
of the country. In order to familiarize the Probationers
with the work of Indian Missions abroad and enhance
their knowledge of India’s immediate neighbourhood, the
Probationers also visited the Indian Missions in Colombo
and Thimphu in two groups in May-June 2009.
IFS Probationers of 2009 batch joined the Institute in
December 2009 and their training programme has
commenced.

Training of Officials of the Ministry
The first Mid-Career Training Programme for Joint
Secretary level officers was carried out from
12 April-1 May 2009 in two phases at the Indian School
of Business, Hyderabad and at FSI premises. 36 officers of
the rank of Joint Secretary participated in the training
which, inter alia, covered international relations and
India’s foreign policy, India’s security environment, energy
security, economic diplomacy, strategic decision making
and implementation, etc.
The second Mid-Career Training Programme for
Joint Secretary level officers was carried out from
4-16 January, 2010 in two phases at the Indian School of
Business (ISB) Hyderabad and at FSI premises. 36 officers
of the rank of Joint Secretary participated in the training.
The email-based Mid-Career Training Programme for
Director-level officers of 1991 batch was completed in
June 2008. The programme for 1992 batch IFS officers is
in the final stage of completion, and that for 1993 batch
is also concurrently running. This programme consists of
five modules of India’s foreign policy, economy, security,
regional issues, and Indian diaspora. Officers are also
required to write a monograph.
A media training programme for officers of the Ministry
of the rank of Joint Secretary/Director/Deputy Secretary
was carried out from 6-10 July, 2009. The officers were
imparted training on facing the media and conducting
press conferences etc.
Two Refresher Courses for Section Officers of the Ministry
were conducted from 15-24 June, 2009 and

171

Annual Report 2009 - 2010

4-13 November, 2009. The participants were briefed on
communication skills and various functions in Missions
abroad. The participants also underwent training in the
Integrated Mission Accounting Software (IMAS).
Three Basic Professional Courses (BPCs) for Assistants
and Clerks of the Ministry were carried out from
15-24 July, 14-23 September and 7-15 December, 2009.
The participants were imparted training on
Mission-related topics as well as on the Integrated Mission
Accounting Software (IMAS).
The First Induction Course for Direct Recruit Assistants
of the Ministry was held from 5-16 October, 2009. In this
orientation programme, while training in general topics
was carried out by Institute of Secretariat Training &
Management faculty, the topics related to Ministry were
covered by the officers from the concerned Divisions in
the Ministry.
A one day Course on Right to Information (RTI) was
organized at Foreign Service Institute on 20 January, 2010
with the cooperation of Central Information Commission
(CIC) in which officials from the Ministry, including IFS
Probationers of 2009 batch, participated.

Promotion of Links with other Ministries
and Training Institutes
The fourth Vertical Interaction Course for senior police
officers on the theme “Main Currents in India’s Foreign
Policy” was held at the FSI from 2-6 February, 2009.
Officers from various state police services, Border Security
Force (BSF), Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF), etc.
attended the course.
Senior officers of the Cabinet Secretariat participated in
a three-day training programme from 21-23 July, 2009.
The topics covered included, India’s foreign policy,
structure and functions of the Ministry of External Affairs
and Missions abroad, Passport/Visa/Consular and
Immigration matters, Intellectual Property Rights, Vienna
Convention, Kashmir, impact of technology control
regime on national security, WTO matters, etc.
FSI also organized a one -day briefing on
22 December, 2009 for 12 Army and Air Force officers
who will shortly be proceeding on their postings as Defence
Attaches in our missions abroad.
At the invitation of its Secretary-General, one of the Joint

Secretaries at FSI visited RCVP Noronha Academy of
Administration, Bhopal, and addressed the probationers
of the State Civil Service and the State Revenue Service
on “India’s Foreign Policy Compulsions” on
8 December, 2009, while another Joint Secretary,
represented the Foreign Service Institute at the
10th Conference of Central Training Institutions held at
the Lal Bahadur Shastri Academy of Administration,
Mussoorie from 21-23 October, 2009.

Programmes for Foreign Diplomats
Foreign Service Institute continued to conduct various
training programmes for Foreign Diplomats in its efforts
at building bridges of friendship with countries around
the world.
The 47 th & 48 th Professional Course for Foreign
Diplomats (PCFD) were successfully organized by
FSI from 11 February-23 March and from
4 November-3 December 2009 respectively. 24 diplomats
from various countries attended the 47th PCFD course
and 29 diplomats from 25 countries participated in the
48th PCFD programme. The 49th PCFD is expected to be
organized from 23 February-23 March 2010.
The Institute also organized three special courses, one
for 15 diplomats from Maldives, one for 21 diplomats from
Afghanistan and a third one for 37 ASEAN diplomats.
During the two PCFDs and the Special Courses, the
foreign diplomats were taken to various places of historical,
cultural and industrial importance in and around Delhi.
They also visited Agra, Jaipur, Bengaluru, Hyderabad,
Kolkata, Bodhgaya, Goa, etc.

Linkages with Counterpart Institutes
Abroad
A Delegation from Bhutan led by Mr. Lyonpo Thinley
Gyamtsho, Chairman of the Royal Civil Service
Commission called on both the Joint Secretaries in
September 2009. An Israeli delegation led by
Ms. Alona Fisher Kamn, Head of Department of Training
called on the concerned Joint Secretary in November
2009. A three member delegation from Poland led by
Dr. Andrzej-Ananicz, Deputy Director of the Polish
Institute of International Affairs and Director of
Diplomatic Academy, Foreign Affairs of Poland called on
Dean (FSI) in November 2009.

172

Implementation of
Official Language Policy
and Propagation of Hindi Abroad

T

he Ministry has a well-organized programme for
propagation of Hindi abroad with the involvement
of our Missions/Posts. Under this scheme Hindi teaching
materials including Hindi books on various subjects, text
books, magazines, Hindi learning CD’s, software to work
in Hindi on computers, dictionaries etc. are supplied to
our Missions / Posts abroad for presentation to educational
institutions / organizations involved in the work of
propagation of Hindi. The Ministry also extends financial
support to various foreign universities and other
educational institutions through Indian Missions abroad
for Hindi related activities. During the year 2009-2010,
Hindi books, teaching materials and software were
supplied to about 70 Missions/Posts abroad. Hindi
magazines were supplied to about 100 Missions/Posts
abroad. Honorarium was paid to several teachers for
teaching Hindi in classes organized by our Missions/Posts
in Belarus, Sri Lanka, South Africa, Surinam, Hungary
and Brazil. Miscellaneous grants were also sanctioned to
four Missions/Posts for undertaking various activities
towards promotion and propagation of Hindi abroad.
The Ministry coordinates work relating to grant of
scholarships to foreign students to study Hindi at Kendriya
Hindi Sansthan, Agra. 100 scholarships are on offer
annually. 70 students availed scholarships in 2009-2010.
Organizing Regional Hindi Conferences in different
countries by the Ministry has been greatly appreciated by
Hindi scholars, teachers and students abroad. A two day
Regional Conference was organized in Muscat in March
2009. There is a demand for organizing such conferences
on regular basis in different countries where Hindi is
taught in local Universities. The Ministry is considering
various proposals for organization of a World Hindi
Conference and Regional Conferences.
Implementation of Official Language Policy of the
Government of India continued to be accorded a very
high priority by the Ministry of External Affairs.
Documents like Bilateral Treaties, Agreements,
Memorandum of Understanding, Annual Report of the
Ministry, Parliament Questions and other documents
meant to be placed before the Parliament are prepared
bilingually.

24

Training in Hindi as official language forms an integral
part of the training programme of Foreign Service Institute
(FSI) in the Ministry. Six such programmes were held on
21 January, 2009, 12 February, 2009, 24 March, 2009,
18 June, 2009, 16 July, 2009 and 15 September, 2009. A
total of 210 Officials attended the training programmes.
The Ministry organized Hindi Pakhwara and Hindi Diwas
at Headquarters. Competitions like Hindi Essay Writing,
Hindi Noting & Drafting, Hindi Typing, Hindi
Stenography, Hindi General Knowledge and Hindi Kavita
Path were organized during the fortnight. This time the
response from the officials of the Ministry was
overwhelming and the participation was beyond
expectations. Hindi Pakhwara’s prize distribution function
was organized in the Committee Room of the South Block
and the Foreign Secretary, Smt. Nirupama Rao, Chief
Guest at the function, distributed prizes to the winners.
In her speech the FS appreciated the Hindi Section for
its contribution towards the propagation of Hindi abroad.
(Photograph of Hindi Day)
Our Regional Passport Offices also organized different
competitions such as Hindi Essay Competition, Hindi
Writing Competitions and Quiz Competitions on the
occasion of Hindi Pakhwara, 2009. Our Missions abroad
also organized Kavi Sammelans, Essay Competitions and
Cultural Activities on the occasion of Hindi Diwas on
14 September, 2009. Special grants were sanctioned to
25 Missions/Posts abroad for organizing these activities.
Hindi Section organized a Hindi Workshop from
10-19 November, 2009 for the officials deployed in
Administrative Sections of the Ministry in Akbar Bhavan.
Participants were taught about Government’s Official
Language Policy and other subjects such as Noting and
Drafting in Hindi etc. Hindi books were also distributed
to the participants on the concluding day. More such
workshops are proposed to be held for the Under
Secretaries in the Ministry in February 2010.
World Hindi Day is celebrated every year in all our
Missions/Posts abroad as well as at Headquarters on
10 January. 31 Missions/Posts abroad were sanctioned
special grants for celebrating the World Hindi Day on

173

Annual Report 2009 - 2010

10 January, 2010. At the Headquarters, a function was
organized in the Foreign Service Institute to celebrate the
World Hindi Day. Minister of State for External Affairs
Smt. Preneet Kaur was the Chief Guest. An essay
competition was organized among the foreign students
by the Ministry through Kendriya Hindi Sansthan, Agra
and Delhi, Delhi University and JNU. A brief
Kavi Sammelan was organized by ICCR on the occasion.
Parliament Committee on Official Language visited

Regional Passport Offices at Vishakhapatnam, Chennai,
Pune, Surat and Ghaziabad for inspection during year
2009-2010. Work related to these visits was coordinated
by Hindi section of the Ministry. During current year
25 sections of the Ministry and two Regional Passport
Offices were inspected by the officers of Hindi Section to
assess the progress made in use of Hindi. Proper guidance
was given regarding implementation of the Official
Language Policy to officials of these offices.

174

Minister of State, Smt. Preneet Kaur with prize winner Foreign Hindi Students alongwith
Additional Secretary (AD) and Joint Secretary (OSD Estt.).

Smt. Nirupama Rao, Foriegn Secretary and Shri Dinkar Khullar, AS(AD)
during the award ceremony of Hindi Pakhwara 2009.

175

25

Indian Council for Cultural Relations

T

he Indian Council for Cultural Relations was formally
set up in 1950, with the primary objective of
establishing, reviving and strengthening cultural relations
and mutual understanding between India and other
countries. Its aims, as enunciated in the Memorandum of
Association, are:
To participate in the formulation and
implementation of policies and programmes relating
to India’s external cultural relations;
To promote cultural exchanges with other countries
and people;
To promote and strengthen cultural relations and
mutual understanding between India and other
countries; and
To establish and develop relations with national and
international organizations in the field of culture.
The Council has worked steadily to attain these objectives.
The major activities of the Council are:
Administration of scholarship schemes for overseas
students on behalf of the Government of India and other
agencies, welfare of international students; grant of
scholarships to foreign students to learn Indian dance and
music; exchange of exhibitions; organization of and
participation in international seminars and symposia;
participation in major cultural festivals abroad;
organization of “Festival of India” in countries abroad;
exchange of groups of performing artists; organization of
lecture-demonstration by performing artists abroad;
Distinguished Visitors Programme under which eminent
personalities from abroad are invited to visit India, and
the outgoing visitor’s programme in which experts are sent
abroad for delivering lectures, presentation of books,
audio-visual material, art objects and musical instruments
to institutions abroad; providing the secretariat for the
Jawaharlal Nehru Award for International Understanding;
organization of the annual Maulana Azad Memorial
Lecture, conducting Maulana Azad Essay Competition;
publication of books and journals for distribution in India
and abroad; maintaining Indian Cultural Centres abroad;
maintaining a well stocked library and the manuscripts of

Maulana Abul Kalam Azad; and digitization of rare
manuscripts.
The Council has 14 Regional Offices which continue to
function in Bangalore, Chandigarh, Chennai, Hyderabad,
Kolkata, Lucknow, Mumbai, Thiruvananthapuram, Jaipur,
Pune, Varanasi, Shillong, Cuttack and Guwahati. The
activities of the Regional Offices include coordination
with local bodies/organizations & providing assistance to
foreign students studying under the Council’s scholarships
schemes. The Regional Offices also extend logistic
facilities to incoming and outgoing cultural delegations
& the Council’s distinguished visitors.
The Primary objective of the Council is to establish, revive
and strengthen cultural relations and mutual
understanding between India and other countries. In order
to promote awareness and appreciation of India’s
composite cultural heritage abroad, the ICCR maintains
Chairs of Indian Studies in various Universities and
institutions abroad. Indian Professors are deputed to these
Chairs on short-term and long-term basis.
Presently, the Council is maintaining 19 Long Term Chairs
to teach Indian languages as well as Social Sciences with
their focus on India, under the bilateral Cultural Exchange
Programmes, Scheme of Propagation of Hindi Abroad and
Council’s own programmes. The Council has a Hindi
Chair for Professors each in Port of Spain (Trinidad &
Tobago), Budapest (Hungary), Moscow (Russia), Warsaw
(Poland), Sofia (Bulgaria), Beijing (China), Ankara
(Turkey), Brussels (Belgium), and Valladolid (Spain);
Chairs of Sanskrit in Bangkok (Thailand) and Paris
(France); a Chair of Tamil in Warsaw (Poland); Chairs of
International Relations in Osh (Kyrghzystan) and
Tashkent (Uzbekistan); a Chair of Peace Studies in
Johannesburg (South Africa); a Chair of Film/Cinema
Studies in Port of Spain (Trinidad & Tobago) and three
Hindi Chairs for Teachers at Bucharest (Romania),
Paramaribo (Suriname) and Jalalabad (Afghanistan).
The Council is also maintaining 11 Rotating/Short-Term
Chairs in various countries, these include a Chair of
Sanskrit and Buddhist Studies in Ulaanbaatar (Mongolia),
a Chair of Indian Literature in Pennsylvania (USA), five

176

Indian Council for Cultural Relations

Chairs of Indian Studies in various Universities in
Germany, one Chair of Indian Economy in Paris (France),
a Chair of Indian Studies in Johannesburg, (South Africa),
Chair of India-China Comparative Economy in
Guangzhou (China) and Chair of Humanities & Social
Sciences in Tel Aviv (Israel).
Besides these, the Council has signed an MoU to establish
the following Chairs under its ‘Expansion Plan’: Slovenia
(Hindi, Short-Term), UK (Economics, Short-Term),
South Korea (Economics, Short-Term), Greece
(Economics, Short-Term), Japan (Humanities,
Short-Term), Croatia (Hindi, Long-Term), Armenia
(Hindi, Long-Term), Turkmenistan (Hindi, Long-Term),
Denmark (Economics, Short-Term), USA (Non-Violence/
Peace Studies, Long Term).

Scholarship and Welfare of International
Students
One of the important activities of the ICCR is the
implementation of scholarship schemes for overseas
students for doctoral, post-graduate and under-graduate
courses, as well as professional courses such as engineering,
pharmacy, business administration and accountancy.
Around 1368 foreign students are currently studying in
India under the various scholarship schemes administered
by the ICCR. During April-November 2009, the Council
offered 2226 new scholarships, including 675 scholarships
for Afghan students and 526 from African students.
The Council regularly organizes “winter and summer
camps” and “study tours” for the benefit of international
students.
Meeting of Regional Directors/Regional Officers: A
meeting of the Heads of Regional Offices was convened
by Dr. Karan Singh, President, ICCR on 26 June, 2009 at
Azad Bhavan, I.P. Estate, New Delhi to discuss various
issues concerning the welfare of foreign students and to
review the activities undertaken by the Regional Offices
for foreign students. All Sectional Heads at Headquarters
were also present.
Orientation Programme: An Orientation programme for
the IFS probationers of the 2008 batch was organized by
the Council from 25-29 May, 2009. Lectures/lecture-cumdemonstrations/visits to Museums, Galleries and places
of historical interest were also arranged for them. Eminent
speakers delivered, inter-alia, lectures on Indian
traditional & modern art and art-forms, cultural &
architectural heritage, theatre and films.
The Council also organized the 17 th International
Students Cultural Festival called “Friendship Through

Culture” on 11 November, 2009 at Kamani Auditorium,
New Delhi. It was very well attended and also received
excellent media coverage.

Incoming Cultural Delegation
ICCR organizes the visits of foreign performing artists to
India for performances in various cities of India. These
groups are hosted under the ambit of bilateral Cultural
Exchange Programmes as well as in response to
recommendations of Indian Missions abroad and requests
received from foreign diplomatic missions and Cultural
Centres in India. During the period April-November 2009,
the Council hosted the visits of 19 foreign cultural groups
from Geneva, Malaysia, Mauritius, USA, Pakistan, UK,
Uzbekistan, Sri Lanka, Spain, Egypt, Tanzania, Paraguay,
Brazil, Iran, Columbia, Portugal, Poland, Trinidad &
Tobago, Venezuela. The Council also organized 17 special
events including the Thumri Festival and the Malhar
Festival in Delhi and a Sufi Music Festival at Srinagar.

Publications
The Council has an ambitious publication programme,
which has grown over the years. The Council published
five journals in five different languages namely, “Indian
Horizons” and “Africa Quarterly” (both English
Quarterlies), “Papeles de la India” (Spanish, bi-annual),
Rencontre Avec L’ Inde” (French bi-annual) and “Thaqafatul-Hind” (Arabic Quarterly).

Conferences and Seminars
During the period under review, the Council collaborated
in the holding of various International Conferences &
Seminars with a view to facilitate interactions between
intellectuals, opinion makers and academicians
representing various countries. These included a) Indology
conferences in Prague and Bali during June 2009; b) an
International Seminar on “ Nicholas Roerich “in Delhi;
c) Indology Conferences in Sofia (from 24-26 September, 2009)
and Almaty (from 19-20 November, 2009). “Indologists”
from India, the host country and the Europe and Central
Asian region participated in the Seminar;
d) The Council organized a Colombian Cultural Week and
hosted the interactive sessions of the Poets in Delhi and
Kolkata in association with Embassy of Colombia in New
Delhi from 20-26 October, 2009. The Council also assisted
various organization and prominent institutes like IIT, JNU,
Delhi University, Allahabad University and Jamia Millia
Islamia in organizing 17 International Conferences in India,
in which several prominent Indian and foreign scholars
participated and deliberated on cultural and literary themes,
including the Urdu and Persian languages.

177

Annual Report 2009 - 2010

Busts and Exhibitions
The Council sent three statues of Mahatma Gandhi for
installation at the Gandhi Memorial at the Bellevue
Library, San Francisco, Washington State, the Strathcona
Park in Ottawa (Canada) and the Piazza Gandhi in San
Donato, Milan (Italy). Three busts of Mahatma Gandhi
were also sent for installation at the University of Puerto
Rico, PR, New York; Vicenza, Milan, (Italy); and
University of UNSW, Sydney. The Council also sent two
busts of Rabindranath Tagore for permanent installation
in Ust Kamenogorsk City, Kazakhstan and Tagore
Museum, Bangladesh. A Statue of Sri Aurobindo was air
freighted by ICCR for permanent installation at UNESCO
Headquarters in Paris.
The ICCR also sent eight major exhibitions (ICCR’s own
collection), including the Exhibition entitled “Celebrating
Women-Amrita Shergill Revisited” to Seoul (Korea);
Astana (Kazakhstan); and Kabul (Afghanistan); the
Exhibition “Women by Women” to Algeria; a SAARC
Paintings Exhibition to Sri Lanka, Bangladesh & Maldives;
a Photographic Exhibition, “The Murals of India”, to
Rome, Italy; a Photographic Exhibition, “Legacy of
Compassion”, to London; Berlin & Casa de la India,
Valladolid (Spain); an Exhibition (first set) of Reprints,
“Kalpana – Masterpieces of Figurative Indian
Contemporary Paintings”, to London; Casa de la India,
Valladolid (Spain) & Berlin (Germany). A second set of
the same exhibition was sent to Port of Spain & Suriname,
with a third set going to Philippines.
The Council also sponsored visits of artists accompanying
their exhibitions abroad. These included the following
visits: (a) Ms. Nandita Palchaudhuri and her associate to
Durban (South Africa) to participate in the “Make
Art – Stop Aids” Exhibition held in May 2009;
(b) Shri Aditya Arya accompanying Kulwant Roy’s Photo
Exhibition, “History in the Making” in May/June 2009 to
Canada & USA; (c) Shri R. K. Bhatnagar with his
painting Exhibition to Suriname in June 2009;
(d) Ms. Aparajita Jain, Mr. Sadashiv Kuncolienker,
Mr. Susanta Mandal and Ms. Mithu Sen with their
Exhibition “Contemporary Indian Arts Festival” being
organized at Museum of Contemporary Art (MOCA) in
Shanghai during July 2009; (e) Shri Tilak Gitai &
Shri Pratik Gitai, with the Exhibition “RAGAMALA –
The Missing Link” which was held at The Nehru Centre,
London & Tagore Centre, Berlin from August to
September 2009. The Council also provided airfare to an
four member delegation which participated in a seminar
on the Exhibition, “CHALO INDIA: A New Era of Indian
Art” held in Vienna from 1-3 November, 2009. Air freight

were also provided to exhibits for the Exhibition “Painted
Narratives”, to Durban & Johannesburg (South Africa) from
1 September-5 October 2009; Ms. Anuradha Rishi
with the Exhibition “Nature in Peace” – a Tribute to
Mahatma held at The Nehru Centre, London (UK) from
29 September-1 October 2009; and the Photo Exhibition on
Gandhiji mounted by the Gandhi Smriti & Darshan Samiti,
New Delhi and sent to Croatia during September 2009.
The ICCR organized nine Incoming/Local exhibitions &
visits:
(1) Exhibition: Paintings of Contemporary Art from
Ministry of Culture, Egypt at Indira Gandhi National
Centre for the Arts (IGNCA), New Delhi during
May 2009; (2) Exhibition “Winsome Strokes” by
Ms. Deepa Seth Bhando at Shridharani Gallery, New
Delhi – 110001 in June 2009; (3)Photographic Exhibition
on Satyajit Ray curated by NGMA at RTC, ICCR, Kolkata
in June 2009; (4) Painting Exhibition by Group of Eminent
Painters from Egypt at Lalit Kala Akademi, New Delhi
during October 2009; (5) Exhibition by famous Cuban
Painter Ms. Zaida del Rio from Cuba at Lalit Kala Akademi
New Delhi from 2-7 November, 2009; (6) Painting
Exhibition “This, That and Then” by Ms. Shuchi Khanna
at Gallery Romain Rolland, Alliance Francaise, New Delhi
from 13-15 November, 2009. The Council also sponsored
the visit to India of a Bhutanese team led by
Mr. Lyonpo C K Dorji, Chairman, Royal Privy Council
(RPC), along with three Bhutanese artisans, for
familiarization with Bronze Casting Skills in India, from
3-7 November, 2009. The team met Indian sculptors &
artists and visited their workshops/studios in Kolkata,
Chennai, Ahmedabad & Delhi. The Council also financed
the painting exhibition and visit of two artists,
Ms. Victoria Lieana Dragomirescu and Ms. Sanda Butiu
from Romania. The Exhibition was held at RTC, ICCR,
Kolkata as well as at the Azad Bhavan Art Gallery, New
Delhi, from 27 November-5 December 2009.

Outgoing Cultural Delegations
During the period, the Council sponsored 63 cultural
delegations (up to 10 November, 2009).
The Council sponsored many outstanding artists,
including Ms. Geeta Radhakrishnan (Mohiniattam),
Ms. Susheela Mehta (Bharatnatyam), Ms. Aditi Mangaldas
(Contemporary Dance group “Drishtikon”),
Ms. Sruti Bandopadhay (Manipuri dance), Ms. Sangeeta
Dash (Odissi), Shri Hari and Ms. Chethna (Kathak),
Ms. Arushi Mudgal (Odissi), Pt. Debu Choudhury (Sitar),
Shri Ahmad Hussain and Shri Mohammad Hussain
(Ghazal).

178

Indian Council for Cultural Relations

The Council provided 38 travel grants to Composite
Dance group of Outstanding artists - Ustad Ali Ahmed
Hussain Khan (Shehnai), Ms. Mom Ganguly
(Mohiniattam), Ms. Bombay Jayashri Ramnath (Carnatic
vocal), Shri T. M. Krishna (Carnatic vocal), Choir group
of Vishwa Bharati University, West Bengal,
Ms. Daksha Seth Dance Company, Kerala. 50% of travel
grant to Contemporary Dance Group of Attakalari Centre
for Movement and Arts led by Shri Joychandran Palazhy,
Bharatnatyam dance group led by Shri V. P. Dhananjayan
& Ms. Shanta Dhananjayan and a vocal group led by
Shaguna Purushottaman was also provided. Apart
from this, the Council also provided travel grants to
many
outstanding
artists
such
as
Shri Deepak Kumar Chakraborty (Tabla),
Pt. Vishwamohan Bhatt (Mohan veena) and
Ms. Manisha Gulyani (Kathak).

Festival of India
As part of its effort to foster and strengthen cultural
relations and mutual understanding between India and
other countries, the Council organized the following
Festivals:

of India in Russia” (artworks from collection of National
Museum of India, New Delhi).
The Council decided to send approx 38 performing arts
groups to Russia for participation in the “Year of India”,
out of which 37 groups have already performed in Russia.
The Festival brought to a formal close on
7 December, 2009, with a specially designed presentation
by sarod maestro Ustad Amjad Ali Khan.
Festival of India in Argentina
The Council sponsored two dance troupes – a five member
Kuchipudi Dance Group led by Ms. Sailaja, and a
12-Member Dandiya Group led by Shri Ranabhai Sida
from Gujarat, from 4-15 November, 2009, for the Festival
of India in Argentina
Festival of India in Indonesia
The Council also participated in the Festival of India in
Indonesia by way of sending three performing arts groups
14-member Bhangra Group led by Shri Daljit Singh,
10-member Parikrama Band Group led by Shri Subir Malik
and three member Mohan Veena Group led by
Shri Vishwa Mohan Bhatt.

Year of India in Russia
The Festival Unit of the Council coordinated various
events for the “Year of India in Russia”, which opened on
31 March, 2009 at the New Bolshoi Theatre, Moscow in
the presence of Dr. Karan Singh, President, ICCR and
Mr. Zhukov, Dy. Prime Minister of Russia. The inaugural
event was based on a seamless blend of Indian Classical
Dances and comprised of eight performing arts groups
from various parts of India.
The Council also organized a gala presentation on
3 September, 2009 during the visit of President to Russia
in which 18 performing arts group comprising of Folk
dancers from all over India who presented a spectacular
show. In the course of the year, the Council organized the
following four Exhibitions in collaboration with ROSIZO,
Federal State Entity State Museum and Exhibition
Centre:- 1) “Leo Tolstoy and Mahatma Gandhi”: a Unique
Legacy in the State Leo Tolstoy Museum (Moscow) which
was displayed in the Museum-Estate of
Leo Tolstoy Yasnaya Polyana (Tula) where Leo Tolstoy
resided; 2) “A Journey of Indian Cinema” in the Art
Museum named after A. Tuganova(Vladikavkaz Republic
of North Ossetia-Alania) on 10 November, 2009; 3) “The
Modern Art of India: pictorial Trajectories” (art works
from the collection of NGMA, New Delhi) ; 4) “Divines
and Mortals”: the most important exhibition of the “Year

Outgoing Visitors Programme
The Council sponsors the visit of Indian intellectuals,
scholars, academicians and artists to facilitate their
participation in seminars, symposia, study tours and
conferences abroad.
During the period April-November 2009, the Council
sponsored the visits of 82 eminent scholars to various parts
of the world.

Distinguished Visitors Programme
As part of its effort to foster and strengthen cultural
relations and mutual understanding between India and
other countries, the Council facilitates the visits to India
of eminent public personalities as well as scholars,
intellectuals, academicians and artists from other
countries under its Distinguished Visitors Programme.
During the period, the Council hosted 11 distinguished
visitors from different countries such as Ukraine, Japan,
Republic of Korea, Germany, Hungary, USA and Spain.

Awards
President of India presented the Jawaharlal Nehru Award
for International Understanding for the year 2007 to the
President of Iceland , Dr. Olafur Ragnar Grimsson, at a
special function held on 14 January, 2010.

179

26

Indian Council of World Affairs

D

uring the period from 1 April 2009-31 March 2010,
the Indian Council of World Affairs organized and
planned the events as under:

vii) Annual Lecture’ of the Association for India’s
Development [AID] on “India’s Place in the World”
by Prof. Lord Bhikhu Parekh (8 January, 2010).

Events organized from 1 April 2009-29 January 2010:

A list of the events organized and planned by the ICWA
is attached (Appendix-XVI).

i)

Lectures

7

ii)

Seminars

15

iii)

Bilateral Strategic Dialogue

13

iv)

Panel Discussions/Background Briefings

3

v)

Other events (Book Release etc.)

2

Total

Outreach programmes with Universities and Centres
for International Affairs within India:
During the period, the ICWA signed MoUs for bilateral
cooperation with the following:

40

i)

Manipal Advanced Research Group, Manipal
University.

ii)

Department of Political Science, University College
of Arts and Social Science, Osmania University.

Some of the major events included:
i)

ii)

iii)

iv)

v)
vi)

Lecture by an eminent China scholar Prof. V. P. Dutt
on “India and China: The Past and the Future”,
chaired by Shri Shiv Shankar Menon, former Foreign
Secretary (4 September, 2009).

Outreach programmes with Universities and Centres
for International Affairs outside India:
During the period, the ICWA signed MoUs for bilateral
cooperation with the following:

India-EU Forum on Effective Multilateralism –
Keynote address was delivered by Smt. Preneet Kaur,
Minister of State for External Affairs
(8-9 October, 2009).

i)

Argentine Council for International Relations.

ii)

European Union Institute for Security Studies
(EUISS).

International Conference: Asian Relations
Conference Series on ‘Emerging China: Prospects for
Partnerships in Asia’- Inaugural address was delivered
by Shri M.Hamid Ansari, Vice President of India
and valedictory address by Dr. Shashi Tharoor,
Minister of State for External Affairs
(21-23 November, 2009). The conference was
addressed by 25 foreign scholars and 15 Indian
scholars and was attended by over 300 persons
including academics, diplomats, officials etc.

Visits of Foreign Dignitaries to ICWA
The Council hosted the following foreign dignitaries
during the above period:
1)

Dr. Ahmed Shaheed, Minister of Foreign Affairs of
the Republic of Maldives; 29 July, 2009.

2)

Shri Jhala Nath Khanal, Chairman, Communist
Party of Nepal(UML); 6 November, 2009.

3)

Dr. Jaime Bermudez, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Republic of Colombia; 11 November, 2009.

4)

Mr. Kevin Rudd, Prime Minister of Australia;
12 November, 2009.

5)

ICWA’ Second India-Australia Round Table with the
Lowy Institute, Australia (12-13 November, 2009).

Mr. Manouchehr Mottaki, Foreign Minister of the
Islamic Republic of Iran; 17 November, 2009.

6)

Interaction with Mr. Kasit Piromya, Minister of
Foreign Affairs of Thailand (24 December, 2009).

Mr. Kasit Piromya, Minister of Foreign Affairs of
Thailand; 24 December, 2009.

7)

Prof. Lord Bhikhu Parekh; 8 January, 2010.

Major address on strategic affairs by Mr. Kevin Rudd,
Prime Minister of Australia – Presided over by:
Dr. M. S. Gill, Minister of Youth Affairs & Sports
(12 November, 2009).

180

Indian Council of World Affairs

ICWA continued to develop as a think tank and as an
important platform for foreign affairs discussions in India
during the above period.
During the period, ICWA strengthened its research wing
by appointing one Director (Research) and five Research
Fellows. At present there are six research fellows and a
Director of Research, who are specialists in area studies
and are working on different aspects of foreign and
domestic policies of their respective geographic areas of
specialization. The aim of the research wing is to acquire
in-depth knowledge about the various regions, understand
the Indian foreign policy towards the specific region and
formulate policy options for India working on the regions
of Russia and Eurasia, China, Japan, South Asia including
Afghanistan, West Asia North Africa, and South East
Asia. The Research Wing works in close co-ordination
with the Research Committee of the ICWA. ICWA
research fellows regularly participated in seminars with
lectures and contributed papers in various reputed
journals.
With the research faculty, the ICWA aims to come out
with a series of publications including books, monographs
and articles on various developments across the world
that can be used as reference tools by the policy makers.
ICWA’s Journal ‘India Quarterly’ (IQ) was brought out
regularly during this period. In addition, the ICWA is
bringing out a Special Edition of the IQ for the fourth
quarter (October-December 2009) on Indian foreign
policy. The Minister for External Affairs Shri S. M. Krishna
has contributed the lead article to the issue which will
feature articles on various themes of interest to India
contributed by eminent retired members of the Indian
Foreign Service.
ICWA participated in the following Council for Security
Cooperation in the Asia Pacific (CSCAP) related events
organized from April 2009-January 2010:
1.

CSCAP Study Group Meeting on Transnational
Crime Hubs held at Bangkok, Thailand from
30 April-2 May, 2009 attended by Shri C. D. Sahay.

2.

CSCAP Study Group Meeting on Naval
Enhancement held at Singapore from
25-26 May, 2009 attended by Capt. P. K. Ghosh.

3.

31 st Steering Committee Meeting held at
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia from 1 June, 2009
attended by Ambassador K. K. S. Rana and
Dr. AVS Ramesh Chandra.

4.

23rd Asia Pacific Round Table Meeting held at Kuala
Lumpur from 1-4 June, 2009 attended by
Dr. P. K. Dadhich and Shri Ajai Sahni.

5.

CSCAP Study Group Meeting on Climate Change
held at Kuala Lumpur from 30-31 May, 2009.

6.

CSCAP Study Group Meeting on Countering the
Proliferation of Weapons and Mass Destruction held
at Beijing, China on 29 June, 2009 and ARF ISM
Nuclear Disarmament held at Beijing from
1-2 July, 2009 attended by Ambassador Dilip Lahiri.

7.

CSCAP Study Group Meeting on Transnational
Crime Hubs held at Phuket, Thailand from
10-11 October, 2009 attended by Shri C. D. Sahay.

8.

32nd Steering Committee Meeting of CSCAP &
seventh General Conference held at Jakarta,
Indonesia from 15-16 November, 2009 attended by
Ambassador Dilip Lahiri.

9.

10th Meeting of CSCAP Study Group on Countering
the Proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction
in the Asia Pacific, from 6-8 December, 2009,
Fortuna Hotel, Hanoi, Vietnam.

10.

Fifth Meeting of CSCAP Export Controls Experts
Group, from 8-10 December, 2009, Fortuna Hotel,
Hanoi, Vietnam.

ICWA Library is gradually redeeming its glorious past of
yester years as a premier store house of information and
data related to foreign affairs. Library’s membership has
substantially increased, and its membership in January
2010 touched 627. It is continuously growing. The
increase in the number of researchers now using the library
is a testimony to the growing popularity of the place. The
automation and computerization work in the Library
began in early 2009 and about 75,000 books of the book
collection have already been entered in the system. The
catalogue of the books will be available online by
31 January, 2010, which will give researchers the facilities
of accessing and getting to know the Sapru House
collection. Sapru House has now memberships of esteemed
institutions and reputed national and international
professional bodies viz. DELNET, IASLIC, IFLA. These
memberships are optimally used to seek information or
borrow material for our Research faculty and research
students.
ICWA routinely receives queries from American Centre,
British Council, India International Centre, Nehru
Memorial and Museum Library, Central Secretariat,
DELNET and various other renowned libraries. Media
personnel of prestigious newspapers have been visiting
the library for reference information. A large number of
books are being added to the collection such as books on
key issues in international affairs and foreign policies
pertaining to Africa, South Asia, Central, East and West

181

Annual Report 2009 - 2010

Asia, and on themes such as Energy Security, Environment
and Climate Change, Global warming etc. Professors and
Research scholars alike from reputed Indian Institutions
and Universities have referred to the books, periodicals
and press clippings available in the library. A decision has
been taken for creating the digital content of the immense
and valuable treasure available in the ICWA library. The
press-clippings 10 lakh in number, bound volumes of

newspapers of 10 number of major Indian dailies from
the 1964 and rare books 700 in number will be preserved
through digitization and will be made available online
giving readers a special search tool on the web to look
into the vast store- house of information from the past
available with the ICWA making it a distinct treasure
house.

182

Research and Information System for
Developing Countries

Overview

R

IS, a New Delhi based autonomous think-tank under
the Ministry of External Affairs, is an organization
that specializes in international economic relations and
development cooperation. RIS has the mandate to
function as an advisory body to the Government of India
on matters pertaining to multilateral economic and social
issues, including regional and sub-regional cooperation
arrangements, as may be referred to it from time to time.
RIS is envisioned as a forum for fostering effective policy
dialogue and capacity-building among developing country
think-tanks on international economic issues.
RIS conducts policy research on international economic
issues and provides analytical support to the Government
of India in preparation for major meetings and negotiations.
The focus of the work programme of RIS has been on
promoting South-South cooperation and on assisting
developing countries in multilateral negotiations in various
areas. RIS has prepared major research studies to assist
various NAM Summits, East Asia Summit, SAARC
Summits, IBSA Summit, BIMSTEC Summits UNCTAD
Ministerial Conferences, WTO Ministerial Conferences,
among other high level events. RIS has been engaged in
the Track II process of several regional initiatives, including
the Track-II Study Group of CEPEA. RIS has also provided
analytical support to the Government of India during the
negotiating processes for concluding comprehensive
economic partnership agreements with different countries.
The organization has been engaged in policy dialogue on
the way forward for an Asian Economic Community with
leading policy think-tanks in Asia. Through its intensive
network of policy think tanks, both in India and other
countries, RIS has sought to strengthen policy coherence
on international economic issues.
Highlights of the RIS’ work during the year 2009-10 are
presented below:

Research and Policy Inputs Provided to
the Government
RIS conducted research studies to assist the policy
formulation specifically in the context of India’s economic
engagement with its partner countries. Some of the
specific inputs provided by RIS include:
183

27

ASEAN-India: Inputs were provided during the
Meetings of 15th ASEAN-India Working Group,
ASEAN-India Joint Cooperation Committee and
ASEAN-India Senior Office Meetings held in the
Ministry of External Affairs.
CEPEA: RIS participated in the Meeting of Track
II Study Group on CEPEA held in Sydney, Australia
in May 2009 and provided important inputs.
Asian Cooperation Dialogue: Briefing paper in
connection with the Eighth ACD Ministerial
Meeting on Update of the Think-Tanks Initiative
was submitted to the Ministry of External Affairs
on 6 October, 2009.
SAARC: Inputs were provided on various issues
concerned with SAARC in the in the interactive
sessions held with the high officials of the Ministry
of External Affairs from time to time.
Chiang-Mai Initiative and EAS: A brief note on
Chiang-Mai Initiative and EAS was submitted to
the Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) on
2 April, 2009.
IOR-ARC: Inputs were provided during the
Meetings IOR-ARC convened in the Ministry of
External Affairs.
Joint Study Group for Comprehensive Economic
Cooperation with Indonesia, New Zealand and
Australia: Inputs were provided on different aspects
of these issues in the interactive sessions held with
the high officials of the Ministry of Commerce from
time to time.
Heiligendamn Process: A note on the
“Heiligendamn Process – Possible Deliverables for La
Maddalena Summit 2009 – Some Comments” was
submitted to the MEA on 4 April, 2009. The
following Notes on the Heiligendamn L’Aquila
Process were submitted the MEA on
1 October, 2009: 1) Comments on Draft Elements
for Work on “Freedom of Investment to Mutual
Benefit”; 2) Inputs on the Theme of “Development”;
and 3) Inputs on the theme of “Innovation and
Technology”.

Annual Report 2009 - 2010

Policy Dialogue, Conferences and
Symposia

Dr. Biswajit Dhar, Director General, RIS extended the
vote of thanks to all the participants.

During 2009-10 RIS organized a number of policy
dialogues, conferences and symposia to fulfil its mandate
of fostering intellectual dialogue among developing
countries. The select major events organized in the period
include the following:

International Symposium on “Under Economic Crises,
How Should Asia Promote Further Economic
Integration?” 24-25 September, 2009: RIS and Japan
Economic Foundation hosted the International
Symposium on “Under Economic Crises, How Should
Asia Promote Further Economic Integration?” in New
Delhi from 24-25 September, 2009. The programme began
with an Open Forum which was chaired by
Prof. Arjun Sengupta, Member of Parliament (Rajya
Sabha) and Chairman, RIS. Dr. Biswajit Dhar, DirectorGeneral,
RIS
made
welcome
remarks.
Mr. Noboru Hatakeyama, Chairman and CEO, Japan
Economic Foundation (JEF) (Former Vice-Minister for
International Affairs, Ministry of International Trade and
Industry, Japan) delivered the Opening Speech. Dr. Shashi
Tharoor, Minister of State for External Affairs delivered
the keynote address. Dr. Biswajit Dhar, Director-General,
RIS was the moderator. The programme of the
international symposium had sessions on The Financial
and Economic Crisis and FTAs – How Can Intra-regional
Export Growth through FTAs help Tackle the Crisis?;
Asian FTAs in Progress – An Introduction to EAFTA,
CEPEA, and TPP; What Would be the Future Shape for
Regional Economic Integration in East Asia?
The concluding session was chaired by
Ambassador L. K. Ponappa, Vice Chairperson, RIS and
Dy. National Security Advisor. Summing up was done by
Mr. Noboru Hatakeyama and Dr. Biswajit Dhar. The
programme of the second day had Experts’ Informal
Roundtable Discussion. The Media Briefing session was
led by Dr. Biswajit Dhar and Mr. Noboru Hatakeyama.
The overall coordinator of the event was Dr. Ram Upendra
Das, Senior Fellow, RIS.

The Second South Asia Economic Summit,
11-12 December, 2009: The second South Asia
Economic Summit (SAFES) was organized by RIS in New
Delhi from 11-12 December, 2009 in New Delhi in
collaboration with SACEPS, UNDP, ESCAP, ADB and
FICCI. The partner institutes were IPS, CPD, IIDS and
SAWTEE. The programme of the inaugural session began
with welcome remarks by Dr. Biswajit Dhar, Director
General, RIS. Prof. Muchkund Dubey, President, Council
for Social Development and Chairman, RIS Research
Advisory Council chaired the inaugural session.
Mr. Xiaoyu Zhao, Vice President (Operations 1) Asian
Development Bank delivered the Special Address and also
released the ADB study on Intraregional Trade and
Investment in South Asia. Mr. Tariq Sayeed, President,
SAARC Chamber of Commerce and Industry made a
special presentation. Dr. Ajay Chhibber, UN Assistant
Secretary-General, UNDP Assistant Administrator and
Director for Regional Bureau for Asia and Pacific, UNDP.
The UNDP RCC study “The Global Financial Crisis and
the Asia-Pacific Region” and the latest RIS Discussion
Papers were also launched during the inaugural session.
Mr. Salman Khurshid, Minister of State (Independent
Charge) for Corporate Affairs, Government of India was
the Guest of Honour. He also delivered a Special Address.
Governor Atiur Rahman, Bangladesh Bank, Dhaka
chaired the special session. The participants took part in
open discussion that followed after the special address of
the Minister.
The themes of the different technical sessions of the
second SAES included: Global Economic Crisis and
Implications for South Asian Economic Integration and
Development; Regional Economic Integration: Deepening
of SAFTA; Strengthening Physical Connectivity in South
Asia; Towards an Inclusive Society in South Asia; Scope
for Project-based Plurilateral Cooperation in South Asia;
Trade, Climate Change and Food Security Issues for South
Asia; Special and Differential Treatment to LDCs in South
Asia; Migration and Development; South Asian
Regionalism; South Asian Integration: ADB Case Studies;
and Vision of Integration and Development in South Asia.
Dr. Sheel Kant Sharma, Secretary General, SAARC,
Kathmandu delivered the valedictory address.

18 th Biennial Meeting of Association of Indian
Economic and Financial Studies on “Emerging India
and the Global Economy”, 19-20 June, 2009: RIS,
jointly with the Association of Indian Economic and
Financial Studies (AIEFS), organized the 18th Biennial
Meeting of the Association of Indian Economic and
Financial Studies on Emerging India and the Global
Economy in New Delhi from 19-20 June, 2009. The
programme began with the welcome remarks Prof. Suhas
Ketkar, President, AIEFS and Dr. Biswajit Dhar, DirectorGeneral, RIS. Prof. Arjun Sengupta, MP (Rajya Sabha)
and Chairman, RIS made the Chairman’s remarks.
Prof. Abhijit Sen, Member, Planning Commission
delivered the keynote address. The Meeting had the
following important sessions: Presidential Session on
Global Recession and Development Financing;
Perspectives on Indian Economy; Productivity and Trade;

184

Research and Information System for Developing Countries

Financial Sector and Global Financial Crisis; Productivity
Challenges of Agriculture Sector; Socio-economic
Consequences of Globalization; Globalization and Trade
In the Valedictory Session Dr. Biswajit Dhar, DirectorGeneral, RIS made the initial remarks. Prof. Suhas Ketkar,
Vanderbilt University did the Summing up.
Ambassador L. K. Ponappa, Vice-Chairperson, RIS,
Deputy National Security Advisor and Secretary, NSCS
delivered the Valedictory Address. Dr. Ram Upendra Das,
Senior Fellow, RIS was the coordinator of the event.
Workshop on Alternate Patent Regime and Access to
Health, 25-26 May, 2009: RIS and the Chinese Academy
of Science and Technology for Development organized a
two-day “Workshop on Alternate Patent Regime and Access
to Health” in Beijing from 25-26 May, 2009. The inaugural
session began with the welcome remarks by the
Vice President of CASTED and by Mr. Miltos Ladikas,
Coordinator, and Innova-P2. Dr. Sachin Chaturvedi,
Senior Fellow, RIS extended the vote of thanks. The
Workshop had the following sessions: Panel on Global
Pharma and R&D Priorities in India; Panel on Global
Pharma and R&D Priorities in China; Trends in IPR
Regime India: Focus Health Sector; Trends in IPR Regime
China: Focus Health Sector; IPR, Indigenous Knowledge
and Medical Sector: Policy Imperatives: Case Study of
India; IPR, Indigenous Knowledge and Medical Sector:
Policy Imperatives: Case Study of China; Dynamics of
Innovation in Health Sector in India; Dynamics of
Innovation in Health Sector in China; Access to Health
and IP: Alternative Approaches and Innova P-2 - WHO
Work Overview: Chinese perspective and Indian
perspectives; and the Work Agenda Ahead and Joint
Perspectives for Innova - case study for pharmaceutical
survey and analysis to Innova P-2.
Pan-Asian Integration: Linking East and South Asia
and National Strategies for Regional Integration: South
and East Asian Case Studies, 20 November, 2009: RIS
jointly with ADB organized a seminar and launch of
books on “Pan-Asian Integration: Linking East and South
Asia”; and “National Strategies for Regional Integration: South
and East Asian Case Studies” in New Delhi on
20 November, 2009. The Seminar began with welcome
remarks by Dr. Ram Upendra Das, Senior Fellow, RIS.
Dr. Srinivas Madhur, Senior Director, Office of Regional
Economic Integration, ADB made the opening remarks.
Dr. Biswajit Dhar, Director-General, RIS addressed the
participants on the theme of linking South Asia with East
Asia. Dr. Isher Ahluwalia, Chairperson, ICRIER delivered
the keynote address. It was followed by the presentation
on Pan-Asian Integration: Main Findings of the Book by
Dr. Ganeshan Wignaraja, Principal Economist, Office of

Regional Economic Integration, Asian Development
Bank. Participants also took part in the open discussion
that followed.
RIS-ITPO Conference on India-ASEAN FTA:
Business Opportunities, 18 November, 2009: India and
ASEAN have signed a Trade in Goods FTA recently.
Linking together the dynamic economies of the
10 ASEAN countries and India in a trade pact is an
important event in the direction of strengthening their
mutual partnership in the realms of trade in goods, services
and investment as well as a stepping stone towards a
broader architecture for regional economic cooperation
in Asia. Against this background, RIS jointly with India
Trade Promotion Organization (ITPO), New Delhi
organized a Conference on India-ASEAN FTA: Business
Opportunities on Wednesday, 18 November, 2009 in New
Delhi. The programme began with Opening Remarks by
Dr. Subas Pani, Chairman and Managing Director, ITPO;
and Opening Remarks by Dr. Biswajit Dhar, DirectorGeneral, RIS. Mr. Yogendra Kumar, Additional Secretary
(MER), Ministry of External Affairs made inaugural
remarks. Mr. Rajiv Yadav, Executive Director, ITPO
extended the vote of thanks. It was followed by the panel
discussion on India-ASEAN FTA in Goods.
Mr. P. K. Dash, Joint Secretary, Ministry of Commerce &
Industry chaired. The panelists included Dr. Ram Upendra
Das, Senior Fellow, RIS; Professor N. Chandra Mohan,
IILM Institute for Higher Education; Mr. D. Matsushima,
Senior Director, JETRO; and Mr. Dilip Chenoy, Director
General, Society of Indian Automobile Manufacturers
(SIAM), New Delhi. It was followed by open
discussion.
IDEAs-RIS Workshop on Nature and Implications of
Expanding Presence of India and China for Developing
Asia, 5-6 November, 2009: RIS and the International
Development Economics Associates (IDEAs), New Delhi,
India hosted the .workshop on “Understanding the Nature
and Implications of the Expanding Presence of India and China
in the Global Economy”, with special reference to Asia in
New Delhi from 5-6 November, 2009. The brought
together activists, policy makers and academics from
various parts of developing Asia. The Workshop focused
on the following broad themes: On the Question of the
Shifting Power Centres in Global Economic Order: Role
of China and India; China’s Importance for Developing
Asia: Trade and Investment Relations; China’s Impact
on Developing Asia: Case Studies; India’s Importance for
Developing Asia: Trade and Investment Relations; Asian
Experience of Integration through Trade, Aid and
Investment: South Asia; Asian Experience of Integration
through Trade, Aid and Investment: South-East Asia; and
Future Regional Integration: Possible Trajectories.

185

Annual Report 2009 - 2010

Prominent participants in the workshop were Prof. Abhijit
Sen, Prof. Prabhat Patnaik, Prof. Muchkund Dubey,
Ambassador Navrekha Sharma and Ambassador
L. K. Ponappa. Lt. Gen. (Retd.) Andi Muhammad Ghalib,
Ambassador of Indonesia in India delivered a Special
Address.
Discussion Meeting on the Unrelenting Pressure of
Protectionism, 18 December, 2009: Global Trade Alert,
coordinated by the Centre for Economic Policy Research,
an academic and policy research think-tank based in
London, has come out with the report entitled “The
Unrelenting Pressure of Protectionism: The third GTA
Report”. The Report represents the latest data on the
protectionist dynamics at work since the first G-20 crisisrelated Summit in November 2008 and highlights the
many anti-trade measures that are in the pipeline. Drawing
upon a rich evidential base of over 600 completed
investigations of state measures that could affect foreign
commercial interests, the main findings are discussed in
the report. This report has a particular focus on
developments in the Asia-Pacific Region, which contains
several export-led powerhouses.
RIS organized launching of the report cum discussion
meeting on the third Report in New Delhi on
18 December, 2009. Dr. Simon Evenett, Professor of
International Trade, University of St. Gallen, who is the
editor of the Report, made a presentation on the main
findings of the Report. A large number of participants
took part in the discussion that took place during his
presentation.
Discussion Meeting on ASEAN Plus Agreements and
Opportunities for India, 19 January, 2010: RIS
organized a Discussion Meeting on ASEAN Plus
Agreements and Opportunities for India, on 19 January,
2010 in New Delhi. Dr Mia Mikic, Deputy Coordinator,
Asia-Pacific Research and Training Network (ARTNeT),
UNESCAP, Bangkok, initiated the discussion. A large
number of participants took part.
RIS-ERIA Brainstorming Symposium on Economic
Integration in East Asia: Emerging Landscape,
22 January, 2010: RIS in collaboration with ERIA
organized a one-day Symposium on the theme of
“Economic Integration in East Asia: Emerging Landscape”
in New Delhi on 22 January, 2010. Ambassador
K. Kesavapany, Director, ISEAS, Singapore chaired the
Inaugural Session which began with the welcome remarks
by Dr. Biswajit Dhar, Director General, RIS. Mr. Hidetoshi
Nishimura, Executive Director, ERIA, Jakarta delivered
the keynote address.

Ambassador S. T. Devare, Director General, ICWA, New
Delhi chaired the first session which addressed the theme
of Deepening Economic Integration in East Asia.
Dr. Sanjaya Baru, Editor, Business Standard, New Delhi
delivered the special address. Mr. V. L. Kantha Rao,
Director, MOC&I, New Delhi; Mr. Sugato Sen, Senior
Director, SIAM, New Delhi; and Mr. D. K. Nair, Secretary
General, CITI, New Delhi were the panelists.
Mr. Pushpanathan Sundaram, Deputy Secretary General,
ASEAN Secretariat chaired the second session which had
Presentation of ERIA Study: Comprehensive
Development Plan. Dr. Fukunari Kimura, Chief
Economist, ERIA, Jakarta was the lead presenter. The
panelists were: Mr. Manab Majumdar, Assistant Secretary
General, FICCI, New Delhi and Dr. Rashmi Banga, Senior
Economist, UNCTAD, New Delhi.
The third session was on the “Role of India in East Asian
Economic Integration.” Mr. Kavi Chongkittavorn, Executive
Editor, The Nation, Bangkok chaired this session.
Mr. P. K. Dash, Joint Secretary, MoC&I, New Delhi
delivered the special address. Dr. Ram Upendra Das,
Senior Fellow, RIS; and Mr. Daisuke Matsushima, JETRO,
New Delhi were the panelists.
Seminar on Patent Regime and Access to Health:
Define Strategies Urgently, 12 June, 2009: RIS and the
India Habitat Centre jointly organized the Seminar on
Patent.
Regime and Access to Health: Define Strategies Urgently
in New Delhi on 12 June, 2009. The seminar began with
initial remarks by Dr. Biswajit Dhar, Director General,
RIS and Mr. R. M. S. Liberhan, Director, India Habitat
Centre, New Delhi. A large number of participants took
part in the discussion that took place during the Seminar.
Dr. Sachin Chaturvedi, Senior Fellow, RIS was the
coordinator of the event.
Seminar on Fast Growth in India and China:
Implications for Jobs in the US in the Context of the
Financial Crisis, 15 April, 2009: RIS organized the
seminar on “Fast Growth in India and China: Implications
for Jobs in the US in the Context of the Financial Crisis” in
New Delhi on 15 April, 2009. Dr. Nagesh Kumar, DirectorGeneral, RIS made the initial remarks. Professor Ajit
Singh, Director of Research, Cambridge Endowment for
Research in Finance, University of Cambridge; Chair in
Economics, University of Birmingham Business School;
and Emeritus Professor of Economics, University of
Cambridge initiated the discussion on the subject at this
Seminar. Mr. R. Gopalan, Additional Secretary, Ministry
of Commerce and Industry chaired. A large number of
participants took part in the open discussion that followed.

186

Research and Information System for Developing Countries

Blocks with particular reference to India-ASEAN
Cooperation: On behalf of the Foreign Service
Institute, Ministry of External Affairs, RIS organized
the Capacity-Building Programme on Regional
Trade Blocks with particular reference to IndiaASEAN Cooperation for Diplomats from ASEAN
in New Delhi on 26 August, 2009.

Informal Dialogue Trade and Climate Change in
Emerging Economies: The Competitiveness,
Technology, and Intellectual Property Rights
Dimension, to be organized by ICSTD and RIS in
New Delhi on 30 March, 2010.

Outreach, Global
Networking

Presence

and

Training Programme for IFS Probationers (2008
Batch) on Global Economic Regime and India’s
Regional Economic Engagements: RIS, on behalf
of the Foreign Service Institute, Ministry of External
Affairs, organized the Training Programme for
IFS Probationers (2008 Batch) on Global Economic
Regime and India’s Regional Economic
Engagements
in
New
Delhi
from
7-11 September, 2009.

In keeping with its mandate, RIS has developed working
relationship with think-tanks in other developing
countries for undertaking collaborative programmes with
a focus on critical economic issues facing the global
community. Towards this end, RIS has developed strong
institutional links with Institute for Southeast Asian
Studies (ISEAS), Singapore; Development Research
Centre (DRC) of State Council of China; Institute of
Policy Studies (IPS), Colombo; Malaysian Institute of
Economic Research (MIER); Centre for Strategic and
International Studies (CSIS), Jakarta; Korea Institute of
International Economic Policy (KIEP); Institute of
Developing Economies of Japan; International Institute
for Trade and Development (ITD), Bangkok; Centre for
Policy Dialogue (CPD), Dhaka; South Asia Centre for
Policy Studies (SACEPS), Kathmandu; NAM Centre for
South-South Technical Cooperation (NAM-CSSTC),
Jakarta; Institute of Developing Economies (IDE/Jetro),
Japan; Economic Research Institute for ASEAN and East
Asia, Indonesia; and Vietnam Academy of Social Sciences.
RIS also works in close collaboration with several intergovernmental and international organizations including,
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP);
United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia
and the Pacific (UNESCAP), Bangkok; Asian
Development Bank (ADB), Manila; the Commonwealth
Secretariat, London; South Centre, Geneva; and
International Centre for Trade and Sustainable
Development, Geneva.

Capacity Building
Programmes

and

Training

Capacity-Building Module on Global Economic
Issues and Regional Trade Blocs with Special
reference to SAARC: RIS, on behalf of the Foreign
Service Institute, Ministry of External Affairs,
organized a special course on Capacity-Building
Module on Global Economic Issues and Regional
Trade Blocs with Special reference to SAARC for
the Diplomats from Maldives in New Delhi from
3-4 August, 2009.
Capacity-Building Programme on Regional Trade

ESCAP ARTNeT/RIS Follow-up Workshop on
Gravity Modelling of Trade Facilitation and “Behind
the Border” Measures Affecting Trade: The ESCAP
ARTNeT/RIS Follow-up Workshop on Gravity
Modelling of Trade Facilitation and “Behind the
Border” Measures Affecting Trade was held in RIS
from 21-25 September, 2009.
Training Module on Understanding Global
Training System and Regional Economic
Cooperation: RIS organized a Training Module on
Understanding Global Training System and Regional
Economic Cooperation on 23 October, 2009 in
conjunction with the UGC Refresher Training
Programme in Economics for College and University
Teachers conducted by the Academic Staff College,
Department of Economics, Jamia Millia Islamia
University, New Delhi.
International Economic Issues and Development
Policy (IEIDP) Programme. IEIDP Programme in
New Delhi from 15 February-12 March 2010.

RIS Publications
RIS published three Policy Briefs; 14 Discussion Papers;
one issues of the South Asia Economic Journal; two issues
of the Biotechnology and Development Review; two issues
of the New Asia Monitor, and one issue of the RIS MekongGanga Policy Brief were brought out. In addition one
combined issue of the RIS Diary was also published
(see Appendix-XVII). RIS publications can be
downloaded from its website http://www.ris.org.in.
Budget
RIS has sought a budgetary support of Rs. 3.14 crore
during 2009-10 from the MEA.

187

28

Library

T

he Ministry’s Library has over 100,000 books, rich
resource material and a large collection of maps,
microfilms and official documents. It is also equipped with
modern facilities to support policy planning and research.
The library subscribes / receives and maintains about
480 Periodicals/Journals (including online journals and
databases) and newspaper titles.
The library has an in-house computer system consisting
of a server, and 12 PCs. The system support data entry
and retrieval in Hindi as well. The Library has CD-ROM
databases on foreign affairs and current affairs. The Library
PCs are also equipped with CD writers and laser printers.
It also has a colour scanner (with OCR capability as well
as facility for storage and retrieval of Image), a microfilm/
microfiche reader printer, photocopiers and a HP Office
jet pro-laser printer with Desk Top Publishing (DTP)
software.
A Library Committee manages library activities including
purchase of books and subscription of journals/ periodicals.
In April 2008, Foreign Secretary has reconstituted the
Library Committee which now consists of Joint Secretary
(PP & R) as Chairman, three Directors from territorial
divisions as Members and Director (Lib & Info) as
Member Secretary.

All Documentation / Bibliographic Services as well as
other library operation and services have been
computerized, using an integrated library software package
“LIBSYS” covering all features of library management.
LIBSYS follows MARC as well as non-MARC format. It
supports word based free text searching using boolean
operators. It also provides online validation of input data
prior to updating the database. Information on all books,
maps, documents and selected articles from periodicals
received in the Library since 1986 [and also pre-1986
publications in active use] are available online through
intranet on all PCs of Ministry of External Affairs Library
at Patiala House. Library’s Information can also be
accessed through Internet in MEA Library’s website:
http://mealib.nic.in.
All new documents received in the Library i.e. books maps.
microfilms, selected articles from periodicals are being fed

on a regular basis in the database on foreign affairs. Using
this database and CD-ROM Database, the Library
provides Current Awareness Service and Bibliographical
and Reference Service. In addition, the Library regularly
issues:
Foreign Affairs Documentation Bulletin (FADB): a list
of Selected articles on International Relations and related
subjects.
Recent Additions: an annotated list of Books/
Publications added to the Library.
Chronicle of Events: important news items on
International Relations and related subjects
The library also regularly issues daily Chronicle, Book
Alerts and Article Alerts, which consist of abstracts and
full text of important articles from journals/periodicals
subscribed by MEA Library through group email id to all
Foreign Service Officers in the Ministry and Missions
abroad.
In addition, the MEA Library has become a virtual Library
in reality and have started subscribing “EIU online
services”, “MBIC from DATAMONITOR” and “JSTOR”
databases for the users at Head Quarters in New Delhi
and all Indian Missions Abroad. The library also subscribes
118 online journals / periodicals along with print copies.
These online databases and journals / periodicals can be
accessed on Internet via username and password. A list
of such titles has also been circulated at Head Quarters
as well as Indian Missions abroad and also available on
MEA Library’s Website: http://mealib.nic.in.
The Library in cooperation with NIC has brought out a
full text CD-ROM version of Annual Report of Ministry
of External Affairs [from 1948 to 1998-99] and foreign
Affairs Record [1995 to 1999 (August)]. The information
on the CD can be retrieved via combination of searches
including Boolean search on any given word or
combination of words. This CD-ROM version was
prepared based on material available as on 1 January, 2000.
This CD can be consulted in the MEA Library at Patiala
House, New Delhi.

188

Library

Retro-conversion and bar-coding of MEA Library records
project have been approved last year. The work has been
awarded last year and will be completed in the current
financial year.
Library also provides practical training to the student of
Library Science studying in various Institutions of Delhi
from time to time.
Dr. S. S. Dhaka, Director (Library & Information) and
Shri Sanjay K. Bihani, ALIO have been elected to IFLA
Committees and attended their meetings. MEA Library
has also been represented in International and National
Conferences/Seminars of various professional
Organizations and Associations including IFLA and SLA.
On
request
from
HCI,
Kuala
Lumpur,
Shri Sanjay K. Bihani, ALIO went on a month’s temporary

duty to set up the library in Indian Cultural Centre, Kuala
Lumpur during September-October 2009.
The Library has also processed case for Category five
Library as per orders of Ministry of Finance after a gap of
more than 17-18 years.
MEA Library website (http://mealib.nic.in) is being updated
regularly. A circular in this regard has been sent to all
Officers in the Ministry including Indian Missions abroad
as per instructions of Foreign Secretary.
Library users including research scholars are welcome to
access the Library and its database, including CD-ROM
Database, and the Foreign Affairs Information Retrieval
System (FAIRS). Photocopy and Computer print-out
facilities are also available to all Library users including
research scholars.

189

Appendices

Appendix I
Cadre strength at Headquarters and Missions abroad during 2009-10 (including Posts
budgeted by Ministry of Commerce and those ex-cadred etc.)
S. No

Cadre/Post

Posts at
Headquaters

Posts at
Mission

Total

1

Grade I

5

28

33

2

Grade II

6

40

46

3

Grade III

38

122

160

4

Grade IV

36

118

154

5

Junior Admn. Grade/Senior scale

47

164

211

6

(i) Junior Scale

10

25

35

(ii) Probationers Reserve

62

-

62

(iii) Leave Reserve

15

-

15

(iv) Deputation Reserve

19

-

19

(V) Training Reserve

7

-

7

245

497

742

(i) Grade I

84

122

206

(ii) Deputation Reserve

6

-

6

(i) Integrated Grades II&III

147

236

383

(ii) Leave Reserve

30

-

30

(iii) Deputation Reserve

16

-

16

(iv) Training Reserve

25

-

25

(i) Grade IV

189

416

605

(ii) Leave Reserve

60

-

60

(iii) Deputation Reserve

55

-

55

(i) Grade V/VI

154

101

255

(ii) Leave Reserve

60

-

60

(iii) Deputation Reserve

14

-

14

(i) Grade II of Cypher Cadre

41

145

186

(ii) Leave Reserve

24

-

24

(i) Stenographer’s cadre

142

488

630

(ii) Leave Reserve

47

-

47

(iii) Training Reserve(Hindi)

10

-

10

(iv) Deputation Reserve

12

-

12

13

Interpreter’s Cadre

7

26

33

14

L&T cadre

14

1

15

Sub Total

1137

1535

2672

Grand Total

1382

2032

3414

Sub Total
IFS(B)
7

8

9

10

11

12

193

Appendix II
Data on recruitment through direct recruitment, departmental promotion and Ltd
Departmental Examination made in the Ministry along with the reserved vacancies for
April 2009 to November 2009
Groups

Total No. of Vacancies

Number of Vacancies
Reserved
SC

ST

OBC

Unreserved

Group A

4

-

-

-

4

Group A
(Ex-Cadre)

3

-

-

-

3

Group B

85

4

8

4

69

Group C

15

-

-

1

14

Total

107

4

8

5

90

194

Appendix III
Number of IFS Officers with Proficiency in various languages
Language

Number of Officers

Language

Number of Officers

Arabic

86

Sinhalese

1

Korean

1

German

30

Bahasa Malaysia

2

Spanish

55

Nepalese

3

Hebrew

3

Bhasa Indonesia

12

Thai

2

Persian

19

Italian

3

Burmese

1

Turkish

6

Portuguese

20

Japanese

23

Chinese

56

Ukranian

1

Russian

73

Kazakh

1

Dutch

1

Vietnamese

1

Serbo-Croatian

3

Kiswahili

5

French

65

195

Appendix IV
Statement showing the number of passport applications received and passports issued,
miscellaneous applications received and services rendered, No. of Passports issued as
well as Revenue under Tatkaal Scheme and total Expenditure of Passport Offices from
1 January - 30 November 2009.
Name of
RPO/PO

Ahmedabad
Amritsar
Bangalore

No. of
Applications
received

No. of
No. of
Passports miscellanissued
eous
applications
received

Miscellaneous
services
rendered

Passports
issued
under
Tatkaal

Revenue
under
Tatkaal
Scheme

Total
Revenue

Total
expenditure

273159

272593

8843

9012

-

26814750

298576250

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

54542707
-

272700

271191

24196

22327

38879

68826100

305016175

44064883

Bareilly

60492

57412

1899

1735

2814

4521000

66497770

20389512

Bhopal

71912

59498

2001

1949

9358

14049500

85467969

17226803

Bhubneswar

40320

39062

2440

2025

17217

29033000

67036600

8418104

Chandigarh

234944

242228

28395

28534

14015

38866995

269538957

41433183

Chennai

216392

197792

24537

21563

666000 337979931

54038279

103794000

Cochin

200835

203368

33633

32278

37126

94040900

264106053

46807634

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

Coimbatore
Dehradun

38899

39892

2285

1983

4239

6994600

44713825

6543711

Delhi

261698

244967

21579

20798

53786

78537600

348050187

51920290

Ghaziabad

107433

102807

4223

3973

5787

14229600

110481301

17859853

5700

14790000

44954800

7597938

51255 137620900

392230849

67174629

Guwahati

38099

28906

4056

3518

Hyderabad

292675

255546

27304

26644

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

Jaipur
Jalandhar

122193

134749

22505

22339

1942

3149700

146109559

51017224

Jammu

18748

891

17554

819

97

138500

21612915

6793434

Kolkata

212497

187564

15977

15166

11773

29687500

205614259

33080578

Kozhikode

170672

173866

23609

23407

23372

39259000

214856920

36783246

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

Madurai

116188

118668

8012

7595

9322

19323600

140848976

21574560

Malappuram

134678

136951

19043

19043

11693

18124000

170918420

26037920

Mumbai

251904

244640

15634

15381

14793

23287500

278644309

79544206

Nagpur

55489

53314

1337

1292

4471

5779750

61053612

6732122

Panaji

27528

26786

4279

4604

1353

2065500

31832821

6337767

Lucknow

Patna

13545

14700

877

1125

347

562500

14655530

2667748

Pune

104725

103418

6181

6175

10327

15022500

105939975

17777495

Raipur

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

Ranchi

38998

37987

3796

3319

6930

10467500

40371910

5962118

Shimla

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

Srinagar

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

Surat

77429

77560

6529

6241

1207

1593500

79595600

13694877

Thane

137013

133507

4726

4878

5651

10004500

147263210

-

Trichy

108711

118311

9411

9162

6413

9285000

253955615

-

Trivandrum

124964

122252

25008

24004

25715

39071500

174802720

17296287

9221

14237000

184875776

19063230

1050803 1107363926

4623661142

832136059

Vishakapatnam
Total

59147

61745

13477

11735

3883987

3762171

383346

352624

196

Appendix V
MEA Actual Expenditure and 2004-2009, BE & RE (2009-10)
(Revenue & Capital)
Years

Actuals (in Rs. Crores)

Percentage of variation from previous year

2004-05

3756.15

12.31

2005-06

4089.67

8.88

2006-07

3949.68

-3.43

2007-08

4572.39

15.77

2008-09

6630.73

45.01

2009-10(BE)

6293.00

-5.09

2009 10(RE)

6333.00

0.64

197

Appendix VI
The Major Sectoral Allocations in the 2009-2010 Budget (Revised Estimate)
(Revenue & Capital)
Sectors

% of Total Budget

Allocation (in Rs. Crores)

3.45

218.79

Embassies & Missions

20.34

1288.05

Passport & Emigration

6.49

410.84

Special Diplomatic Expenditure

18.61

1178.40

Technical & Economic Cooperation

30.57

1936.29

Contributions to International Organizations

3.11

197.19

Grant to Institutions

2.53

160.36

Capital Outlay

6.32

400.00

Loans and Advances to Foreign Governments

6.67

422.50

Others

1.91

120.58

100.00

6333.00

MEA Secretariat

Total

198

Appendix VII
Principal Destinations of India’s Aid & Loan Programmes
The principal beneficiaries of our Aid and Loan Programmes in the Current Financial Year 2009-2010 are as under in
Revised Estimates 2009-2010
Aid & Loan to Countries

(In Rupees Crores)

% of India’s total aid and loan budget

1301.98

55.20

Afghanistan

287.00

12.17

Nepal

150.00

6.36

Bhutan

African Countries

125.00

5.30

Mongolia

125.00

5.30

Sri Lanka

80.00

3.39

Myanmar

55.00

2.33

Eurasian Countries

20.00

0.85

Bangladesh

3.76

0.16

Maldives

3.50

0.15

Latin American Countries

2.00

0.08

205.55

8.71

2358.79

100.00

Others
Total

1.

The Government of India has extended loans to the
Government of Bhutan and Government of
Mongolia to assist in the implementation of
developmental projects. During 2009-10, the loan
extended to the two Governments amounts to Rs.
422.50 crores.

2.

The Budget of the Ministry of External Affairs is
essentially a Non-Plan Budget. However, from 199697, a Plan Budget Head has been established with
the approval of the Cabinet. The Plan Budget caters
to certain large developmental projects undertaken
in some of the neighbouring countries of India, such
as Bhutan, Afghanistan and Myanmar. The TalaHydroelectric Project in Bhutan has been
commissioned. The other projects in Bhutan being
funded from the Plan Budget Head are the
Punatsangchu Hydroelectric Projects – I and II, the
Mangdechu Hydroelectric Project, and the
construction of the Dungsum Cement Plant. The
construction of the Kabul to Pul-e-Khumri double
circuit transmission line in Afghanistan has been
completed. Two sub - stations would be now
constructed at Doshi and Charikar in Afghanistan
as additional components of this project. The
Kaladan Multimodal Transport project in Myanmar
and the proposed Nalanda International University
being set up in India are also being funded from the
Plan allocations.

3.

The estimated expenditure of the Headquarters of
the Ministry of External Affairs during the Financial
Year 2009-10 is Rs. 218.79 crores, which is 4.29 %
of the total estimated revenue budget of Rs. 5096.00
crores ( Non-plan). Estimated expenditure on
Indian Missions and Posts abroad is expected to be
Rs. 1288.05 crores, which is about 25.28 % of the
total revenue budget of the Ministry.

4.

The Ministry of External Affairs revenue from
Passport and Visa fees and other receipts for 200910 are likely to be of the order of Rs. 2334.20 crores.
It is estimated that Passport fees would account for
Rs. 994 crores, Visa fees for Rs. 1240 crores and other
receipts for Rs. 100.20 crores .

199

Appendix VIII
Extracts from C&AG's Report on Ministry of External Affairs
Irregular appointment of local staff

Ex Consul General, Hamburg in the Federal Republic of Germany made
appointments against three local posts in contravention of guidelines of
MEA and facilitated the appointments of personnel directly from India
resulting in an irregular expenditure to the tune of Rs. 1.27 crore.
(Report No. CA 14 of 2008-09)

Extra expenditure due to deployment
of India-based chauffeurs

The deployment of India-based chauffeurs to three Missions namely
Dushanbe, Kyiv and Oslo resulted in extra expenditure of Rs. 57.98 lakh
during three years ending 2007-08. Inability to use the India-based
chauffeurs outside the city limits’ due to their lack of familiarity and
absence, of local language skills were other issues over and above the
extra expenditure.

Indian Council for Cultural Relations

Indian Council for Cultural Relations made payments totalling Rs. 49.91
lakh to a public relations consultant without adequate justification and
in contravention of Government policies.

(Report No. CA 14 of 2008-09)

(Report No. CA 15 of 2008-09)
Persistent irregularities

Unauthorised expenditure on engagement of contingency paid staff of
Rs. 58.10 lakh during April 2004 to May 2008 .
Loss of interest due to injudicious retention of excess cash balance
resulting in loss of interest of Rs. 50.85 lakh during August 2002 to March
2008 .
Recovery at the instance of audit on account of overpayment of pay and
allowances to employees of 44 MissionS/POSits abroad of Rs. 36.55lakh .
Unrealised VAT refunds aggregating Rs. 26.94 lakh, due to improper filing,
inadequate monitoring and deficiency in pursuance of VAT refunds in
Indian Missions at Durban, Kampala, Kathmandu and Nicosia.
(Report No. CA 14 of 2008-09)

200

Appendix IX
Status of Action Taken Note (Financial Year 2003-2009)
SI.No.

Year

No. of Paras/PA reports on
which ATNs have been
submitted to PAC after
vetting by Audit

Details of the Paras/PA reports on which ATNs are pending

No. of ATNs not
sent by the
Ministry even
for the first time

No. of ATNs sent
but returned with
observations and
Audit is awaiting
their resubmission
by the Ministry

No. of ATNs
which have been
finally vetted by
audit but have not
been submitted by
the Ministry to
PAC

1

2003

-

-

1

-

2

2004

-

-

1

-

3

2005

-

-

2

2

4

2006

-

-

-

1

5

2007

-

-

3

3

6

2008

-

6

1

4

7

2008-09

-

9

1

1

201

Appendix X
Treaties/Conventions/Agreements Concluded or Renewed by India with other countries
2009
S. Title of Convention/Treaty/
No Agreement

Date of
Signature

Date of Date of Entry
Deposit
into force
Ratification/
Accession/
Acceptance

A. MULTILATERAL
1.
2.

3.

C-142 Human Resources Development
Convention, 1975
Convention for the Unification of Certain Rules for
International Carriage by Air (the Montreal
Convention 1999).
ASEAN
Comprehensive Economic Cooperation between the
Republic of India and the Association of South East
Asian Nations:Trade in Goods Agreement along with its
annexes; Agreement on Dispute Settlement Mechanism;
Protocol to Amend the Framework Agreement; and
Understanding on Article 4 of the Agreement on Trade
in Goods Agreement.

25.3.2009

19.1.2009

27.4.2009

13.8.2009

16.12.2009

13.9.2006

20.1.2009

B. TRILATERAL
1.

Trilateral Agreement among the Government of the
Republic of India, the Government of the Federative
Republic of Brazil and the Government of the Republic
of South Africa concerning Merchant Shipping and
other Maritime Transport related Matters.

C. BILATERAL
1.

Argentina
Framework Agreement between India and Argentina on
cooperation in the Peaceful uses of Outer space.

14.10.2009

2.

MoU between SEGEMAR of Argentina Republic and
Geological Survey of India.

14.10.2009

3.

POC in S & T between Department of Science and
Technology of the Republic of India and Ministry of
Science, Technology and Productive Innovation of the
Argentina Republic on Sports Cooperation.

14.10.2009

MoU between Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sport of the
Republic of India and Sport Secretariat of the Argentina
Republic on Sport Co-operation.

14.10.2009

5.

MoU on cooperation in the field of Trade Promotion &
Technology Transfer in International Trade between the
Government of Argentina Republic and the Government
of Republic of India.

14.10.2009

6.

MoU between INTI, Republic of Argentina and National
Research Development Corporation New Delhi.

14.10.2009

4.

7.

MoU between ONGC Videsh Ltd. (OVL) and ENARSA.

8.

Institutional Cooperation Agreement between the
Argentina Council on Scientific and Technical Research
(CONICET) and the Council for Scientific and Industrial
Research, CSIR India.

202

25.3.2010

14.10.2009

1.1.2010

Appendix X

S. Title of Convention/Treaty/
No Agreement

9.

Date of
Signature

Exchange of letter for Five year Multiple entry gratis
business visas.

10. Agreement between the Government of the
Republic of India and the Government of Argentina for
Cooperation in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy.
11. Bangladesh
Agreement between the Government of the Republic
of India and the Government of the People’s
Republic of Bangladesh for the Promotion and
Protection of Investment.

Date of Date of Entry
Deposit
into force
Ratification/
Accession/
Acceptance

14.10.2009

14.10.2009

9.2.2009

26.3.2009

12

Belarus
Agreement between the Ministry of Youth Affairs and
Sports of the Government of the Republic of India and
the Ministry of Sports and Tourism of the Republic of
Belarus on Cooperation in the field of Physical
Training and Sport.

17.9.2009

17.9.2009

13

Benin:
Protocol for consultations betweenMinistry of External
Affairs of the Republic of India and the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs and African Integration of the
Republic of Benin.

4.3.2009

4.3.2009

Agreement between the Government of the Republic of
India and the Government of the Republic of Benin for
the creation of the India – Benin Joint Committee for
Political, Economic, Scientific, Technical and Cultural
Cooperation

4.3.2009

4.3.2009

Memorandum of Understanding between the
Government of the Republic of India and the
Government of the Republic of Benin for setting up an
Information Technology Centre of Excellence(CETI)
in the Republic of Benin.

4.3.2009

14

15

17

18

Cultural Exchange Programme between the Government
of the Republic of India and the Government of the
Republic of Benin in the years 2009 – 2012.

23.9.2009

Burkina Faso
Agreement between the Government of Republic of India
and the Government of Burkina Faso for the
establishment of the Joint Commission for Political ,
Economic, Scientific, Technical and Socio – Cultural
Cooperation

20.3.2009

Bulgaria
Agreement between the Government of the Republic of
India and Government of the Republic of Bulgaria on
Exemption from Visa Requirement for Holders of
Diplomatic And Official/Service Passports.

203

3.3.2009

20.3.2009

Appendix X

S. Title of Convention/Treaty/
No Agreement

Date of
Signature

Date of Date of Entry
Deposit
into force
Ratification/
Accession/
Acceptance

3.3.2009

3.3.2009

20. Canada
MoU between The Government of the Republic of India
and the Government of Canada on the Establishment of
a Joint Study Group to Examine the Feasibility of a
Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement.

17.11.2009

17.11.2009

21. MoU between the Department of Natural Resources of
Canada and the Ministry of Power of the Republic of
India concerning Cooperation in the field of Energy.

17.11.2009

17.11.2009

22. MoU between the Ministry of Agriculture of the
Republic of India and the Department of Agriculture
and Agri-food, Canada on Cooperation in the field of
Agriculture and Allied Sectors.

13.1.2009

23. Chile
Agreement between the Government of the Republic of
India and the Government of the Republic of Chile on
Cooperation in Science and Technology.

21.4.2008

24. MoU on Cooperation in the field of New and Renewable
Energy of the Republic of India and the National Energy
Commission of the Republic of Chile

17.3.2009

17.3.2009

25. China
The Memorandum of understanding between the
Government of the Republic of India and the
Government of the People’s Republic of China on
organizing the “Festival of India” and the
“Festival of China” in the year 2010.

16.4.2009

16.4.2009

19

Programme for Cooperation in the Fields of Science,
Education and Culture between the Government of the
Republic of India and the Government of the Republic
of Bulgaria for the period 2009-2011.

27.3.2008

26. Colombia
MoU between the Ministry of National Defence of the
Republic of Colombia and The Ministry of Defence of
the Republic of India on Defence Cooperation.

4.2.2009

27. Agreement between the Republic of India and the
Republic of Colombia for Promotion and Protection of
Investments.

10.11.2009

28. Congo
Cultural Cooperation Agreement between the Republic
of India and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

29.10.2009

29.10.2009

29. Cape Verde
MoU on Protocol for consultations between MEA of the
Republic of India and Ministry of Foreign Affairs of
Republic of Cape Verde.

20.10.2009

20.10.2009

30. MoU between MEA of the Republic of India and
Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Republic of Cape Verde
for Establishment of IT Centre of Excellence.

20.10.2009

20.10.2009

204

27.11.2009

Appendix X

S. Title of Convention/Treaty/
No Agreement

Date of
Signature

Date of Date of Entry
Deposit
into force
Ratification/
Accession/
Acceptance

31. France
Agreement on Social Security between the Government of the
Republic of Government of the French Republic.

30.9.2008

32. Germany
Agreement between the Republic of India and the Federal
Republic of Germany on Social Insurance.

8.10.2008

19.3.2009

33. Hong Kong
Agreement between the Government of the Republic of India
and the Government of the Hong Kong Special Administrative
Region in the People‘ s Republic of China Concerning Mutual
Legal Assistance in Criminal Matters.

14.9.2009

19.10.2009

34. Italy
Agreement between the Government of the Republic of India
& the Government of the Italian Republic on Defence
Co-operation

3.2.2003

27.3.2009

35. Jordan
Agreement between the Government of the Republic of India
and the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan for the Promotion and
Protection of Investments.

1.12.2006

26.3.2007

36. Kazakhastan
Memorandum of understanding between Nuclear Power
Corporation of India and JS NAC Kazatomprom of Kazakhstan.

24.1.2009

24.1.2009

37. Memorandum of Understanding between the Indian Space
Research Organization of the Republic of India and National
Space Agency of the Republic of Kazakhstan on Cooperation
in the field of space activities.

24.1.2009

24.1.2009

38. Extradition Treaty between the Republic of India and the
Republic of Kazakhstan.

24.1.2009

22.1.2009

13.2.2009

39. Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement between
the Republic of India and the Republic of Korea.

7.8.2009

40. Kuwait
Executive Programme for the cultural and information
exchanges between the Government of the Republic of India
and the Government of the State of Kuwait 2009-2011.

7.4.2009

41. Agreement on Scientific and Technological Cooperation
between the Government of the Republic of India and the
Government of the State of Kuwait.

7.4.2009

42. Executive Programme for Education and Learning cooperation
between the Government of the Republic of India and the
Government of the State of Kuwait 2009-2011.

7.4.2009

7.4.2009

43. Liberia
Protocol for consultation bet. MEA of the Republic of India
and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Liberia.

18.9.2009

18.9.2009

44. Libya
Bilateral Investment Promotion and Protection Agreement
between India and the Great Socialist People’s Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya.

25.5.2007

205

7.4.2009

8.11.2007

25.3.2009

Appendix X

S. Title of Convention/Treaty/
No Agreement

Date of
Signature

Date of Date of Entry
Deposit
into force
Ratification/
Accession/
Acceptance

45. Mali
Protocol for consultations between MEA of the Republic of
India and Ministry of Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of the Republic of Mali.

9.10.2009

9.10.2009

46. Agreement of Political, Economic, Scientific, Technical and
Cultural Cooperation between the Government of the
Republic of India and the Government of the Republic of Mali.

9.10.2009

9.10.2009

47. Mexican States
Mutual Legal Assistance Treaty on Criminal Matters between
India and the United Mexican States.

10.9.2007

48. Programme of cooperation between the Government of the
Republic to India and the Government of Mongolia in the
field of culture for the year 2009- 2012.

14.9.2009

14.9.2009

49. MoU between Departments. of Atomic Energy of the
Government of the Republic of India and the Nuclear Energy
Agency, Regulatory Agency of the Government of
Mongolia on cooperation in the field of Peaceful use of
Radioactive Minerals and Nuclear Energy.

14.9.2009

14.9.2009

51. Agreement between the Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare, Government of the Republic of India and
the Ministry of Health, Government of Mongolia on the
Cooperation in the field of Health and Medical Science.

14.9.2009

14.9.2009

52. MoU between the Ministry of Statistics and Programme
Implementation, Government of India and The National
Statistical Office of Mongolia on Cooperation
in Statistical Matter.

14.9.2009

14.9.2009

28.9.2007

17.1.2009

50. Agreement between the Government of the Republic of India
and the Government of Mongolia on Stabilization Loan
Assistance.

53. Mozambique
Agreement between the Government of the Republic of India
and the Republic of Mozambique for the Reciprocal
Promotion and Protection of Investments.

19.02.2009

18.5.2009

54. Myanmar
Agreement between the Government of the Republic of India
and Government of the Union of Myanmar for the Promotion
and Protection of Investments.

24.6.2008

1.10.2008

55. Nigeria
MoU between the Bureau of Indian Standards and the
Standards Organization of Nigeria.

4.9.2009

56. Poland
Agreement between the Government of the Republic of India
and the Government of the Republic of Poland on
Cooperation in the Field of Health and Medicine.

24.4.2009

57. Agreement between the Government of the Republic of India
and the Government of the Republic of Poland on
Tourism Cooperation.

24.4.2009

206

5.2.2009

4.9.2009

24.4.2009

Appendix X

S. Title of Convention/Treaty/
No Agreement

Date of
Signature

58. Qatar
Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of
the Republic of India and the Government of the
State of Qatar.

14.11.2009

59. Romania
Protocol between the Government of the Republic of India
and the Government of Romania amending the Agreement
between the Government of Romania and the Government
of the Republic of India on the Promotion and Reciprocal
Protection of Investments.

16.2.2009

Date of Date of Entry
Deposit
into force
Ratification/
Accession/
Acceptance

6.5.2009

60. Agreement between the Government of India and the
Government of Romania on the authorization for the gainful
occupation for the family members of a member of the
diplomatic mission or consular post.
61. Scotland
MoU on India – Scotland Renewable Energy Cooperation
between the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy,
Government of the Republic of India and the
Government of Scotland.
62. Serbia
Agreement between the Government of the Republic of
India and Federal Government of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia for the Promotion and Protection of Investments.

17.9.2009

14.10.2009

31.1.2003

63. Agreement between the Government of Republic of India
and the Government Republic of Serbia on Cooperation in
the field of Agriculture and Allied Sectors.

3.3.2009

64. Sao Tome and Principe
Protocol for Consultations Between Ministry of External
Affairs of the Republic of India and Ministry of Foreign ,
Cooperation and Communities of the Democratic Republic
of Sao Tome and Principe.

1.12.2009

65. Singapore
Agreement between the Government of the Republic of India
and the Government of the Republic of Singapore on
Science and Technology Cooperation.

3.8.2009

66. Spain
MoU between the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy of
the Republic of India and the Ministry of Industry, Tourism
and Trade of the Kingdom of Spain in the field of
Renewable Energy.

7.10.2009

67. MoU between the Ministry of Agriculture of the Republic of
India and the Ministry of Environment, Rural and Marine of
the Kingdom of Spain in the field of Agriculture and
Allied Sectors.

23.4.2009

68. Syria
Memorandum of Understanding between the India and Syria
on cooperation in Oil and Gas Sector.

14.1.2009

207

14.10.2009

5.5.2003

24.2.2009

3.8.2009

23.4.2009

Appendix X

S. Title of Convention/Treaty/
No Agreement

Date of
Signature

69. Sierra Leone
Agreement of Political, Economic, Scientific, Technical and
Cultural Cooperation between the Republic of India and
The Government of the Republic of Sierra Leone.

13.1.2009

Date of Date of Entry
Deposit
into force
Ratification/
Accession/
Acceptance

70. Tajikistan
Extradition Treaty between the Republic of India and
Republic of Tajikistan.

14.11.2003

71. USA
MoU for the collaboration on Solar Energy Research and
Development between the Solar Energy Centre, Ministry of
New and Renewable Energy Republic of India and the
National Renewable Energy Laboratory, United States
Department of Energy.

23.11.2009

23.11.2009

72. MoU for the collaboration on Wind Energy Research and
Development between the Centre of Wind Energy
Technology, Ministry of New and Renewable Energy
Republic of India and the National Renewable Energy
Laboratory, United States Department of Energy.

23.11.2009

23.11.2009

73. Agreement between the Government of the Republic of
India and the Government of USA to Establish a Board and
an Endowment for Joint Reserch and Development,
Innovation, Enterpreneurial and Commercialization
Activities in Science and Technology.

20.7.2009

20.7.2009

74. Agreement between the Government of the Republic of
India and the Government of USA on Technology
Safeguards at all facilities under the Jurisdiction and/ or
Control of the Government of the Republic of India
Associated with the Launch of U.S Licensed Spacecraft.

20.7.2009

20.7.2009

3.2.2009

3.2.2009

75. MoU between the Ministry of New and Renewable energy
of the Republic of India and The Department of Energy of
the USA on Cooperation in the Development of
Bio Fuels.
76. Vietnam
Memorandum of Understanding between the Government
of the Republic of India and the Government of the Socialist
Republic of Vietnam on the Recognition of Vietnam‘s
Full Market Economy Status.

208

21.10.2009

10.6.2005

18.02.2009

Appendix XI
Instruments of Full Powers Issued during the period 1 January 2009 to December 2009
Sl. No. Convention/Treaty

1.

2.
3.
4.

5.
6.
7.

8.
9.

10.
11.

12.
13.
14.

15.
16.

Date of
Full Powers

Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of the Republic of
India and the Government of Australia on Cooperation in the field of
Water Resources Management.

15.1.2009

Statute of the International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) adopted at Bonn on the
twenty sixth day of January in the year two thousand and nine.

20.2.2009

Agreement between the Government of the Republic of India and the Republic of
Mozambique for the Reciprocal Promotion and Protection of Investments.

06.5.2009

The Protocol between the Republic of India and the Republic of Finland for the
avoidance of double taxation and the prevention of fiscal evasion with respect
to taxes on income.

08.7.2009

Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement between the Republic of India and
the Republic of Korea.

14.7.2009

Agreement between the Government of Republic of India and the Government of the
Republic of Singapore on Science and Technology Cooperation.

14.7.2009

Agreement between the Government of the Republic of India and the Government
of the United States of America to Establish a Board and an Endowment for Joint
Research and Development, Innovation, Entrepreneurial and Commercialization
Activities in Science and Technology.

15.7.2009

Memorandum of Understanding on Labour Mobility Partnership between the
Republic of India and the Kingdom of Denmark.

31.7.2009

Comprehensive Economic Cooperation between the Republic of India and the
Association of South East Asian Nations: Trade in Goods Agreement along with its
annexes; Agreement on Dispute Settlement Mechanism; Protocol to Amend the
Framework Agreement; and Understanding on Article 4 of the Agreement on Trade
in Goods Agreement.

7.8.2009

Agreement on Social Security between the Republic of India and the Grand Duchy
of Luxembourg.

10.8.2009

Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of the Republic of India
and the Government of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam on the Recognition of
Vietnam‘ s Full Market Economy Status.

10.8.2009

Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of the Republic of India
and the Government of the State of Qatar.

12.11.2009

Agreement between the Republic of India and the Republic of Colombia for Promotion
and Protection of Investments.

9.11.2009

Memorandum of Understanding on Cooperation in Bamboo Applications and R&D
between the Ministry of Science and Technology, Government of the Republic of India
and the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development of Government of the
Republic of Colombia.

9.11.2009

Agreement between the Republic of India and the Republic of Colombia for
Promotion and Protection of Investments.

10.11.2009

Agreement on Social Security between the Republic of India and the
Swiss Confederation

20.10.2009

209

Appendix XII
Instruments of Ratification/Accession issued during the period
1 January 2009 to December 2009
Sl. No. Instruments of Ratification/Accession

Date of Issue of Ratification

1.

C-142 Human Resource Development Convention, 1975

2.

Trilateral Agreement among the Government of the Republic of India, the Government
of the Federative Republic of Brazil and the Government of the Republic of South
Africa concerning Merchant Shipping and other Maritime Transport related Matters.

20.01.2009

3.

Extradition Treaty between the Republic of India and the Republic of Kazakhstan.

13.02.2009

4

Protocol between the Government of the Republic of India and the Government of
Romania amending the Agreement between the Government of Romania and the
Government of the Republic of India on the Promotion and Reciprocal
Protection of Investments.

6.5.2009

Agreement between the Government of the Republic of India & the Government of
Republic of Chili on cooperation in Science and Technology.

27.3.2009

Agreement between the Government of the Republic of India & the Government of
the Italian Republic on Defence Co-operation.

27.3.2009

Agreement between the Republic of India and the Federal Republic of Germany on
Social Insurance.

19.3.2009

Agreement between the Govt. of Republic of India And the Govt. of the People’s
Republic of Bangladesh for the Promotion and Protection of Investment.

26.3.2009

Convention for the Unification of Certain Rules for International Carriage by Air
(the Montreal Convention 1999).

27.4.2009

10

Agreement between the Govt. of the Republic of India and the Republic of
Mozambique for the Reciprocal Promotion and .Protection of Investments.

18.5.2009

11.

Host Country Agreement between the Government of the Republic of India and the
Permanent Court of Arbitration(PCA)

22.6.2009

Agreement on Social Security between The Government of the Republic of India and
the Government of the French Republic

22.5.2009

5
6
7
8
9

12
13

14
15

19.1.2009

Agreement between the Govt. of the Republic of India and the Govt. of the Hong Kong
Special Administrative Region in the People‘ s Republic of China Concerning Mutual
Legal Assistance in Criminal Matters.

19.10.2009

Treaty between the Republic of India and Bosnia and Herzegovina on Mutual Legal
Assistance in Criminal Matters.

27.11.2009

Agreement between the Republic of India and the Republic of Colombia for the
Promotion and Protection of Investments

27.11.2009

210

Appendix XIII
Conference/Seminars/Study projects organized/undertaken by Institutions/NGOs, which were
funded, partially or wholly, by Policy Planning & Research Division during the Period
Sl. No.

Event

Institution / Beneficiary

1

Heads of Missions Conference,New Delhi

PP&R Division, M.E.A., New Delhi

2

Research Project on PoK(5 years)

Institute for Defence Studies and
Analyses, New Delh

3

Two-day seminar on “Terrorism of 26/11: Implications for
Indian Foreign Policy”

Vidya Prasarak Mandal, Mumbai

4

Three seminars on Nepal, China and Pakistan(1 year)

Asia Centre, Bangalore

5

Seminar on Ragiv Gandhi’s Disarmament initiatives: Global
and South Asian Context.

Madanjeet Singh
University, Pondicherry

6

Celebrations of Nehru’s Birthday as “Asian Unity Day”

Association of Asian Union,
New Delhi

7

Two-day seminar on “India and Africa : An Emerging
Partnership”.

Society for Indian Ocean Studies
(SIOS), New Delhi

8

One time financial Assistance. of Rs.75,00,000/-

Centre for Indian Studies Beijing
University, Beijing

9

Setting up an Institute of Foreign Policy Studies in Calcutta
University Campus, Alipur

Kolkatta University, Kolkatta

10

Three-day Seminar on “Fertile Crescent : India and Great
Powers”

Centre for West Asian and African
Studies, Jawahar Lal Nehru University,
New Delhi

11

Two-day seminar on “New Dimension of Indo-Arab Relations”

Maharaja College, Ernakulam

12

Second China-South Asia forum

Centre for the Study of Developing
Societies, New Delhi

13

National Workshop on “Costal Security: Needed a New Look”

Mahatma Gandhi University,
Kottayam, Kerala

14

Seminar on “India and Asia Pacific: Convergence and
Divergence”

Centre for Southeast Asia & Pacific:
Studies, Sri Venkateshwar University,
Tirupati

15

National Interest Project (20 topics)

Indian Council for Research on
International Economic Relations
(ICRIER), New Delhi

16

Financial Assistance for the expenditure incurred onmonthly
meetings during 2009

Association of Indian Diplomats
(AID), New Delhi

211

Appendix XIV
List of ITEC Partner Countries
S. No

Countries

S. No

Countries

1

Afghanistan

40

D.R. Congo

2

Albania

41

Djibouti

3

Algeria

42

Dominican Republic

4

Angola

43

East Timor

5

Anguilla

44

Ecuador

6

Antigua and Barbuda

45

Egypt

7

Argentina

46

El-Salvador

8

Armenia

47

Equatorial Guinea

9

Azerbaijan

48

Eritrea

10

Bahamas

49

Estonia

11

Bahrain

50

Ethopia

12

Bangladesh

51

Fiji

13

Barbados

52

Gabon

14

Belarus

53

Gambia

15

Belize

54

Georgia

16

Benin

55

Ghana

17

Bhutan

56

Grenada

18

Bolivia

57

Guatemala

19

Bosnia - Herzegovina

58

Guinea

20

Botswana

59

Guinea Bissau

21

Brazil

60

Guyana

22

Brunei Darussalam

61

Haiti

23

Bulgaria

62

Honduras

24

Burkina Faso

63

Hungary

25

Burundi

64

Indonesia

26

Cambodia

65

Iran

27

Cameroon

66

Iraq

28

Cape Verde Island

67

Ivory Coast

29

Cayman Island

68

Jamaica

30

Central African Republic

69

Jordan

31

Chad

70

Kazakhstan

32

Chile

71

Kenya

33

Colombia

72

Kiribati

34

Commonwealth of Dominica

73

Korea(DPRK)

35

Comoros

74

Kyrgyzstan

36

Costa Rica

75

Laos

37

Croatia

76

Latvia

38

Cuba

77

Lebanon

39

Czech Republic

78

Lesotho

212

Appendix XIV

S. No

Countries

S. No

Countries

79

Liberia

119

Russia

80

Libya

120

Rwanda

81

Lithuania

121

Samoa

82

Macedonia

122

Senegal

83

Madagascar

123

Serbia

84

Malawi

124

Seychelles

85

Malaysia

125

Sierra Leone

86

Maldives

126

Singapore

87

Mali

127

Slovak Republic

88

Marshall Islands

128

Solomon Island

89

Mauritania

129

South Africa

90

Mauritius

130

Sri Lanka

91

Mexico

131

St. Kitts & Nevis

92

Micronesia

132

St. Lucia

93

Moldova

133

St. Vincent & Grenadines

94

Mongolia

134

Sudan

95

Montenegro

135

Suriname

96

Montserrat

136

Swaziland

97

Morocco

137

Syria

98

Mozambique

138

Tajikistan

99

Myanmar

139

Tanzania

100

Namibia

140

Thailand

101

Nauru

141

Togo

102

Nepal

142

Tonga

103

Nicaragua

143

Trinidad & Tabago

104

Niger

144

Tunisia

105

Nigeria

145

Turkey

106

Oman

146

Turkmenistan

107

Palau

147

Turks & Caicos Island

108

Palestine

148

Tuvalu

109

Panama

149

Uganda

110

Papua New Guinea

150

Ukraine

111

Paraguay

151

Uruguay

112

Peru

152

Uzbekistan

113

Philippines

153

Vanuatu

114

Poland

154

Venezuela

115

Qatar

155

Vietnam

116

Republic of Congo

156

Yemen

117

Republic Of Sao Tome

157

Zambia

118

Romania

158

Zimbabwe

213

Appendix XV
List of Empanelled ITEC Training Institutes
S.No.

Name of Institute

City

1.

Bureau of Parliamentary Studies and Training

New Delhi

2.

Institute of Government Accounts and Finance

New Delhi

3.

International Center for Information and System Audit

Noida

4.

National Crime Records Bureau

New Delhi

5.

National Institute of Training for Standardization (Bureau of Indian Standards)

Noida

6.

Aptech Limited - New Delhi

7.

Centre For Development of Advanced Computing

Mohali

8.

Centre For Development of Advanced Computing

Noida

9.

Centre For Excellence in Telecom Technology and Management

Mumbai

10.

CMC Ltd.

New Delhi

11.

NIIT Ltd.

New Delhi

12.

UTL Technologies Ltd.

Bengaluru

13.

Administrative Staff College of India

Hyderabad

14.

Institute of Applied Manpower Research

Delhi

15.

IIM

Ahmedabad

16.

International Management Institute

New Delhi

17.

Entrepreneurship Development Institute of India

Ahmedabad

18.

National Institute of Entrepreneurship and Small Business Development

Noida

19.

National Institute of Micro Small & Medium Enterprises

Hyderabad

20.

National Institute of Rural Development

Hyderabad

21.

The English and Foreign Languages University

Hyderabad

22.

Human Settlement Management Institute

New Delhi

23.

Indian Institute of Mass Communication

New Delhi

24.

International Statistical Education Centre

Kolkata

25.

National Institute of Bank Management

Pune

26.

National Institute of Technical Teachers Training and Research

Chennai

27.

National University of Educational Planning and Administration

New Delhi

28.

Research and Information System for Developing Countries

New Delhi

29.

V.V. Giri National Labour Institute

Noida

30.

Central Fertilizer Quality Control & Training Institute

Faridabad

31.

Central Institute of Rural Electrification

Hyderabad

32.

Central Institute of Tool Design

Hyderabad

33.

Central Scientific Instruments Organization

New Delhi

34.

Fluid Control Research Institute

Kerala

35.

Indian Institute of Production Management

Orissa

36.

Indian Institute of Remote Sensing

Dehradun

37.

Indian Institute of Technology

Roorkee

38.

National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education & Research

Punjab

39.

RITES (Courses for Railway Personnel only)

Gurgaon

40.

South India Textile Research Association

Coimbatore

41.

The Barefoot College

Tilonia, Rajasthan

42.

TERI (The Energy & Resources Institute)

New Delhi

214

Appendix XVI
Seminars/Conferences/Lectures/Meetings: April 2009 - March 2010
No. Date

Event

Following events already held from April 2009 to January 2010
Lectures
1. 29 July 2009
2. 4 Sept. 2009
3. 6 Nov. 2009
4. 11 Nov. 2009
at 1600 hrs.
5. 12 Nov. 2009
at 1500 hrs
6. 17 Nov. 2009
at 1100 hrs.
7. 8 January 2010
at 4.30 p.m.

Lecture on “Vision of Indo-Maldives Relationship in the context of Democratization in
Maldives” by Dr. Ahmed Shaheed, Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Maldives
Lecture by Prof. V.P. Dutt on “India and China: The Past and the Future”Chaired by: Shri
Shivshankar Menon, former Foreign Secretary
Talk on “Political Transition in Nepal” by Shri Jhala Nath Khanal, Chairman, Communist
Party of Nepal, (UML)
Lecture by Dr. Jaime Bermudez, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of
Colombia on “Colombia and its International Perspective” Presided over by:Dr. Shashi
Tharoor, Minister of State for External Affairs
Major Address on Strategic Affairs byMr.Kevin Rudd, MP, and Prime Minister of Australia
Presided over by:Dr. M.S. Gill, Minister of Youth Affairs & Sports [in collaboration with the
Australian High Commission in New Delhi]
Lecture by Mr. Manouchehr Mottaki, Foreign Minister of the Islamic Republic of Iran
‘Annual Lecture’ of the AID on “India’s Place in the World” by Prof. Lord Bhikhu
Parekh.Chief Guest: Dr. Shashi Tharoor, Hon’ble Minister of State for External Affairs

Seminars
1. 9-10 April 2009
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

9.
10.
11.

12.

13.

National Seminar on “Regional Security in South Asia” [in collaboration with the
Department of Geopolitics of Manipal University] [Seminar at Manipal University]
5 June 2009
Seminar on “Nepal”
12 June 2009
Seminar on “Sri Lanka”
13 July 2009
Seminar on “President Obama’s New West Asian Policy: Prospects and Challenges”
17 July 2009
Seminar on “Nepal Today & Nepal-India Relations”
25 July 2009
Seminar on the “Geo-Political Contest in Afghanistan and its Impact on India’s
interest”Organized by ICWA and Asia Centre, Bengaluru. (Seminar in Bangalore)
31 July 2009
Seminar on ‘Indonesia Today: Post Elections Reassessment of Democracy, Military and
Islam’Main Speaker: Mr. Bambang Harymurti, Chief Editor, TEMPO Magazine from Jakarta
12 August 2009 Seminar on “Socio-cultural transformation: Future of Culture in Changing Societies” in Male
(Maldives) As part of events during the India-Maldives Friendship Week in Male (Seminar in
Male, Maldives)
25 August 2009 Seminar on “Iran-GCC Relations: Understanding Current Dynamics”
8 Sept. 2009
Seminar on ‘Climate Change’Chairman: Shri Shyam Saran, Special Envoy of PMSpeaker:
Shri Raj Chengappa, CEO, India Today
29 October 2009 One-Day National Seminar on “India and its Neighbourhood: Changing Trajectories of
Relations” in collaboration with the Department of Political Science, Osmania University,
Hyderabad (Seminar in Hyderabad)
21-23 Nov. 2009 International Conference: Asian Relations Conference Series on ‘Emerging China: Prospects
for Partnerships in Asia’Inaugural Address by:Shri M. Hamid Ansari, Vice President of
IndiaValedictory Address by: Dr. Shashi Tharoor, Minister of State for External Affairs [in
association with the Association of Asia Scholars (AAS), New Delhi (In commemoration of
ICWA Foundation Day)]
3 Dec., 2009
Joint Conference with Azerbaijan on “India-Azerbaijan Cooperation: Prospects and Challenges”
(on the Occasion of Azerbaijan’s National Day Anniversary; in association with the Azerbaijan
Mission in New Delhi)The Deputy Foreign Minister of Azerbaijan and the Azeri Ambassador
in India participated

215

Appendix XVI

No. Date

Event

14. 7-9 Dec. 2009

India-China-Russia Trilateral Seminar organised by Institute of Chinese Studies at ICWA.
Dinner on 7th December 2009 was hosted by Director General, ICWA
One-Day International Seminar on “India’s Effective Look East Policy” in collaboration
with the Society for Indian Ocean Studies(SIOS), Calcutta Chapter and Centre for South
& Southeast Asian Studies, Calcutta University Venue: Kolkata

15. 19 Dec. 2009

Bilateral Dialogues
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

20 April 2009
8 June 2009
11August 2009
16 Sept. 2009
18 Sept. 2009
(IIC)
6. 8-9 Oct. 2009

7. 12-13 Nov 2009
8. 8-12 Dec. 09

9. 14 Dec. 2009
10. 24 Dec. 2009
11. 29 Dec. 2009

12. 19 Jan. 2010
13. 27-29 Jan. 2010

Interactive Session with African Editors
Interaction with Sri Lankan Editors
Interaction in ICWA with Editors from Bangladesh
An Interaction with the Indonesian Members of Parliament
Discussion with Latin American and Caribbean HoMs on cooperation between ICWA and
its counterpart Institutions in their countries followed by Lunch at IIC
India-EU Forum on “Effective Multilateralism”Keynote Address by: Smt.
Preneet Kaur, Minister of State for External Affairs [in collaboration with the European
Union Institute for Security Studies(EUISS) & Delegation of the European Commission]
ICWA’ Second India-Australia Roundtable with the Lowy Institute, Australia
India-Russia DialogueA six member delegation led by Ambassador S.J.S. Chhatwal visited
Moscow for the ICWA-MGIMO Annual dialogue[In collaboration with Moscow State Institute
of International Relations (MGIMO)]Venue: Moscow]
Interaction with a delegation of Senior Journalists (Editors and Correspondents) from Nepal
Interaction with Mr. Kasit Piromya, Minister of Foreign Affairs of ThailandChaired by:
Ambassador A.N. Ram
Interaction with Prof. Dr. Amitav Acharya, Professor, South-East Asian and East Asian Studies,
American University, School of International Service, Washington D.C. & Ten Students from
the School of International Service, American University, Washington DC, USAChaired by:
Ambassador Ronen Sen, former Ambassador of India to the United States of America
Interaction with Senior Editors/Journalists from China Chair: Ambassador K. Raghunath,
former Foreign Secretary of India.
India-Malaysia Strategic Dialogue with Institute of Strategic and International Studies (ISIS),
MalaysiaVenue: Kuala Lumpur

Panel Discussions/Background Briefings
1. 30 April 2009
2. 2 Dec. 2009
3. 5-7 Jan. 2010

In-house discussion on “Regional Security Environment – A Five Year Perspective” by the
Association of Indian Diplomats in partnership with ICWA
Function to mark the International Day of Solidarity with the Palestinian peopleChief
Guest:Dr. Shashi Tharoor, Minister of State for External Affairs
Meeting of the Joint Research Project on India-GCC Relations in collaboration with the
Gulf Research Centre (GRC) of Dubai being coordinated between the GRC in UAE, the
Public Diplomacy (PD) Division, MEA, and the ICWA [Coordinated with Ambassador
Shri Ranjit Gupta]

Book Release etc.
1. 19 June 2009

2. 21 Dec. 2009

Release of the Book: “Democracy, Nation Building and Peace in South Asia: Challenges
and Prospects” [Edited by Prof. Nalini Kant Jha, Rajiv Gandhi Chair Professor in Contemporary
Studies at Allahabad Central University, Allahabad] by Prof. Bimal Prasad, Chairman, National
Gandhi Museum and Honorary Director, Rajendra Prasad Academy
Discussion on the book: “A New Energy Frontier: The Bay of Bengal Region” [Edited by
Ambassador Sudhir T. Devare, Director General, ICWA] Chair: Dr. Vijay L. Kelkar, Chairman,
Finance Commission of India

216

Appendix XVI

No. Date

Event

Activities Planned (February-March 2010)
1. 4 Feb. 2010

Lecture by the President of the Republic of Slovenia, H.E. Dr. Danilo Türk on “Peace,
stability and prosperity of the Western Balkans”

2. 6 February 2010

Joint Seminar in collaboration with Asia Centre Bangalore on “Recent Developments in
Bangladesh and India’s Security Challenges” Venue: Bengaluru

3. 11 February 2010 Address by the Cuban Ambassador in New Delhi in connection with the 50th Anniversary of
India-Cuba Relations
4. February 2010
(Middle)

Seminar by Institute of Chinese Studies (ICS) at the ICWA

5. Jan.-Feb., 2010

To revive ‘Africa Centre’ at ICWAA brain-storming meeting to plan Africa related activities

6. February 2010

Seminar with Centre for Advanced Strategic Studies(CASS), Pune UniversityVenue: PuneWe
are in discussion with CASS & the date & precise topic will be decided later in December.

7. Late Feb. 2010

Seminar on India’ Nuclear Policy[Dates yet to be finalized]

8. Late Feb.early Mar. 2010

Conference on Afghanistan in N. Delhi [A delegation of Afghan MPs expected to
participate in the Conference being tied up in consultation with E/I Kabul]

9. Feb.-March 2010 Seminar in collaboration with the Kerala International CentreVenue: Thiruvananthapuram
10. Feb.-March 2010 Seminar with the Institute for Asian Studies, Hyderabad
11. March 2010

Visit of ICWA Delegation to Sikkim for preliminary discussions at the Sikkim University with
North-east academics & scholars on the proposed conference “India’s engagement with Asia
Pacific and the North-East” and finalization of the same for mid 2010, including the venue
(Shillong or Guwahati). [The visit to Sikkim will be held in March 2010]

12. 25-26
March 2010

Foresight Group London: International Seminar on Globalization (TBC)The Alfred
Herrhausen Society (a forum of Deutsche Bank) and Policy Network’, a think-tank in London
have proposed a conference on ‘India’s role in a Multi-polar world’ to be held in Delhi during
25-26 March, 2010. Policy Network will organize and pay for the visit of 40-50 scholars &
policy-makers from a number of countries. About 75-100 Indian participants from various
Indian Cities will also participate.

13. MarchApril 2010

Conference of the Commonwealth Journalists Association (South Asia Chapter) Venue: ICWA,
New Delhi

14.

Proposal for EAM’s Address at ICWA on a date convenient to EAM

15.

Talk by Ambassador Shri Aloke Sen on ‘India-Myanmar Relations’Venue: ICWA, New Delhi

16.

Lecture by Shri B.P. Singh, Hon’ble Governor of SikkimVenue: ICWA, New Delhi

17.

Signing of MoU with the Strategic Research Centre of Turkey (SRCT) – to be signed with
Ambassador of Turkey in Delhi

18. Early 2010

ICWA Delegation to Turkey for Dialogue with the Strategic Research Centre of Turkey
(SRCT)Dates for such visit will be considered after signing a MoU with SRCT.

19. Early 2010

ICWA Delegation to Nigeria for Dialogue with the Nigeria Institute of International
Affairs.Dates to be finalized in coordination with our High Commissioner in Nigeria

20. 1st quarter 2010

ICWA - ISEAS Singapore Dialogue.On developing cooperation in research, publication etc.
A MoU is proposed to be signed early next year. The Nalanda- Sriwijaya project undertaken
by several organizations, including ISEAS could be an appropriate subject to be associated
with ISEAS.

217

Appendix XVII
Seminars Organized by RIS

RIS Publications
Policy Briefs
#44 Agro-industry as the ‘Mahayana’ of International
Cooperation: A World Waiting to be Born, January
2010.

#154 Trade Facilitation, Information Technology
and SMEs: Emerging Evidences from India by
Sachin Chaturvedi.
#155 Addressing the Defaults of Globalization by Jan
Pronk.

#43 Regional Keynesianism: An Urgent Need of the
Hour and Its Relevance for India Today, September
2009.

#156 The European Union’s Proposed Carbon
Equalization System: Can It be WTO
Compatible? by Biswajit Dhar and Kasturi Das.

#42 IPR, R&D Capability and Health Care: Key Issues
before India, June 2009.

#157 Regional Economic Integration in South Asia:
Prospects and Challenges by Ram Upendra
Das.

#41 Financial Crisis, Global Economic Governance and
Development: Responses of Asia and the Global
South, February 2009.
Discussion Papers
#146 Livestock Industrialization, Trade and SocialHealth-Environment Impacts in Developing
Countries: A Case of Indian Poultry Sectors by
Rajesh Mehta, Clare A. Narrod and Marites M.
Tiongco.
#147 India’s Role in East Asia: Lessons from Cultural
and Historical Linkages by Ellen L. Frost.
#148 India’s Outward Foreign Direct Investments in
Steel Industry in a Chinese Comparative
Perspective by Nagesh Kumar and Alka Chadha.

#158 On Managing Risks Facing the Indian
Economy: Towards a Better Balance between
Public and Private Sector by Ramgopal
Agarwala.
#159 India’s Trade in Drugs and Pharmaceuticals:
Emerging Trends, Opportunities and
Challenges by Reji K Joseph.
#160 Regional Cooperation for Regional
Infrastructure Development: Challenges and
Policy Options for South Asia by Prabir De
Periodicals
1.

South Asia Economic Journal (Vol. 10 No. 1)
January-June 2009.

#149 Eradicating Poverty in India: Lessons from
Experiments in Empowerment by Beena Pandey.

2.

Asian Biotechnology and Development Review,
Vol. 11(3), July 2009.

#150 Policies for Industrial Learning in China and
Mexico by Kevin P. Gallagher and M.
Shafaeddin.

3.

Asian Biotechnology and Development Review,
Vol. 11(2), March 2009.

4.

New Asia Monitor, Vol. 6 No. 3, July 2009.

#151 Who Uses the Patent System in Developing
Countries? A Study of Patent Propensities in
Argentina, 1992-2001 by Andres Lopez and
Eugenia Orlicki.

5.

New Asia Monitor, Vol. 6 Nos. 1 & 2 April 2009

6.

Mekong-Ganga Policy Brief, No.4, March 2009.

#152 The Limited Promise of Agricultural Trade
Liberalization by Timothy A. Wise.
#153 Climate Change, Technology Transfer and
Intellectual Property Rights by K. Ravi Srinivas.

218

Newsletter
RIS Diary, Vol. 7, Nos. 1& 2, April 2009

Abbreviations

DTAC

Double Taxation Avoidance Convention

EAC

East African Community

EAS

East Asia Summit

ECOWAS

Economic Community Of West African
States

Asia Europe Meeting

EIL

Engineers India Limited

ASSOCHAM

Associated Chambers of Commerce
and Industry

EMM

East Asia Energy Ministers Meeting

EU

European Union

AU

African Union

EXIM

Export Import Bank of India

AYUSH

Ayurveda, Yoga & Naturopathy, Unani,
Siddha and Homeopathy

FICCI

Federation of Indian Chambers of
Commerce and Industry

BIMSTEC

Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multi-Sectoral
Technical and Economic Cooperation

FIPB

Foreign Investment Promotion Board

CCIT

Comprehensive Convention on
International Terrorism

FOC

Foreign Office Consultations

FTA

Free Trade Agreement

GAIL

Gas Authority of India Limited

GCC

Gulf Cooperation Council

AALCO

Asian African Legal Consultative
Organisation

AMM

ASEAN Ministerial Meeting

ARF

ASEAN Regional Forum

ASEAN

Association of South East Asian Nations

ASEM

CECA

Comprehensive Economic Cooperation
Agreement

CEP

Cultural Exchange Programme

GST

Goods and Service Tax

CHOGM

Commonwealth Heads of Government
Meet

HAL

Hindustan Aeronautics Limited

CIC

Central Information Commission

HIV/AIDS

Human Immuno Virus / Acquired
Immuno Deficiency Syndrome

CII

Confederation of Indian Industry

IAEA

International Atomic Energy Agency

CIS

Commonwealth of Independent States

IATT

Inter Agency Task Team

COMESA

Common Market for Eastern and
Southern Africa

IBF

India Business Forum

CORPAT

Coordinated Patrol

IBEF

India Brand Equity Forum

COSC

Chiefs of Staff Committee

ICCR

Indian Council for Cultural Relations

CPIO

Central Public Information Officer

ICRIER

Indian Council for Research on
International Economic Relations

CPV

Consular Passport and Visa

ICT

CRRID

Centre for Research in Rural and
Industrial Development

Information and Communication
Technology

ICWA

Indian Council of World Affairs

CSCAP

Council for Security Cooperation in Asia
Pacific

IDSA

Institute for Defence Studies and Analyses

CSD

Comprehensive Security Dialogue

IFS

Indian Foreign Service

DIPP

Department of Industrial Policy and
Promotion

IIBF

Indian Institute of Banking and Finance

IIFC

India International Film Convention

IIT

Indian Institute of Technology

DSSC

Defence Services Staff College

219

Abbreviations

ILO

International Labour Organisation

INS

Indian Navy Ship

INSTC

International North-South Transport
Corridor

OECD

Organisation for Economic
Cooperation and Development

ONGC

Oil and Natural Gas Corporation

PDIL

Projects and Developments India Ltd.

INTOSAI

International Organisation of Supreme
Audit Institutions

PHARMEXIL

Pharmaceutical Export Promotion
Council of India

IRENA

International Renewable Energy Agency

PIO

Persons of Indian Origin

IONS

Institute of Noetic Sciences

RBI

Reserve of Bank of India

IOR-ARC

Indian Ocean Rim Association for
Regional Cooperation

RITES

Rail India Technical Economic Service

RTI

Right to Information

ISCS

Inter-State Council Secretariat

SAARC

ITEC

Indian Technical and Economic
Cooperation

South Asian Association for Regional
Cooperation

SADC

Southern African Development
Community

SAFTA

South Asia Free Trade Agreement

SBI

State Bank of India

SCAAP

Special Commonwealth Assistance for
Africa Programme

SCO

Shanghai Cooperation Organisation

JWG

Joint Working Group

LNG

Liquified Natural Gas

MECON

Metallurgical and Engineering
Consultants Limited

MERCOSUR

Market of Southern Cone Countries

MFN

Most Favoured Nation

SEBI

Securities and Exchange Board of India

MoU

Memorandum of Understanding

SEWA

Self Employed Women’s Association

NABARD

National Bank for Agriculture and
Rural Development

SEZ

Special Economic Zone

SME

Small and Medium Enterprises

NAFED

National Agricultural Cooperative
Marketing Federation of India Limited

STPI

Software Technology Parks of India

NAM

Non-Aligned Movement

TEAM-9

Techno-Economic Approach for Africa
India Movement

TEKES

Teknologian Kehittamiskeskus

TERI

Tata Energy and Research Institute

UNCTAD

United Nations Conferences on Trade
and Development

NASSCOM National Association of Software and
Service Companies
NATO

North Atlantic Treaty Organisation

NELP

New Exploration Licensing Policy

NEPAD

New Partnership for Africa’s
Development

UNESCO

United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization

NIC

National Information Centre

UNGA

United Nations General Assembly

NPT

Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty

UNSC

United Nations Security Council

NSC

National Security Council

UPA

United Progressive Alliance

NSG

Nuclear Suppliers Group

VSNL

Videsh Sanchar Nigam Limited

OCI

Overseas Citizenship of India

WTO

World Trade Organisation

220

