   java script is required for this page java script is required for this
   page java script is required for this page java script is required for
   this page java script is required for this page java script is required
   for this page

   Mon, February 09, 2015 at 00:49:57 IST Indian Flag
   Ministry of                      Print Content Small Font Medium Font      
    External       MEA Library      Large Font                                
    Affairs,   Ministry of External   * Sitemap                               
   Government  Affairs, Government    * Contact Us                            
    of India         of India         * Feedback                              
                                      * _____________________           [  ]  

     * Home
     * Director's Office
          * Director Lib & Info
          * Library Officers & Staff
     * Journals
          * Current Journals
          * Online Journals
          * CD-ROMs Databases
     * Online Services
          * Business Monitor Online
          * EIU
          * JSTOR
          * Janes Online Services
          * Kessing World News Archive
          * Marketline MDIC
          * Online Service Links
     * Newspapers
          * E-Newspapers
          * Subscribed Print Newspapers
     * Library Bulletins
          * Foreign Affairs Documentation Bulletin
          * Recent Additions
          * Chronicle of Events
     * Alert
          * Book Alert
          * Article Alerts
     * Important Abbrevations

 Annual Reports Prior to 1999                                                                  
   * Home >   Annual Reports Prior to 1999 >   Annual Report 1992-93           * Home          
 Annual Report 1992-93                                                         * Director's    
                                                                                 Office        
                 India's External Relations : An overview 1                    * Journals      
 S.NO.  CHAPTERS                                                    PAGE No.   * Online        
 1.   India's Neighbours                                             15          Services      
 2.   South-East Asia and the Pacific                                27        * Newspapers    
 3.   East Asia                                                      34        * Alert         
 4.   Central Asia                                                   41        * Important     
 5.   West Asia and North Africa                                     43          Abbrevations  
 6.   Africa (South of the Sahara)                                   54        * Back          
 7.   Europe                                                         60                        
      Eastern Europe                                                 60                        
      Western Europe                                                 71                        
 8.   The Americas                                                   75                        
      North America                                                  75                        
      Central and South America and the Caribbean                    80                        
 9.   United Nations and International Conferences                   83                        
      Political Issues                                               83                        
      Disarmament Issues                                             87                        
      Economic Issues                                                89                        
      Social and Humanitarian Issues                                 92                        
      Budgetary and administrative Issues                            93                        
      Election/Appointments                                          93                        
      Activities of the Non-Aligned Movement                         93                        
      Commonwealth                                                   93                        
      Conferences                                                    94                        
      International Law: Development and Activities                  95                        
 10.  Foreign Economic Relations                                     98                        
 11.  Policy Planning and Research                                   102                       
 12.  External Publicity                                             104                       
 13.  Protocol                                                       108                       
 14.  Passport and Consular Services and Indians Overseas            110                       
 15.  Administration and Organization                                115                       
 16.  Foreign Service Training Institute                             117                       
 17.  Implementation of Official Language Policy and Propagation of  119                       
      Hindi Abroad                                                                             
 18.  Cultural Relations                                             122                       
      APPENDICES                                                     129-168                   
                                                                                               
 -I>                                                                                           
 1992                                                                                          
 India's External Relations An Overview                                                        
 The functioning of the Minis" of External Affairs during the year 1992-93                     
 should be evaluated in the context of the additional dimensions of changes                    
 and uncertainties which characterised international relations during this                     
 period, as well as certain trends of domestic turmoil and tension. India's                    
 foreign policy, therefore, had to acquire the necessary flexibility and                       
 responsiveness to meet the situation. The year under review shows that the                    
 Ministry under the guidance of the higher leadership in the Government has                    
 been able to meet this objective to a satisfactory extent despite external                    
 pressures and internal constraints.                                                           
                                                                                               
 Basic considerations which governed the structuring of our foreign policy                     
 and its implementation are: preservation of India's national identity as a                    
 plural, democratic and secular society, India's territorial integrity, and                    
 well-being of our people. This last objective involved the refashioning of                    
 our domestic economic arrangements and its appropriate projection abroad so                   
 that the necessary external inputs could be ensured for sustaining                            
 developmental activities and modernisation of our economy. These factors                      
 governing our foreign policy were subject to pressures generated by                           
 external trends and forces characterising the international situation.                        
 While there were growing trends of democracy in the international community                   
 and a greater demand for economic fairplay and respect for human rights,                      
 there was also an upsurge of centrifugal ethno-religious forces,                              
 secessionist movements, assertion of subnational identities threatening                       
 composite pluralistic societies. Our foreign policy had to and has to cope                    
 with these challenges while ensuring our abiding interests in maintaining                     
 our national identity and ensuring our economic development.                                  
                                                                                               
 India adjusted to the rapidly changing external scenario with dynamism and                    
 a practical approach. Though in the aftermath of the cold war the world was                   
 perceived as unipolar with the United States becoming the most influential                    
 politico-military power, India perceived that the international situation                     
 cannot be defined in uni-dimensional terms. There were and there are other                    
 emerging centres of influence which would have long term influence on and                     
 implications for international relations. An economically resurgent China,                    
 - technologically and economically dominant Japan and Germany, a                              
 politically assertive Europe integrating itself in socio-economic terms                       
 were and are to be acknowledged as potent influences in the conduct of                        
 'foreign relations. The emergence of regional cooperation arrangements in                     
 the ASEAN and Asia Pacific region and in South and North America were other                   
 factors to be reckoned with. The emerging world, therefore, is multipolar                     
 and Indian foreign policy aimed at establishing equations with these                          
 emerging centres of influence in international relations. The balance held                    
 by the two superpowers is gone. The multiplicity of new nations and the                       
 role of Russia in the changed context requires bilateral exchanges and the                    
 forging of new associations with emerging nations.                                            
 -1>                                                                                           
                                                                                               
 India's relations with its immediate neighbours in South Asia are naturally                   
 a matter of highest priority. India made a conscious and purposive effort                     
 to improve bilateral relations and multilateral cooperation with its                          
 neighbours. Prime Minister, Shri Narasimha Rao, met Prime Minister Nawaz                      
 Sharif of Pakistan five times at different international conferences.                         
 Foreign Secretary level talks were held as scheduled throughout the period                    
 under review. Additional Confidence Building Measures are being put in                        
 place gradually. Attempts continued for establishing a working                                
 good-neighbourly relationship with Pakistan. In overall terms, however,                       
 there has been a distinct negative trend in Pakistan's attitude towards                       
 improving Indo-Pak relations. Unless there is a change in Pakistan's                          
 behaviour, an adversarial and tense interaction could be the prospect in                      
 the foreseeable future. The reason, in India's perception, is Pakistan's                      
 continuing domestic political compulsions to interfere in Kashmir and                         
 Punjab, Pakistan's perceptions about India's vulnerabilities of which it                      
 attempts to take advantage and Pakistan's own internal crisis of identity                     
 which necessitates the power structure of Pakistan nurturing an                               
 antagonistic relationship with India on the basis of communal and extremist                   
 religious arguments. While acknowledging these prospects realistically,                       
 India's endeavour remains to prevent the tense relationship from crossing                     
 thresholds which could drift towards military confrontation. India's long                     
 term interest is in having a good- neighbourly and normal relationship with                   
 Pakistan.                                                                                     
 -2>                                                                                           
                                                                                               
 Relations with Nepal, Bhutan, Sri Lanka and Maldives have steadily improved                   
 and the content of bilateral relations has increased. There is a                              
 qualitative and positive change in our relations with Nepal, which acquired                   
 economic substance due to the discussions held between the Prime Minister                     
 of Nepal and Prime Minister, Shri Narasimha Rao, at Delhi and Kathmandu.                      
 Our commitment to deepening our close links with Bhutan was expressed                         
 through decisions on cooperation in Bhutan's Seventh Five Year Plan                           
 (1992-97) and during the King of Bhutan's State visit to India in January                     
 1993. With Nepal, an ambitious agenda of cooperation in developing water                      
 resources and in strengthening our many bonds was agreed during Prime                         
 Minister Shri Narasimha Rao's visit to Nepal in October 1992. Discussions                     
 held by our Prime Minister Shri Rao with President Premadasa in Colombo in                    
 late 1991 and during Mr Premadasa's visit to India in January 1993 marked a                   
 constructive orientation in relations with Sri Lanka. There have been high                    
 level visits between these countries and India which contributed                              
 substantially to this process. Discussions between Prime Minister Narasimha                   
 Rao and President Gayoom also structured bilateral relations between India                    
 and Maldives on positive lines.                                                               
                                                                                               
 Relations with Bangladesh showed improvement, the highlight of the year was                   
 Prime Minister Begum Khaleda Zia's visit to India in May, 1992. The long                      
 standing problem related to the Tin Bigha corridor was resolved with India                    
 handing over Tin Bigha to Bangladesh and satisfactory arrangements being                      
 made for Bangladesh's access to the Tin Bigha area through a leased                           
 corridor. Issues relating to the sharing of water resources, the return of                    
 the Chakma refugees were the subject matter of detailed discussions. Though                   
 they remain unresolved, a willingness to reason together on these issues                      
 instead of taking rigid political stances characterised exchanges between                     
 the two countries.                                                                            
                                                                                               
 The demolition of the disputed structure in Ayodhya and its aftermath has                     
 affected bilateral relations with India on the one hand and Pakistan and                      
 Bangladesh on the other. The assertively intrusive pronouncements made by                     
 the leaders of these two countries and the resolutions passed in the                          
 National Legislatures of these two countries on developments in India have                    
 certainly generated additional tensions. Establishing a pattern of durable                    
 friendly relations and creating an atmosphere of peace and stability in the                   
 South Asian region, therefore, remains a difficult task but working for the                   
 objectives of friendship, peace and stability with patience remains a                         
 commitment of the Government of India not only because this is desirable                      
 but also because it is necessary and imperative for stability and progress                    
 of the South Asian region.                                                                    
 -3>                                                                                           
                                                                                               
 India's relations with the United States have become closer and more                          
 substantial. Beginning with the meeting between Prime Minister Narasimha                      
 Rao and President George Bush in New York in January 1992 during the                          
 Security Council Summit, a series of high level contacts continued                            
 throughout the period under review. These contacts covered political,                         
 strategic, economic and cultural activities in consequence of which Indo-US                   
 cooperation in these spheres have increased in range and content.                             
                                                                                               
 India has restructured its relations with all the countries which                             
 constituted the former Soviet Union. High level exchanges took place                          
 between India and the Russian Federation culminating in President Yeltsin's                   
 visit to India in January 1993 during which ten bilateral agreements for                      
 cooperation were signed covering the entire spectrum of political,                            
 economic, technological and defence relations. The visit, while underlining                   
 the continuity in IndoRussian relations, also signified India establishing                    
 a new pattern of relations with the Russian Federation, the latter                            
 emphasising that the relationship is with a new political entity and not                      
 merely a continuum from the relationship with the former Soviet Union.                        
                                                                                               
 The year was characterised by exchange of visits between the top political                    
 leaders of various Republics which constituted the former Soviet Union. A                     
 series of bilateral agreements of cooperation in different fields have been                   
 put in place with several of these Republics. India has established direct                    
 diplomatic relations with all the Central Asian Republics and European                        
 Republics which formerly were in the Soviet Union. Foundations have been                      
 laid for long term and substantive relations with all these Republics                         
 keeping in mind mutual requirements and complimentarities. Conscious of the                   
 special cultural and historical linkages with the Central Asian region,                       
 India has opened Embassies in Alma Ata in Kazhakhstan and Tashkent in                         
 Uzbekistan. The Ministry has also decided to open a Mission in Dushanbe in                    
 Tajikistan. These Missions have concurrent accreditations to cover other                      
 countries in Central Asia. The majority of leaders, who came to India from                    
 areas formerly of the Soviet Union, were from the Central Asian Republics                     
 and a number of leaders of the Government of India also visited these                         
 Republics.                                                                                    
 -4>                                                                                           
                                                                                               
 The politico-economic integration of Europe despite the difficulties being                    
 encountered in the process required India to incorporate the factor in its                    
 relationship with West European countries. High level contacts were                           
 maintained with these countries with Prime Ministerial level exchanges                        
 having taken place with UK, Germany, France, Portugal and Spain. Both                         
 political and economic relations were strengthened and their long term                        
 orientation are being defined in agreements with the European Community                       
 collectively and with several European countries individually.                                
                                                                                               
 India's relations with China showed steady improvement and were                               
 characterised by an increasing number of high level visits and discussions.                   
 Prime Minister Li Peng visited India during the period under review; former                   
 President R Venkataraman visited China and had extensive discussions with                     
 the entire leadership of China. Apart from these, Legislators, Ministers,                     
 cultural and technological delegations exchanged visits. Consulates were                      
 reopened in Shanghai and Bombay. The Joint Working Group dealing with the                     
 boundary question increased the ' frequency of its meetings and tangible                      
 progress has been made in implementing mutual confidence building measures                    
 and towards reaching an agreement on maintaining peace and tranquillity on                    
 the Line of Actual Control. While the resolution of the boundary question                     
 will take time, the objective of both sides has been to steadily strengthen                   
 bilateral relations and evolving a political atmosphere of mutual trust                       
 which would contribute to the solution of the boundary issue. Instead of                      
 the annual one round of the bilateral meetings of the Joint Working Group,                    
 two rounds (fourth and fifth) of the JWG have already been held during the                    
 year and the next round (sixth) will take place during 1993.                                  
                                                                                               
 Prime Minister Narasimha Rao's visit to Japan in June 1992 and the visit of                   
 Prince and Princess Akishino from Japan to India in November 1992,                            
 commemorating the 40th Anniversary of the establishment of diplomatic                         
 relations between India and Japan were the highlights of Indo-japanese                        
 relations during 1992-93. Indo-japanese political, cultural, economic and                     
 technological cooperation showed growth. High level exchanges between                         
 Governmental and economic leaders of the two countries gave an impetus to                     
 this process. These exchanges with Japan reflected the importance that                        
 India attaches to Indo-japanese relations in the context of Japan's                           
 significance and influence in regional and international affairs.                             
 -5>                                                                                           
                                                                                               
 Success of the ASEAN as a regional grouping of countries naturally                            
 attracted India's attention, given India's own economic reforms. India                        
 desired improved relations with individual countries in the ASEAN region                      
 and with ASEAN as a collective entity. ASEAN agreed to have sectoral                          
 dialogue with India and associated India with the ASEAN in a sectoral                         
 framework. This implies India's being able to interact with the ASEAN                         
 countries in specific areas of economic and technological activities.                         
 Bilateral relations with important ASEAN countries have also increased with                   
 possibilities of greater economic interaction between them and India.                         
 Beginnings have also been made for cooperation in the fields of defence                       
 supplies and consultations on security matters with the initiation of high                    
 level visits by our Defence Minister and senior officials of the Ministry                     
 and Service Chiefs to the area.                                                               
                                                                                               
 India has shown interest in associating itself with new economic                              
 cooperation arrangements which are on the anvil in the Asia Pacific region                    
 including countries like Australia, South Korea and Japan. But as these                       
 arrangements are still embryonic, final scope for further cooperation with                    
 this area is yet to crystallise into future groupings.                                        
                                                                                               
 India's relations with countries of the Gulf, West Asia and North Africa                      
 were maintained on an even keel. An important development was that the                        
 misunderstandings about India's policies in some countries towards the Gulf                   
 crisis of 1990-91 were removed. Relations were stabilised and upgraded.                       
 India's economic relations and the status and well-being of the people of                     
 Indian origin functioning in the Gulf countries, West Asia and North Africa                   
 stabilised and improved.                                                                      
                                                                                               
 India's establishing direct diplomatic relations with Israel was in                           
 conformity with the emerging trend in international relations of more and                     
 more countries including Arab countries having contacts with Israel. The                      
 Chairman of the PLO Mr Yasser Arafat also acknowledged the political                          
 realism of the step taken by India. India was invited to become a                             
 participant in the Middle East Peace Process and was invited to become a                      
 member of all the five working groups discussing different aspects of                         
 structuring new agreements on the Middle East-Palestine question. India has                   
 been a participant in these proceedings since their inception.                                
 -6>                                                                                           
                                                                                               
 Developments in South Africa, particularly the ongoing discussions between                    
 the African National Congress and the regime in Pretoria were a matter Of                     
 particular interest and attention to India. India has sent observers to                       
 monitor proceedings and discussions for the restoration of democracy and a                    
 majority government in South Africa. Indian political figures and officials                   
 have been in close touch with the Commonwealth Secretariat and with the                       
 African National Congress in furthering the process for the installation of                   
 a truly democratic Government in South Africa. Expectation is that such a                     
 Government will come into being by the end of 1993. India proposes to                         
 gradually increase its cultural, commercial and consular presence in South                    
 Africa in tandem with progress being made towards the installation of a                       
 democratic Government in that country. India expects to establish full                        
 diplomatic relations when a democratic Government comes into power in South                   
 Africa.                                                                                       
                                                                                               
 India maintained its close relationship with African countries and with                       
 their leaders. Programmes of economic and technical cooperation have been                     
 sustained. However, due to political violence, uncertainties and                              
 considerations of economy, the Ministry decided to close down its Missions                    
 in Zaire, Somalia and Malawi.                                                                 
                                                                                               
 India's bilateral relations with countries of Caribbean and South America                     
 were maintained at optimum levels despite limitations of distance and                         
 economic factors. India's cooperation with South American countries were                      
 particularly significant in the multilateral context as during the period                     
 under report the Global Summit Conference on Environment and the various                      
 meetings of the G-15 were held in that region.                                                
                                                                                               
 India was active in various multilateral fora sharing the concern of the                      
 international community on important issues and also for ensuring its own                     
 national interests which can be affected by the deliberations and decisions                   
 of such organisations. Prime Minister Narasimha Rao participated in the                       
 Security Council Summit at the end of January 1992. He also participated in                   
 the International Economic Conference at Davos and the Non-Aligned Summit                     
 at Jakarta. India remained active in the United Nations particularly as a                     
 member of the Security Council till the end of 1992, relinquishing the seat                   
 on the 1st of January 1993, at the end of India's two-year tenure. Indian                     
 forces are participating in UN peace keeping operations in Yugoslavia,                        
 Somalia, Cambodia and Mozambique.                                                             
 -7>                                                                                           
                                                                                               
 The Indian delegation led by Prime Minister Narasimha Rao took part in the                    
 crucial 10th Non-Aligned Summit held in Jakarta in September 1992. This                       
 Summit was crucial because it was the first Summit of the NAM after the                       
 disintegration of the Soviet Union, the end of the cold war, and the                          
 emergence of new equations between different power centres in the world.                      
 The relevance of the NAM and countries in the non-aligned movement was                        
 being questioned. Prime Minister Shri Narasimha Rao's speech gave the                         
 necessary orientation to the NAM emphasising that if the NAM was relevant                     
 in a bipolar world, it is even more relevant as a movement to protect the                     
 interests of the developing countries in a unipolar or economically                           
 multipolar world. Our Prime Minister's realistic and practical analysis of                    
 the prospect and role of the NAM was appreciated and was acknowledged as an                   
 important factor contributing to the movement adjusting to changing                           
 realities with the required orientations and directions.                                      
 Activities of the G-15 continued to be a matter of attention on the part of                   
 India. India participated in the preparatory meetings for the G-15 in                         
 Caracas, New York, Geneva and Dakar, ultimately leading to the                                
 participation of Prime Minister Narasimha Rao in the G-15 Summit in Dakar                     
 in November 1992. India alongwith Senegal and Malaysia contributed                            
 substantially to the programmes and projects being undertaken by the G- 15.                   
 India is to host the next summit of the G-15 in Delhi later in 1993.                          
                                                                                               
 India remains fully committed to the ideals and objectives of the SAARC                       
 Charter. Indian participation was active and sustained in various                             
 programmes, projects and workshops organised by SAARC. India took a                           
 particularly positive attitude on various new suggestions and projects for                    
 regional cooperation brought up with the SAARC during the period under                        
 review. India was supportive in finalising recommendations for poverty                        
 alleviation programme and for the establishment of a SAARC preferential                       
 trade area. It was India's expectation that high level policy decisions                       
 would be finalised during the SAARC Summit to be held in Dhaka in December                    
 and later in January. Unfortunately this Summit could not take place                          
 because of the political tensions and violence occurring in Bangladesh and                    
 Pakistan and the views expressed on bilateral and regional cooperation by                     
 leading governmental and political circles in these two countries which                       
 gave negative signals to a meaningful dialogue. The Government of India                       
 felt that holding of the Summit in a surcharged and tense atmosphere would                    
 be counterproductive. India hopes that an atmosphere of calm and peace                        
 would be restored so that the SAARC Summit could be held. India's request                     
 for a postponement of the scheduled Summit in no way erodes India's abiding                   
 commitments to cooperation with its South Asian neighbours within the                         
 framework of the SAARC. This last message was specially conveyed by the                       
 Prime Minister of India to the Heads of Governments of member countries of                    
 SAARC.                                                                                        
 -8>                                                                                           
                                                                                               
 In the deliberations at the LIN during the period covered by this report,                     
 India strongly advocated the democratisation of the LIN and for making the                    
 Security Council and other organs of the LIN more representative of the                       
 increased membership of the UN. While welcoming the increasingly effective                    
 role that the UN is playing in peace keeping and peace building operations,                   
 India urged that decisions regarding UN initiatives in these matters should                   
 always be based on a consensus in the General Assembly that such action                       
 should reflect the will of the international community rather than just                       
 five permanent members of the Security Council and that such activity                         
 should always be strictly within the framework of the UN Char-ter and                         
 carried out under the command of the LIN. India also noted that the five                      
 permanent members of the Security Council are not in favour of revising the                   
 Charter or expanding the Security Council though there have been                              
 suggestions that Germany and Japan could be given permanent seats. India                      
 would continue its advocacy for the democratisation of the UN to make it                      
 more effective.                                                                               
                                                                                               
 Issues of international concerns like human rights, environment, non-                         
 proliferation and the transfer of advanced technologies in their foreign                      
 policy dimensions engaged the attention of the Ministry. India has                            
 consistently maintained that while it is committed to universal norms of                      
 human rights, these should not be used unilaterally as an argument to                         
 pressurise developing countries. On non-proliferation, India remains                          
 committed to a principled stand, viz India is completely committed to                         
 nonproliferation. However, India will not be party to any discriminatory                      
 arrangement regarding non-proliferation as envisaged in the NPT. India is                     
 willing to work bilaterally and multilaterally to achieve the objective of                    
 global and complete disarmament, particularly nuclear disarmament within a                    
 definite timeframe on a non-discriminatory basis. India has agreed to have                    
 bilateral discussions with a number of important countries to meet this                       
 objective. That these countries which are committed to non-proliferation                      
 treaty are agreeable to have bilateral discussions with India indicates                       
 that in some measure they accept the logic and relevance of the Indian                        
 stand on non-proliferation though they may not completely agree with our                      
 approach. The NPT is coming up for renewal in 1995 preparatory work for                       
 this commencing later in 1993. India is of the view that this occasion                        
 should be utilised to review the contents of the NPT to make it                               
 non-discriminatory and universally applicable.                                                
 -9>                                                                                           
                                                                                               
 India participated in the Global Summit on Environment in Rio de Janeiro in                   
 June 1992 at the Prime Minister's level. India's advocacy in favour of                        
 protecting global environment without juxtaposing this objective with the                     
 need for sustained development found a responsive echo among many of the                      
 participants.                                                                                 
                                                                                               
 India has voiced opposition to restrictive or discriminatory regimes being                    
 put in place against the transfer of modern and sophisticated technologies                    
 from the advanced to the developing countries. These technologies relate to                   
 space, generation of nuclear energy, communications, informatics and so on.                   
 India is hoping to work with like-minded countries in ensuring the                            
 formulation and implementation of international rules and procedures in                       
 this regard in a fair and just manner.                                                        
                                                                                               
 In step with our liberalised economic policies and the growing importance                     
 of increasing trade, investment and technology flows, the Ministry worked                     
 through its Missions and Posts to promote and safeguard India's economic                      
 and commercial interests. It paid special attention to the requirement of                     
 external economic publicity in the context of the need to effectively                         
 project India and its economic reform programme to the international                          
 business community. In addition to preparing state of the art promotional                     
 material for use by its Missions abroad, the Ministry successfully                            
 organised several investment promotion events in target countries in                          
 coordination with concerned Ministries and with the participation of their                    
 senior Ministers and officials. For visiting delegations of top rank                          
 industrialists such as those that accompanied the British Prime Minister in                   
 January and the German Chancellor in February 1993, the Ministry organised                    
 high level panel discussions between the visiting industrialists and                          
 several Secretaries to key Ministries of Government of India such as                          
 Finance, Commerce, Industry, Power and Telecommunications. These                              
 Roundtables were widely appreciated both by the foreign Governments and                       
 businessmen concerned as having provided the opportunity for useful                           
 interactions with GOI on investment and trade related issues. In addition,                    
 the Ministry was active in keeping Missions informed on an immediate basis                    
 on the changes in economic policies and in obtaining regular feedback on                      
 reactions to India's economic liberalisation programme among industrialised                   
 countries. On the basis of this feedback, the Ministry sent periodic                          
 reports to concerned Ministries and organisations on ongoing investment                       
 promotion efforts and further measures that needed to be taken on                             
 increasing inflows of foreign investment. It also organised economic                          
 orientation programmes for its Heads of Missions from target countries;                       
 these programmes served to underline the growing importance of the economic                   
 aspects of Indian diplomacy and by promoting first hand interactions with                     
 key economic Ministries, assisted the Missions in the efficient discharge                     
 of their economic and commercial responsibilities.                                            
 -10>                                                                                          
                                                                                               
 The Missions, especially in economically important countries, were active                     
 in reaching out to foreign business communities and Governments and keeping                   
 them informed of the new business opportunities available in India.                           
 Investment promotion seminars and industrial delegations were organised,                      
 business queries promptly responded to in coordination with concerned                         
 Ministries and methodical follow-up undertaken thereafter to maintain close                   
 contact with potential foreign investors.                                                     
                                                                                               
 In recognition of the important role being played by it in India's                            
 investment and trade promotion efforts, the Ministry has been asked to                        
 participate on the Foreign Investment Promotion Board and the Steering                        
 Committee Of Secretaries on economic reforms.                                                 
 -11>                                                                                          
                                                                                               
 The period under review was also characterised by certain internal steps                      
 taken within the Ministry to improve its functioning and efficiency.                          
                                                                                               
 New Embassies were set up in Ukraine, Kazakhstan, Belarus and Israel and                      
 Consulates General in Shanghai, St. Petersberg and Vladivostok. In                            
 addition, the Consulate in Tashkent, capital of Uzbekistan, has been                          
 upgraded to an Embassy. The personnel requirement of those new Missions was                   
 met in the short run by swift diversion from other Missions.                                  
                                                                                               
 In accordance with the Government's directive on strict economy, certain                      
 Missions were identified for closure after weighing all relevant factors.                     
 The Missions slated for closure are those in Malawi, Zaire and Colombia.                      
 Ministry is taking measures to ensure that our bilateral relations with                       
 these countries are not affected by the closure of these resident Missions.                   
                                                                                               
 There has been a major reorganisation and streamlining of the work at                         
 Headquarters so that the Ministry can respond more effectively to the                         
 changed and changing international situation. Some territorial divisions                      
 have been merged to ensure better coordination of policies in the concerned                   
 area and some new Divisions have been created to enable the Ministry to                       
 focus more closely on developments within those regions. To handle work of                    
 specialised nature, separate Units have been, set up where required. For                      
 example, a Central Asia Division was established to look after the newly                      
 created CIS states in Asia; separate Asia Pacific and ASEAN Divisions have                    
 been carved out, an International Security and Disarmament Division has                       
 been set up to look after this specialised work. Further, wherever economy                    
 as well as rationalisation could be achieved through merger of Divisions,                     
 this exercise was undertaken. For example, the Conference Cell was made a                     
 part of Protocol Division; SAARC Division was merged with Economic                            
 Division.                                                                                     
                                                                                               
 To optimise the utilisation of manpower, a time schedule has been drawn up                    
 for regular meetings of the various Boards to recommend postings and                          
 transfers of officials which is being strictly observed. As a result it has                   
 become possible to plan the movement of personnel well ahead of time                          
 resulting in greater efficiency.                                                              
 -12>                                                                                          
                                                                                               
 The Departmental Promotion Committees to consider promotions to various                       
 grades in IFS as well as IFS (B) are being convened more regularly. This                      
 contributed to service morale.                                                                
                                                                                               
 Greater transparency has been introduced in the posting procedure. For the                    
 first time, a system has been introduced for circulating information well                     
 in advance about the posts available at all levels to the concerned                           
 officers at Headquarters and abroad.                                                          
                                                                                               
 During the year under report, four important construction projects at New                     
 York, Kuwait, Dubai and Kuala Lumpur were completed. These buildings are                      
 symbolic of our cultural heritage and reflect the image of a modern and                       
 dynamic India. As a result of these efforts, Ministry will save                               
 considerable expenditure on the rentals of offices and residences of                          
 officials in these expensive cities. With the same objective in view, the                     
 Ministry purchased five apartments for residences of the officials of the                     
 Indian Embassy, Washington.                                                                   
                                                                                               
 The Ministry also began several new projects for construction of Chanceries                   
 and residences for officials at Beijing, Islamabad (Phase II), Tashkent and                   
 a well equipped Campus for the Foreign Service Institute at New Delhi. A                      
 modern and spacious office is being built up for Regional Passport Office,                    
 New Delhi with improved facilities for the public.                                            
                                                                                               
 The Indian Council for Cultural Relations continued its activities                            
 imaginatively and effectively under the guidance of then Vice President of                    
 India, Dr Shanker Dayal Sharma. Apart from organising cultural festivals,                     
 the ICCR significantly diversified its activities to encourage academic                       
 exchanges, research projects and publication of material of contemporary                      
 socio-cultural importance.                                                                    
                                                                                               
 Publicity activities of the Ministry of External Affairs assumed critical                     
 importance in face of the adverse publicity and propaganda generated by                       
 some countries against India on issues of Kashmir, Punjab, violation of                       
 human rights, etc. The reports and assessments on human rights issues in                      
 India circulated by human rights organisations like Amnesty International                     
 and Asia Watch also necessitated a gearing up of Government of India's                        
 external publicity efforts to put matters in perspective, to set the record                   
 straight and, more important, to project the problems faced by India and                      
 the remedial action being taken by India in a manner which would prevent                      
 adverse fallout. India's external publicity efforts covered the entire                        
 spectrum of media activities, audio-visual, personal interaction with Press                   
 representatives, organisation of seminars and discussions with                                
 participation from abroad, the commissioning of articles, monographs and                      
 dissemination of substantive as well as descriptive information on matters                    
 of interest and matters deserving attention.                                                  
 -13>                                                                                          
                                                                                               
 The Ministry initiated an exercise to review the entire system of passport                    
 services with the objective of streamlining procedures in order to reduce                     
 delays, improve infrastructure and provide the public with prompt passport                    
 services, while simultaneously deterring passport fraud.                                      
                                                                                               
 As part of this exercise the Ministry introduced a number of measures                         
 including the sale of forms through Post Offices, issuance of passports on                    
 a first-come-first-served basis with a set time-limit for the police                          
 verification report, decentralisation of powers for the priority issue of                     
 passports to specified categories of applicants, streamlined procedures for                   
 the issue of duplicate passports and availability of most miscellaneous                       
 services at any Passport Office. On the operational front, the Ministry                       
 concentrated on improving productivity. As a result, in 1992 there was a                      
 40% increase in the output of fresh passports over the previous year.                         
                                                                                               
 1992 has been an eventful year for international relations. There were                        
 historic at times cataclysmic, changes in the international geo- political                    
 environment. Indian Foreign Policy had to respond not only to these                           
 external changes but also to the winds of change sweeping the internal                        
 economy. Thus, internal measures and requirements of austerity had to be                      
 balanced against the need of meeting our national interests in terms of                       
 external relations effectively. The performance of the Ministry during                        
 1992-93 has to be evaluated against this complex and challenging backdrop.                    
 -14>                                                                                          
                                                                                               
 1992                                                                                          
 1 India's Neighbours                                                                          
                                                                         Top                   
 INDIA CONTINUED TO PURSUE THE GOALS OF PEACE, FRIENDSHIP AND                                  
                                                                                               
 COOPERATION in relations with her neighbours in South Asia. To achieve                        
 these goals India, Inter alia, maintained high level contacts with the                        
 countries of the region.                                                                      
                                                                                               
 During the year under review, traditionally close and cordial relations                       
 between India and Nepal were further deepened and strengthened including                      
 through exchange of a number of official visits.                                              
                                                                                               
 Prime Minister paid an official goodwill visit to Nepal from 19 to 21                         
 October 1992 at the invitation of the Prime Minister of Nepal. Prime                          
 Minister was accompanied by Minister of State for External Affairs Shri R L                   
 Bhatia and senior officials of the Government of India. The Indian and                        
 Nepalese delegations led by the two Prime Ministers held detailed                             
 discussions on issues of common interest. During the course of these                          
 meetings, as also the earlier discussions at the official level that                          
 preceded the visit of Prime Minister, a number of decisions were taken and                    
 steps finalised with a view to further strengthening and expanding                            
 bilateral cooperation.                                                                        
                                                                                               
 A Joint Communique was signed during the visit enlisting various areas of                     
 cooperation between the two countries. In the trade sector in particular,                     
 substantial improvements have been made and transit of Nepalese goods has                     
 been further facilitated. India has agreed to enhance the revolving                           
 stand-by credit facility extended to Nepal from the level of Indian Rs 35                     
 crores to Rs 50 crores. A timeframe for investigations, preparation of                        
 project reports and other works for water resources cooperation on the                        
 Karnali-Pancheshwar, Rapti Koshi, Budhi Gandaki, Kamala and Bagmati                           
 projects were agreed upon. The B P Koirala Nepal- India Foundation was                        
 jointly inaugurated by the two Prime Ministers during the visit. The                          
 Foundation would provide an institutional framework for promoting academic,                   
 cultural and technical exchanges between India and Nepal. An Indo-Nepal                       
 high level task force has been set up to monitor and review the                               
 implementation of Indian aided projects in Nepal. The King of Nepal has                       
 accepted an invitation from Prime Minister to visit India at a mutually                       
 convenient date. The Prime Minister of Nepal has also accepted the                            
 invitation to visit India.                                                                    
 -15>                                                                                          
                                                                                               
 A 6-member Parliamentary delegation led by Shri Shivraj Patil, Speaker of                     
 Lok Sabha, visited Nepal from 15 to 19 November 1992 to participate in the                    
 SAARC Speakers' Conference. Shri Patil extended an invitation to Members of                   
 Parliament from Nepal to attend training camps organized by India's Bureau                    
 of Parliamentary Studies.                                                                     
                                                                                               
 The traditionally close and friendly relations between India and Bhutan                       
 were further strengthened. His Majesty Jigme Singye Wangchuck visited India                   
 in January 1993 and held discussions with President, Prime Minister 'and                      
 other senior Ministers of the Government of India on issues of mutual                         
 interest. There were other high-level visits also from Bhutan including the                   
 visit of the Bhutanese Planning Minister, Minister for Trade and Industry                     
 and Finance Minister. The Foreign Secretary and Secretary (Water Resources)                   
 also visited Bhutan. These visits helped in further consolidating the close                   
 relations between India and Bhutan.                                                           
                                                                                               
 India's bilateral cooperation with Bhutan has been steadily increasing                        
 right from 1961, when India fully funded Bhutan's First Five Year Plan.                       
 This close economic cooperation has been further intensified during                           
 Bhutan's Seventh Five Year Plan (1992-97) which was launched in July 1992.                    
 The total Indian assistance for Bhutan's Seventh Plan would be Rs 750                         
 crores. Several major projects are expected to be taken up by India in                        
 Bhutan during this plan period including a large cement plant at Nganglam,                    
 an Airport Terminal building at Paro, Kurichu Hydel Project in Eastern                        
 Bhutan, hospitals, roads and bridges, transmission lines and sub-stations,                    
 etc.                                                                                          
                                                                                               
 The long association of India in the development of Bhutan's power sector                     
 was further strengthened in November 1992 with the signing of a Memorandum                    
 of Understanding between India and Bhutan for taking up the detailed                          
 project report for Bunakha Hydel Project in Bhutan. Bunakha Hydel Project                     
 would have an installed capacity of 120 MW and would contribute to the                        
 welfare and economic development of Bhutan.                                                   
                                                                                               
 India continued to offer Bhutanese students opportunity for secondary as                      
 well as higher education and training in various fields. Cooperation in                       
 educational and cultural fields continued to be close.                                        
                                                                                               
 The year 1992 began with a positive note in the Indo-Bangladesh relations                     
 with both Governments focussing attention on devising modalities for                          
 leasing Tin Bigha Corridor. An understanding on this question in March 1992                   
 paved the way for the visit of Begum Khaleda Zia, Prime Minister of                           
 Bangladesh, to India in May. The level of interaction with the democratic                     
 government in Dhaka continued to remain relatively high, despite                              
 differences of opinion on some important bilateral issues.                                    
 -16>                                                                                          
                                                                                               
 The visit of democratically elected Prime Minister of Bangladesh, Begum                       
 Khaleda Zia, to India from 26 to 28 May 1992 was the first State visit to a                   
 SAARC country since her assumption of power in 1991. During the visit,                        
 fruitful discussions took place on regional and several key bilateral                         
 issues. In addition, the following three accords were signed:                                 
                                                                                               
 (a) Memorandum of Understanding on Exchange of Plots for the Construction                     
 of Chancery and Residential building;                                                         
                                                                                               
 (b) A Cultural and Academic Exchange Agreement;                                               
                                                                                               
 (c) Exchange of Instruments of Ratification for the Agreement on the                          
 Avoidance of Double Taxation.                                                                 
                                                                                               
 Less than a month later, the Tin Bigha issue was satisfactorily resolved.                     
 The Corridor was finally leased to Bangladesh and opened for use by                           
 Bangladeshi passengers and vehicular traffic on 26 June.                                      
                                                                                               
 The goodwill thus generated was further enhanced by the subsequent visits                     
 to Delhi by Bangladesh Ministers for Finance from 1 to 3 September and                        
 Foreign Affairs from 12 to 14 November, and the visits to Dhaka by Minister                   
 for Water Resources from 25 to 27 August and Foreign Secretary from 21 to                     
 23 August.                                                                                    
                                                                                               
 Unfortunately, after September there were some setbacks following the                         
 controversy with regard to the steps to push back illegal Bangladeshi                         
 migrants and the resistance by Bangladesh not to accept them.                                 
                                                                                               
 Bilateral relations came under further strains due to violent reactions in                    
 Bangladesh to the Ayodhya incident. In widespread violence, the Indian                        
 diplomatic premises in Dhaka came under attack; the High Commission Library                   
 and the Indian Airlines office were set on fire. Scores of places of                          
 worship, commercial establishments and houses of the minority community in                    
 Bangladesh were damaged and burnt. India expressed her concern in this                        
 regard to the Government of Bangladesh as also the hope that the countries                    
 of South Asia would join together in opposing communal forces and would not                   
 allow these forces to retard the process of bilateral and regional                            
 cooperation.                                                                                  
                                                                                               
 Despite setbacks, India and Bangladesh continued to hold discussions to                       
 resolve other outstanding bilateral matters such as the equitable sharing                     
 of the waters of the major rivers and the repatriation of Chakma refugees                     
 to Bangladesh.                                                                                
 -17> The first Secretary-level Joint Committee of Experts (JCE) met in New                    
 Delhi on 19 and 20 November to devise a long-term settlement including an                     
 interim arrangement of the flows of Ganga and Tista during the dry season.                    
 So far as the repatriation of Chakma refugees is concerned, a Political                       
 Level Committee was set up by the Government of Bangladesh in July as                         
 stipulated in the Indo-Bangladesh Joint Communique of May 1992 to encourage                   
 Chakma refugees to return to Bangladesh and for finding out a political                       
 solution to the Chakma problem. Negotiations were underway between the                        
 Committee and the Chakma representatives.                                                     
                                                                                               
 The trade review talks were held in New Delhi in August to place a special                    
 focus on increasing and diversifying trade and economic cooperation between                   
 India and Bangladesh.                                                                         
                                                                                               
 India's exports to Bangladesh in 1991-92 were valued at Rs 810 crores                         
 whereas imports from Bangladesh were Rs 14 crores.                                            
                                                                                               
 Despite some tentative steps taken by the Myanmar Government recently                         
 towards addressing the issue, Myanmar's suppression of the democratic                         
 movement continued to be a factor in India's relations with that country.                     
 India continued to press for the early restoration of democracy in Myanmar.                   
 In early December 1992 India extended support to a UN Resolution on                           
 Myanmar, calling for an early restoration of democracy and human rights and                   
 the immediate and unconditional release of all political prisoners                            
 including Ms Aung San Suu Kyi.                                                                
                                                                                               
 India watched with close attention the changes introduced by Gen Than Shwe,                   
 the Chairman of the state law and order restoration council, including the                    
 decision to convene a National Convention on 9 January 1993 to formulate a                    
 new Constitution for Myanmar.                                                                 
                                                                                               
 With a view to a better management of a working relationship with the                         
 Myanmar Government, India received a Myanmar delegation led by the Director                   
 General of the Myanmar Foreign Office in August 1992. Discussions held                        
 during the visit identified concrete areas for bilateral cooperation                          
 including border trade, prevention of narco- trafficking and contacts                         
 between the civilian and military authorities in the border regions of the                    
 two countries to prevent illegal activities, etc. Agreements for                              
 cooperation in the areas identified thus far are expected to be signed                        
 shortly.                                                                                      
 -18>                                                                                          
                                                                                               
 President of Sri Lanka, Mr Ranasinghe Premadasa, came to India from 1 to 3                    
 October 1992 in his capacity as Chairman of the Sixth SAARC Summit. The                       
 visit also served as a State visit in view of the fact that this was his                      
 first visit to India as President of Sri Lanka. The President of Sri Lanka                    
 and the Prime Minister confirmed the validity of SAARC as a forum for                         
 enhancing interaction among countries of the region. Issues of common                         
 interest to SAARC countries, discussed during the visit, included poverty                     
 alleviation, SAARC Preferential Trading Arrangement (SAPTA), cooperation to                   
 combat terrorism, etc. The two sides also undertook a review of bilateral                     
 matters such as repatriation of Sri Lankan refugees, practical problems                       
 faced by fishermen from both countries and economic cooperation. The two                      
 sides expressed satisfaction over the on-going return of Sri Lankan                           
 refugees to their country and agreed to continue the cooperation to ensure                    
 an early return of these refugees from India. From 21 January 1992 till 2                     
 October 1992, over 29,000 Sri Lankan refugees had returned to their                           
 country. The process has been temporarily suspended and is expected to be                     
 resumed shortly. Regarding problems faced by fishermen from both the                          
 countries straying into each others waters, the two sides agreed to deal                      
 with such cases in a spirit of mutual accommodation and understanding and                     
 to initiate discussions on the subject at the level of senior officials.                      
                                                                                               
 On the ethnic question in Sri Lanka, India reiterated her considered and                      
 consistent view that the legitimate aspirations of the Tamil Community                        
 should be fulfilled within the framework of a united Sri Lanka through                        
 negotiations involving all parties which have eschewed violence. The Sri                      
 Lankan side briefed the Indian side about the present position and future                     
 prospects as seen by them.                                                                    
                                                                                               
 The year 1992 saw expanding cooperation in various areas between India and                    
 Sri Lanka. The second meeting of the Sub-Commission on Trade, Finance and                     
 Investment was held in New Delhi in September 1992. Meetings of the other                     
 two Sub-Commissions on Social, Cultural and Educational matters, and on                       
 Science and Technology are also due to be convened shortly. During                            
 President Premadasa's visit, the two sides expressed satisfaction over the                    
 progress with regard to various proposals under the auspices of the Joint                     
 Commission. During the year, there were increasing contacts between the                       
 business communities of the two countries., as illustrated by the convening                   
 of the Indo-Sri Lanka joint Business Council in Delhi in March 1992, after                    
 a lapse of 11 years, and the participation of over 100 business delegates                     
 from India in the EXPO'92 held in Colombo in November 1992. The visit of                      
 the Sri Lankan Minister for Industry, Science and Technology to India in                      
 March 1992 also provided an opportunity for an useful exchange of views.                      
 -19>                                                                                          
                                                                                               
 In the wake of Ayodhya incident, it was heartening to receive the message                     
 sent by President Premadasa to Prime Minister on 8 December 1992                              
 appreciating the principled stand of Prime Minister and the Government of                     
 India. on the Ayodhya developments. The restraint and maturity shown by the                   
 Government and people of Sri Lanka in reacting to the Ayodhya developments                    
 is worthy of commendation.                                                                    
                                                                                               
 Existing close and friendly relations with Maldives were further                              
 consolidated and reinforced by regular consultation and meetings which                        
 resulted in close understanding at the highest level. Prime Minister met                      
 President Gayoom in Rio during the Earth Summit in June 1992 and again in                     
 Jakarta in September 1992 during the 10th NAM Summit. These high level                        
 contacts provided an opportunity to assess the on-going multi- dimensional                    
 cooperation programmes which encompass infrastructure development, health                     
 and welfare, civil aviation, communication and manpower resource                              
 development of Maldives.                                                                      
                                                                                               
 The Second Session of Indo-Maldives joint Commission for Economic and                         
 Technical Cooperation was held at New Delhi on 2 and 3 March 1992. The                        
 joint Commission looked into every aspect of non-military bilateral                           
 relations between the two countries.                                                          
                                                                                               
 Maldivian Minister of State for Presidential Affairs, Mr Abdul Rasheed                        
 Hussain, led a 6-member delegation to New Delhi to attend a conference                        
 organized jointly by UNICEF and Department of Women and Child Development                     
 from 3 to 5 June 1992.                                                                        
                                                                                               
 Maldivian Minister of State and Head of Customs, Mr Hussain Manikfann,                        
 visited India for two weeks from 10 to 24 October 1992 to familiarise                         
 himself with the Customs Regulations in India.                                                
                                                                                               
 Defence Secretary, Shri N N Vohra, visited Maldives from 19 to 21 December                    
 1992 to discuss various matters connected with Indo-Maldives defence                          
 cooperation. During his stay in Male, Shri Vohra met President Gayoom,                        
 Foreign Minister Fathulla Jameel and Director General of National Security                    
 Service (NSS), Mr Abdul Sattar Anbaree.                                                       
                                                                                               
 Relations with Pakistan, however, continued to be under strain on account                     
 of Pakistan's negative approach. Pakistan's interference in India's                           
 internal affairs and support to subversion and terrorism directed against                     
 India not only continued in the States of Punjab and Jammu & Kashmir but                      
 assumed new dimensions. There is, however, growing international                              
 realization and concern at Pakistan's involvement with terrorism directed                     
 against India. In line with its proclivity to interfere in India's internal                   
 affairs, the Pakistani leadership sought to make statements and agitate                       
 public opinion in that country on matters such as developments in Ayodhya                     
 which were purely the internal affair of India.                                               
 -20>                                                                                          
                                                                                               
 India has, in the interest of peace and security of the region and in                         
 accordance with the Simla Agreement, pursued the path of bilateral dialogue                   
 with Pakistan in an attempt to create an atmosphere of mutual trust and                       
 confidence. In April 1992, some proposals on Military Confidence Building                     
 Measures were forwarded to Pakistan. The sixth round of Foreign Secretary                     
 level talks between India and Pakistan which were scheduled from 1 to 3                       
 June 1992 had to be postponed as Pakistan vitiated the atmosphere by the                      
 abduction and brutal torture of a senior Indian diplomat in Islamabad in                      
 violation of all accepted norms on the treatment of diplomatic personnel.                     
 The dialogue got back on track after the Prime Ministers of the two                           
 countries met at Rio on 14 June 1992 when they agreed that bilateral talks                    
 should be resumed. Consequently, a meeting was held from 6 to 9 August 1992                   
 on the Tulbal Navigation Project. All legal and technical aspects were                        
 discussed. Pakistan's clearance on the joint draft (worked out in October                     
 1991) is awaited. This was followed by the sixth round of Foreign Secretary                   
 level talks from 16 to 19 August 1992, when the two sides:                                    
                                                                                               
 (i) Exchanged the Instruments of Ratification on the Agreement on                             
 Prevention of Air Space Violations by military aircraft and the Agreement                     
 on Advance Notice of Military Exercises, Manoeuvres and Troop Movements;                      
                                                                                               
 (ii) Signed the Code of Conduct on the treatment of Diplomatic/Consular                       
 personnel;                                                                                    
                                                                                               
 (iii) Issued the Joint Declaration on complete prohibition of chemical                        
 weapons;                                                                                      
                                                                                               
 (iv) Agreed to discuss a joint declaration on biological weapons along the                    
 lines of the joint declaration on chemical weapons;                                           
                                                                                               
 (v) Reaffirmed the agreement, in principle, to convene the Sub- Commissions                   
 of the India-Pakistan joint Commission at an appropriate time. It was                         
 agreed that, in the meanwhile, senior officials of concerned Ministries                       
 (Commerce, Education & Culture and Home) could meet;                                          
 -21>                                                                                          
                                                                                               
 (vi) Extended a formal invitation to the Pakistan's COAS to visit, India;                     
 and                                                                                           
                                                                                               
 (vii) Agreed on a series of meetings at the official level: on Siachen at                     
 the Defence Secretary level (October/November 1992); on Sir Creek                             
 (September 1992); on technical discussions on the issue of missing defence                    
 personnel (September/October 1992); and on India-Pak Committee on Drug                        
 Trafficking and Smuggling.                                                                    
                                                                                               
 The sixth round of talks on the Siachen issue between the Defence                             
 Secretaries of India and Pakistan were held in New Delhi from 2 to 4                          
 November 1992. These talks were resumed after a gap of three years.                           
 Proposals to carry forward the dialogue from the fifth round of talks (June                   
 1989) aimed at a comprehensive resolution of the Siachen issue were                           
 discussed.                                                                                    
                                                                                               
 The fifth round of India-Pakistan talks on the Sir Creek issue were held in                   
 New Delhi on 5 and 6 November 1992. The two sides had a detailed and useful                   
 exchange of views on the various issues involved. They agreed that the                        
 discussions would be continued on a mutually convenient date.                                 
                                                                                               
 The Pakistan Foreign Secretary during his meeting with the Prime Minister                     
 on 17 August 1992 handed over a letter from the Prime Minister of Pakistan                    
 proposing bilateral discussions on Jammu & Kashmir under Article 6 of the                     
 Simla Agreement. It has been conveyed to Pakistan that the Simla Agreement                    
 provides the necessary framework for resolving the entire range of                            
 different issues affecting bilateral relations. Negotiations within the                       
 framework of Simla Agreement cannot be compartmentalized or fragmented                        
 under one specific article of the Agreement removed from the context. It is                   
 ironical that Pakistan so soon after suggesting bilateral talks under                         
 Article 6 of the Simla Agreement preferred to raise Kashmir in violation of                   
 the Simla Agreement at the international fora including at the 10th NAM                       
 Summit at Jakarta and UN General Assembly (UNGA) plenary session. Pakistan                    
 has yet to demonstrate its sincerity about seriously pursuing meaningful                      
 bilateral discussions. This can take place only in an atmosphere of mutual                    
 trust and confidence. For this, Pakistan must stop its support to terrorism                   
 and cease interference in India's internal affairs. Unfortunately, within                     
 days of Foreign Secretary level talks, Pakistan National Assembly passed a                    
 Resolution on the Babri Masjid issue (28 August).                                             
                                                                                               
 On 15 October 1992, two Pakistani nationals alongwith terrorist Talwinder                     
 Singh Parmar were killed in an encounter near jullundar. Pakistan's                           
 allegation that these two Pakistani nationals were killed in cold blood is                    
 unfounded and was only to detract Attention from the fact that these two                      
 Pakistani nationals were without valid visas and in the company of                            
 terrorists with arms and ammunition.                                                          
 -22>                                                                                          
                                                                                               
 An attempt was made to cross the LOC on 24 October 1992. Earlier, attempts                    
 had been made on 11 February 1992 and 30 March 1992.                                          
                                                                                               
 In an effort to curtail people-to-people contacts, Pakistan issued an                         
 Advisory to its citizens on 2 December 1992 not to travel to India and                        
 suggesting that those in India should curtail their stay and return home.                     
                                                                                               
 Following developments in Ayodhya, the Government of Pakistan took a series                   
 of steps which can only be viewed by India as an attempt to interfere in                      
 her internal affairs. Vituperative statements by leaders of Pakistan                          
 including at the highest level, resolutions passed by Pakistan National                       
 Assembly and Pakistan Senate on the demolition of Babri Masjid and the                        
 decision of Government of Pakistan to officially call for nationwide strike                   
 on 8 December 1992 to mark a "day of mourning" were highly regrettable and                    
 unacceptable. Pakistan, or for that matter, no other country has any locus                    
 standi on the developments in Ayodhya.                                                        
                                                                                               
 The situation was further aggravated when the Indian diplomatic premises in                   
 Islamabad and Karachi were targets of mob fury on 8 December. Mobs                            
 ransacked and burnt the residence of the Indian Consul General in Karachi.                    
 This was in violation of not only the international norms on the                              
 inviolability of diplomatic premises but of the recently signed Code of                       
 Conduct between the two countries, under which the receiving Government is                    
 to extend protection to diplomatic/consular property and personnel. In the                    
 prevailing circumstances, Government were forced to evacuate the families                     
 of officials in Karachi.                                                                      
                                                                                               
 Through a unilateral decision Pakistan (on 29 December 1992) asked India to                   
 reduce by 31 January 1993 the strength of the Consulate General in Karachi                    
 to 20 (4 diplomats and 16 staff members). Government have conveyed to                         
 Pakistan that parity of the representation between Indian High Commission                     
 in Islamabad and the Pakistan High Commission in New Delhi should be                          
 maintained at 110. Pakistan was asked to withdraw its excess staff from                       
 India by 10 February 1993. It has been conveyed to Pakistan that henceforth                   
 it would not be allowed to operate temporary visa offices in India.                           
 Pakistan has also been informed that it has not been found possible to                        
 accede to its request for use of 'Jinnah House' for its Consulate General                     
 in Bombay or as official residence for its Consul General.                                    
 -23>                                                                                          
                                                                                               
 The downward trend in India-Pakistan bilateral relations has been caused by                   
 Pakistan's propensity to interfere in India's internal affairs and its                        
 continued support to subversion and terrorism directed against India.                         
 Government are of the firm view that while there could be no compromise on                    
 the unity and integrity of the nation, attempts should be made to resolve                     
 differences with Pakistan bilaterally and peacefully on the basis of the                      
 Simla Agreement and in the interest of peace and stability in the region.                     
 Government have urged the Government of Pakistan to abandon its negative                      
 approach and join in sincere efforts to have a meaningful dialogue. For                       
 this, Pakistan's support to terrorism must stop. Government hope that                         
 Pakistan will reciprocate the desire for peace and not persist with its                       
 present policies which are a negation of the accepted fundamental                             
 principles of inter-state conduct and the Simla Agreement.                                    
                                                                                               
 India's relations with Afghanistan are based on traditional ties of common                    
 history and culture. The past year also saw some high level exchanges.                        
 President of Afghanistan, Prof Burhanuddin Rabbani, made a stop-over in New                   
 Delhi on 30 August 1992. The Afghan Minister of State for Foreign Affairs,                    
 Mr Najibullah Laffraei, visited Delhi during November 1992. India                             
 maintained useful exchanges with the new leadership in Afghanistan.                           
                                                                                               
 India has always stood for a sovereign, independent, non-aligned and united                   
 Afghanistan. Government believe that a political settlement taking into                       
 account the legitimate interests of all concerned should be arrived at by                     
 the Afghans themselves without any form of external interference. India                       
 offered Rs 5 crores worth of assistance through the Office of UN                              
 Coordinators for Afghan Refugee Rehabilitation and an equal amount                            
 bilaterally during 1992. India supplied relief items worth Rs 1.5 crores to                   
 Afghanistan through UNCOA. As a part of India's bilateral commitment,                         
 Indian relief supplies worth Rs 4.7 crores of essential items as well as                      
 medicines and medical equipments have also been completed during 1992.                        
                                                                                               
 The transitionary phase in Afghanistan has been greatly complicated. A                        
 conflict situation has arisen involving various Afghan groups. Intense                        
 fighting has erupted around Kabul forcing the closure of several diplomatic                   
 missions, including India's. The absence of any political process, leading                    
 to a settlement acceptable to all sections of the Afghan people, has                          
 accentuated sectarian and ethnic tensions which could seriously undermine                     
 Afghanistan's unified character as a nation state. A renewed international                    
 peace initiative, possibly under UN auspices, is urgently called for.                         
 -24>                                                                                          
                                                                                               
 India continued to play an important and crucial role in the South Asian                      
 Association of Regional Cooperation (SAARC). Recommendations of the 6th                       
 SAARC Summit were jointly implemented by India and other member countries,                    
 and she contributed to their success in the best possible way in the light                    
 of her resources and capabilities. In pursuance with the Colombo Summit                       
 directive, India held the SAARC Ministerial meeting on environmental issues                   
 in Delhi in April 1992. The meeting adopted a joint Communique reflecting                     
 the consensus of views of SAARC countries on environment and development                      
 which was presented to UN Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED)                   
 at Rio in June 1992. Another SAARC Ministerial Conference on Children in                      
 South Asia was held in Colombo in September 1992. It adopted a Resolution                     
 in which 'illustrative regional goals' based on National Plan of Action of                    
 the Member States in education, maternal health, nutrition, access to                         
 drinking water, etc, to promote the welfare of children were identified.                      
                                                                                               
 One of the notable achievements of SAARC during the period under review was                   
 the drawing up of a draft framework agreement on establishment of SAARC                       
 Preferential Trading Arrangement (SAPTA) by the Secretary-level Committee                     
 on Economic Cooperation (CEC) in November 1992 in pursuance of a mandate                      
 received from & 6th SAARC Summit. The framework agreement envisages trade                     
 liberalisation through a product by product approach to reduction of tariff                   
 and non-tariff barriers to trade among SAARC countries to be established                      
 within three years of the signing of the Agreement by the SAARC Council of                    
 Ministers.                                                                                    
                                                                                               
 Another related development in the area of economic cooperation was the                       
 establishment of a SAARC fund for identification and development of                           
 regional Projects of $ 5 million through proportionate contributions from                     
 the member States. A Regional Council of Development Financing Institutions                   
 (RCDFI) has been established to manage this fund.                                             
                                                                                               
 In accordance with a decision of the 6th SAARC Summit, an independent South                   
 Asian Commission on Poverty Alleviation, consisting of eminent persons from                   
 all member States, was constituted to conduct an in-depth study on diverse                    
 experiences of the seven countries on poverty alleviation. The Commission                     
 has already completed its work and its recommendations will be placed                         
 before the 7th SAARC Summit.                                                                  
                                                                                               
 Under the aegis of the SAARC, so far approximately 44 activities have been                    
 held in 1992. These include special training courses, seminars, meetings,                     
 workshops, joint research projects, technical studies, etc. Almost one                        
 third of the total activities were held in India. The trend in the SAARC is                   
 to shift towards concrete development-oriented discussions in core areas,                     
 such as, in economic cooperation, environment, poverty alleviation, etc.                      
 -25>                                                                                          
                                                                                               
 The year 1993 was announced as the SAARC Year of Disabled Persons by the                      
 5th Summit held in Male. A Plan of action has been drawn up to observe this                   
 year appropriately. The Plan envisages programmes at both national and                        
 regional levels.                                                                              
                                                                                               
 Since India is committed to collective self-reliance among the SAARC                          
 Countries, it has always advocated in SAARC fora, the utilisation of                          
 resources available within the region for its programmes or activities.                       
 However, lately India has, in due deference to the demands of the member                      
 States for international assistance, agreed. to a proposed SAARC-Japan                        
 Special Fund of $ 5 million to be used partly for SAARC programmes and                        
 partly to provide intellectual exchange between Japan and the SAARC member                    
 States. SAARC has also authorised the Chairman of the Council of Ministers                    
 to carry out informal consultations with the EEC and the ASEAN in order to                    
 identify mutual beneficial areas of cooperation with them.                                    
                                                                                               
 India continued to play an active role in the SAARC with the hope that it                     
 can develop into an effective vehicle for promoting the economic, social,                     
 technical, scientific and cultural development of the countries of the                        
 region, as it is required to do under its Charter.                                            
                                                                                               
 The 7th SAARC Summit originally scheduled to be held on 12 and 13 December                    
 1992 in Dhaka, Bangladesh, was postponed by a month to 13 and 14 January                      
 1993 in the wake of post-Ayodhya developments. India had agreed to these                      
 new dates in the hope that the situation in and around India would have                       
 stabilised and the political tensions in the region would have abated by                      
 then.                                                                                         
                                                                                               
 Unfortunately, the Summit had to be postponed for the second time, at                         
 India's behest, because of continued vitiated political atmosphere and                        
 actions in some member States amounting to interference in the internal                       
 affairs of India. It was felt that the political direction needed at that                     
 stage to provide greater content and substance to regional cooperation in                     
 South Asia could not be achieved under circumstances then prevailing.                         
                                                                                               
 The new dates of the Summit are to be decided through diplomatic channels.                    
 -26>                                                                                          
 1992                                                                                          
 2 South-East Asia and the Pacific                                                             
                                                                         Top                   
 INDIA'S TRADITIONALLY CLOSE AND FRIENDLY RELATIONS WITH THE MEMBER                            
 COUNTRIES of Association of South East Asian Nations (ASEAN) and with the                     
 countries in Indo-China were maintained and broadened by numerous high                        
 level contacts during 1992-93. India decided to give a special policy                         
 thrust to its relations with the ASEAN.                                                       
                                                                                               
 Bilateral relations with Malaysia were enhanced with the two countries                        
 having regular exchange of views at different levels. The Malaysian Defence                   
 Minister Dato Seri Najib visited India in March 1992 and had meetings with                    
 Prime Minister and Raksha Mantri.                                                             
                                                                                               
 The two countries signalled upgradation of economic and trade ties by                         
 raising the joint Trade Committee to a full-fledged joint Commission. The                     
 first session of the Indo-Malaysian Joint Commission was held in Kuala                        
 Lumpur on 2 and 3 November 1992, co-chaired by the Malaysian Foreign                          
 Minister and the then Minister of State for External Affairs, Shri Eduardo                    
 Faleiro. The Joint Commission has provided the necessary impetus to the                       
 existing trade and economic exchanges between the two countries.                              
                                                                                               
 The bilateral content of India's relationship with Malaysia comprises joint                   
 ventures, project exports and trade in commodities, particularly palm oil,                    
 petroleum crude, rubber and tin from Malaysia. As per agreed minutes signed                   
 by the Malaysian Minister for Primary Industries and the Minister of State                    
 for Commerce in August 1992, India is to import atleast 3,00,000 tons of                      
 palm oil annually for two years. In consideration of this, the Malaysian                      
 Government has expressed willingness to use the Evidence Account Mechanism                    
 for providing the necessary fillip to the arrangement.                                        
                                                                                               
 The momentum of these exchanges was kept up with Prime Minister meeting the                   
 Malaysian Prime Minister, Dr Mahathir, during the NAM Summit in Jakarta in                    
 September 1992.                                                                               
                                                                                               
 Foreign Secretary visited Malaysia from 29 to 31 January 1993, to have                        
 bilateral consultations with Mr Tan Sri Ahmad Kamil, Secretary-General of                     
 the Malaysian Foreign Office. Discussions focussed, inter alia, on                            
 preparations for the impending visit of the Defence Minister to Malaysia,                     
 certain bilateral issues such as the new visa regulation introduced by                        
 Malaysia, delay in Indian import of palm oil and import of petroleum and                      
 petroleum products. There were also exchange of views on the G-15 Summit as                   
 well as on the security environment in South-East Asia in the context of                      
 evolving perceptions in ASEAN region about China and Japan.                                   
 -27>                                                                                          
                                                                                               
 Raksha Mantri, Shri Sharad Pawar, visited Malaysia from 1 to 7 February                       
 1993 at the invitation of the Malaysian Defence Minister Datuk Najib.                         
 During the visit, the Defence Minister signed a Memorandum of Understanding                   
 for cooperation in the defence field. The MOU provides for logistical                         
 support by India for the MIG-29 aircrafts which Malaysia is negotiating to                    
 purchase from Russia. Besides, the MOU will focus on defence infrastructure                   
 build-up, modernisation and training of ground forces, regular exchange of                    
 personnel, and limited joint production ventures in Air and Naval armament.                   
                                                                                               
 India's relations with Singapore have been marked by the readiness stressed                   
 by both sides to embark on a new phase of understanding and cooperation for                   
 mutual benefit. Singapore's Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Trade and                   
 Industry, Brig Gen Lee Hsien Loong, accompanied by a high-powered                             
 delegation, was on an official visit to India from 22 to 27 March 1992.                       
 Brig Gen Lee had meetings with the Prime Minister, Finance Minister,                          
 Minister of Civil Aviation and Tourism, and Minister of State for Commerce.                   
 In his discussions with Prime Minister, Brig Gen Lee expressed interest in                    
 a series of exhibitions from India to be held in Singapore with the                           
 cooperation of the Government of India. Emphasis was placed on future trade                   
 and investment ties between India and Singapore. A proposal for an                            
 India-Singapore Industrial Corridor in the State of Tamil Nadu also came up                   
 for examination.                                                                              
                                                                                               
 Prime Minister's meeting with Prime Minister of Singapore, Mr Goh Chok                        
 Tong, during the Non-Aligned Summit in Jakarta in September 1992 provided a                   
 further fillip to the multi-sided relationship. The Prime Minister of                         
 Singapore evinced keen interest in getting skilled personnel from India for                   
 projects in third countries. He also proposed the setting up of a permanent                   
 exhibition of Indian culture in the Singapore Museum to highlight the                         
 different cultural streams represented in Singapore. Prime Minister Goh                       
 identified trade and investment as another important area of cooperation.                     
 He mentioned the need for India to hold trade fairs in Singapore and                          
 participate in fairs as a means of increasing her exports. Prime Minister                     
 offered full cooperation for sending cultural exhibits from India and                         
 welcomed the prospect for defence cooperation.                                                
 -28>                                                                                          
                                                                                               
 Mr B G George Yeo, Singapore's Minister for Information and the Arts and                      
 Second Minister for Foreign Affairs, visited India from 4 to 15 February                      
 1993 at the invitation of Minister for Human Resource Development, Shri                       
 Arjun Singh. The Minister led a high level delegation which included the                      
 Senior Minister for Trade and Industry, Mr Lim Boon Heng, senior officials                    
 from the field of art and culture, trade and industry and businessmen. The                    
 visit symbolised the desire of both countries to significantly upgrade                        
 existing relations. The visiting Minister called on the Prime Minister and                    
 handed over a letter from the Prime Minister of Singapore.                                    
                                                                                               
 He also signed a Memorandum of Understanding for Cooperation in the Arts,                     
 Archives and Heritage with Minister for Human Resource Development. The                       
 other Ministers with whom he had exchange of views included Finance                           
 Minister, Commerce Minister and Minister of State for External Affairs,                       
 Shri Salman Khurshid. Besides Delhi, the delegation visited Agra, Jaipur,                     
 Bombay, Bangalore and Madras.                                                                 
                                                                                               
 India's friendly relations with the Philippines continued. India warmly                       
 congratulated and assured full cooperation to the new leadership in the                       
 Philippines under President Ramos after the General Elections held in May                     
 1992. Volcanic eruptions of Mount Pinatubo in August 1992 caused massive                      
 destruction in the Philippines. India sent a token relief assistance of                       
 essential medicines worth Rs 5 lakhs for the quake victims.                                   
                                                                                               
 India continued to work closely with Indonesia both bilaterally as well as                    
 in the Non-Aligned forum and contributed to the success of the NAM Summit                     
 in Jakarta under Indonesia's chairmanship.                                                    
                                                                                               
 The then Minister of State for External Affairs, Shri Eduardo Faleiro,                        
 visited Indonesia for the Non-Aligned Ministerial Meeting in Bali in May                      
 1992. Mr Ali Alatas, the Foreign Minister of Indonesia, visited New Delhi                     
 in July 1992 as Special Envoy of President Soeharto, to hold consultations                    
 and to invite the Prime Minister to attend the Non-Aligned Summit in                          
 Jakarta in September 1992. During the NAM Summit, the Prime Minister had                      
 full exchange of views in his meeting with President Soeharto on NAM as                       
 well as bilateral issues of mutual interest. Shri Eduardo Faleiro and Shri                    
 R L Bhatia, Minister of State for External Affairs, also attended the NAM                     
 Summit. The momentum of regular consultations was kept up with the Prime                      
 Minister meeting President Soeharto again in Dakar during the G-15 Summit                     
 in November 1992.                                                                             
                                                                                               
 The Indonesian Minister of Industry, Mr Hartarto, accompanied by a large                      
 delegation comprising of senior officials and business and industrial                         
 representatives visited India in March 1992. Mr Hartarto had meetings with                    
 Prime Minister, Minister of State for Industry and Minister of State for                      
 Commerce. During the visit, an Agreement was signed between M/s Ballarpur                     
 Industries and an Indonesian company for setting up of a rayon pulp joint                     
 venture in Sumatra, Indonesia.                                                                
 -29>                                                                                          
                                                                                               
 India's traditional and historical ties with Thailand registered an                           
 important step with the State Visit of His Royal Highness Maha                                
 Vajiralongkorn, the Crown Prince of Thailand, in April 1992. During the                       
 visit, the Crown Prince had meetings with the President, the Vice President                   
 and the Prime Minister. This was the first ever visit to India by the Crown                   
 Prince of Thailand.                                                                           
                                                                                               
 Foreign Secretary visited Thailand on 1 and 2 February 1993 for detailed                      
 discussions with his counterpart, Thai Permanent Secretary, Dr Pracha                         
 Guna-Kasem, on all aspects of bilateral relations and regional and                            
 multilateral issues. The two Foreign Secretaries expressed the desire to                      
 increase bilateral cooperation in diverse fields encompassing trade and                       
 commerce, technology, defence and culture. Human rights and environmental                     
 issues were also discussed.                                                                   
                                                                                               
 India's relations with Brunei Darussalam were given a boost by the State                      
 visit to India of the Sultan of Brunei in September 1992. This was the                        
 first ever State visit paid by the Sultan of Brunei to India. During the                      
 visit, the Sultan had meetings with the President, the Vice President and                     
 the Prime Minister. The President hosted a banquet in his honour and the                      
 Prime Minister had a luncheon where the Sultan met eminent Indians from all                   
 walks of life. Following discussions, a decision was taken for both                           
 countries to set up Resident High Commissions in each other's capitals and                    
 to exchange delegations to identify areas of cooperation. Brunei Darussalam                   
 had already set up a Resident Mission in Delhi in August 1992, headed by an                   
 Acting High Commissioner.                                                                     
                                                                                               
 Relations with Cambodia continued to be close and friendly. India remained                    
 committed to the implementation of the Paris Accord and in response to                        
 requests from the United Nations, contributed about 1800 military and                         
 civilian personnel for the operations of the UN Transitional Authority in                     
 Cambodia (UNTAC).                                                                             
                                                                                               
 Shri Eduardo Faleiro, the then Minister of State for External Affairs,                        
 represented India at a Ministerial Conference on the Rehabilitation and                       
 Reconstruction of Cambodia held in Tokyo in June 1992. Shri Faleiro laid                      
 stress on the urgency of international support for implementation of the UN                   
 peace plan as per the -30> Paris Accords by the active cooperation of all                     
 the Cambodian parties. He also announced the readiness of India to continue                   
 with approximately $ 1.2 million worth of assistance to Cambodia despite                      
 her constraints. There was general appreciation at the conference about the                   
 role India has played in Cambodia throughout the two decades preceding the                    
 Paris Accords, during the phase of negotiations for the Accords and                           
 subsequently. Shri Faleiro also made it known that expertise, appropriate                     
 technology and pertinent experience are available in India for use in                         
 Cambodia under the appropriate auspices, be it the UNTAC or                                   
                                                                                               
 UNDP or through third country or multilateral aid givers.                                     
 -30>                                                                                          
 Apart from grant of food aid consisting of 2000 tons of rice, medicines                       
 worth approximately US $ 600,000 have been sent to Cambodia. Arrangements                     
 are also being made to hold artificial limb fitment camps in Cambodia.                        
 India continued to provide scholarships to Cambodian nominees for technical                   
 training in India and Indian doctors were already on deputation to work at                    
 a Cambodian hospital. India also continued to carry out the project on                        
 restoration work at the famous Angkor Vat temple in Cambodia.                                 
                                                                                               
 The Prime Minister met Prince Sihanouk in Jakarta in September 1992. During                   
 the meeting, Prince Sihanouk expressed great appreciation for India's help                    
 and participation in the peace process and also in Cambodia's                                 
 reconstruction.                                                                               
                                                                                               
 India's traditional relations with Vietnam were further strengthened by                       
 exchange of high level visits with special emphasis laid on enhancing                         
 bilateral economic, scientific and technical cooperation. The Foreign                         
 Minister of Vietnam, Mr Nguyen Manh Cam, paid an official visit to India                      
 from 21 to 27 March 1992. He met the President, the Vice President, the                       
 Prime Minister and the then Minister of External Affairs and exchanged                        
 views on regional and bilateral issues. Broad identity of views emerged and                   
 it was agreed that strengthened bilateral relations between India and                         
 Vietnam would endure in the emerging international situation. The fifth                       
 session of the Indo-Vietnam Joint Commission was held on 24 and 25 March                      
 1992. Discussions focussed on enhancement of cooperation in existing areas,                   
 especially in the field of trade and commerce, as well as identification of                   
 new areas of cooperation. The Cultural Exchange Programme for 1992-94 was                     
 also signed.                                                                                  
                                                                                               
 The Prime Minister had a meeting with President Vo Chi Cong of Vietnam in                     
 Jakarta during the Non-Aligned Summit in September 1992.                                      
                                                                                               
 The General Secretary of the Communist Party of Vietnam, Mr Do Muoi, led a                    
 high level delegation to India from 8 to 13 September 1992. This was Mr Do                    
 Muoi's first visit to India and his first visit outside the Socialist                         
 States.                                                                                       
 -31>                                                                                          
                                                                                               
 He had meetings with the President, the Vice President, the Prime Minister                    
 and the Finance Minister. The Prime Minister led the Indian delegation for                    
 the official talks. General Secretary Do Muoi stressed the need to give                       
 enhanced economic content to the excellent relations with India. New areas                    
 were identified for bilateral trade in commodities with a view to expanding                   
 the trade turnover. The visit of Mr Do Muoi constituted a new landmark in                     
 IndoVietnam relations and opened up broad prospects for cementing the bonds                   
 of traditional friendship and multi- faceted cooperation between the two                      
 countries.                                                                                    
                                                                                               
 India's friendly relations and economic cooperation with Laos were                            
 maintained. Laotian trainees continued to visit India for training in                         
 diverse fields under the India Technical and Economic Cooperation Programme                   
 (ITEC). In July 1992, India sent a gift of items of stationery for Lao                        
 school children.                                                                              
                                                                                               
 Bilateral relations with Australia continued to progress with economic and                    
 commercial cooperation assuming enhanced importance. The visit of                             
 Australian Minister for Trade and Overseas Development, Mr John Kerin, to                     
 India from 25 to 29 February 1992, leading a Government trade delegation,                     
 to participate in the Joint Ministerial Commission, was ample testimony of                    
 the importance India placed in her economic and commercial relations with                     
 Australia. The Indian side was led by the then Minister of State for                          
 Commerce, Shri Chidambaram. The meeting enabled the visiting Australian                       
 Minister to witness at first hand, India's strong commitment to economic                      
 reforms and liberalisation.                                                                   
                                                                                               
 Trade between India and Australia hovered in the region of US $ 1 billion.                    
 In the first six months of the year, though the balance of trade was in                       
 Australia's favour, trade figures stood at US $ 465 million with Indian                       
 exports at US $ 90 million and imports at US $ 375 million. The Sixth joint                   
 Business Council Meeting was held in Sydney from 23 to 25 March 1992 with                     
 the Australians showing keen interest in India's economic reforms. The                        
 India-Australia Joint Business Council (JBC) met in Delhi on 16 and 17                        
 February 1993.                                                                                
                                                                                               
 A high-level parliamentary delegation from India led by the Speaker, Shri                     
 Shivraj Patil, visited Australia from 21 to 30 June 1992. The visit                           
 afforded the delegation an occasion to study parliamentary practices and                      
 procedures being followed in Australia and was the first visit of an Indian                   
 Parliamentary delegation since 1984.                                                          
                                                                                               
 Exchanges with Australia at the unofficial level on strategic matters                         
 continued. A Workshop on Maritime Security jointly organized by the                           
 Institute of Defence Studies and Analysis (IDSA) and the Indian Ocean                         
 Centre for Peace Studies (IOCPS), Perth, was held in New Delhi from 19 to                     
 21 November 1992 with eminent personalities and specialists from both India                   
 and Australia taking part.                                                                    
 -32>                                                                                          
                                                                                               
 Bilateral relations with New Zealand received a fillip with the visit of Mr                   
 Don McKinnon, Foreign Minister and Deputy Prime Minister of New Zealand, in                   
 June 1992 on the occasion of the inauguration of the newly built premises                     
 of the New Zealand High Commission in New Delhi. Besides attending the                        
 meetings of the Joint Trade Committee and the Joint Business Council, Mr                      
 McKinnon also had meetings with the then Minister of State for External                       
 Affairs, Shri Eduardo Faleiro.                                                                
                                                                                               
 The situation in Fiji continued to receive close attention. After                             
 parliamentary elections in May 1992, Mr Rabuka was installed as Prime                         
 Minister. Except for setting up a Joint Parliamentary Committee in                            
 connection with the review of the Constitution of 1990, the Rabuka                            
 Government failed to do anything tangible for improving the lot of the                        
 Fijians of Indian origin.                                                                     
                                                                                               
 Despite press reports suggesting willingness on the part of Mr Rabuka and                     
 other members of his Government for normalisation of relations with India,                    
 no official communication or confirmation in, this regard was received.                       
                                                                                               
 India continued to highlight the institutionalised. racial discrimination                     
 being perpetuated in Fiji at appropriate international fora and during                        
 bilateral meetings.                                                                           
                                                                                               
 The Ban on commercial and technical cooperation with Fiji continued to                        
 remain in force. Scholarships were given to deserving Fijian students.                        
 -33>                                                                                          
 1992                                                                                          
 3 East Asia                                                                                   
                                                                         Top                   
 THE YEAR UNDER REVIEW SAW THE CONSOLIDATION AND STRENGTHENING OF friendly                     
 relations between India and China which started with the of the then Prime                    
 Minister Shri Rajiv Gandhi to China in December 1988 and gained momentum                      
 with the visit of Premier Li Peng to India in December 1991. The highlight                    
 of the year was the State visit by former President, Shri R Venkataraman,                     
 to China from 18 to 23 May 1992, the first such visit to China by an Indian                   
 Head of State since the establishment of diplomatic relations with the                        
 People's Republic of China in 1950. Another important landmark was the                        
 visit of Raksha Mantri to China in July, establishing formal links between                    
 the defence establishments of the two countries.                                              
                                                                                               
 The former President's discussions with Chinese leaders such as President                     
 Yang Shangkun, General Secretary Jiang Zemin and Premier Li Peng, confirmed                   
 the commitment of both the countries to the development of a positive                         
 momentum in India-China relations and the desire of both the countries to                     
 further strengthen their friendly, good neighbourly and mutually beneficial                   
 relations.                                                                                    
                                                                                               
 The visit of the Raksha Mantri can be seen as part of the confidence-                         
 building effort of both the countries in order to enhance mutual                              
 understanding and trust and establish a tension-free border, a necessary                      
 step to peacefully settle the pending issues between India and China,                         
 including the boundary question.                                                              
                                                                                               
 momentum of high-level exchanges was maintained by a number of Chinese                        
 Ministers visiting India in early 1992, such as their Auditor General, Mr                     
 Lu Peijian, in January, the State Councillor and Chairman, State Education                    
 Commission, Mr Li Tieying, in February/March and the Minister of Civil                        
 Affairs, Mr Cui Naifu, in April. Chinese Party leaders also attended the                      
 annual conclaves of the CPI (M) and the CPI in the early part of the year.                    
 From India, besides Raksha Mantri, Minister of Welfare, Shri Sitaram Kesri,                   
 and Minister of Human Resource Development, Shri Arjun Singh, also visited                    
 China in October. The first Chinese National People's Congress (NPC)                          
 delegation led by its Vice Chairman, Mr Liao Hansheng, visited India in                       
 December. High-level party delegations from the CPI(M), AICC(l), CPI and                      
 the Telegu Desam also visited China during the course of the year. The                        
 Chinese Communist Party sent a delegation headed by Mr Wu Bangguo, Shanghai                   
 Municipal Party Secretary (who was subsequently inducted as Politburo                         
 member at the Party's 14th Congress), which visited India at the invitation                   
 of the AICC W in September.                                                                   
 -34>                                                                                          
                                                                                               
 Another significant event in the year was the holding of the Festival of                      
 China in India. As agreed during Prime Minister Shri P V Narasimha Rao's                      
 talks with Premier Li Peng in Delhi in December 1991, the Festival of China                   
 in India was inaugurated by the Vice President, Shri K R Narayanan, and the                   
 Vice Chairman of the Chinese National People's Congress, Mr Liao Hansheng,                    
 on 2 December 1992 at a glittering ceremony at the Siri Fort Auditorium in                    
 New Delhi. The Festival was received with tremendous enthusiasm in 11                         
 cities across India. Over a hundred artistes and artisans from China                          
 participated in the events. A Festival of India in China is to be held in                     
 the near future.                                                                              
                                                                                               
 The Agreement on re-opening of Consulates-General of India and China in                       
 Shanghai and Bombay respectively, arrived at during the Chinese Premier's                     
 visit to India in 1991, was implemented and both Consulates- General are                      
 now functional. The Chinese Consulate General in Bombay was formally                          
 inaugurated by Mr Liao Hansheng on 7 December 1992.                                           
                                                                                               
 Discussion on the boundary question continued within the Joint Working                        
 Group (JWG) set up for this purpose. Significantly, the JWG met twice for                     
 the first time during the same calendar year: in February and October. The                    
 year also saw mutual defence representation on the JWG for the first time.                    
 Agreement was reached on holding of meetings of border personnel of the two                   
 countries and the establishment of direct telephone links between such                        
 personnel on the boundary. These agreements are being implemented. Further                    
 confidence-building measures to ensure the maintenance of peace and                           
 tranquillity along the line of actual control are being discussed in the                      
 JWG.                                                                                          
                                                                                               
 A major move was the resumption of border trade between Gunji (Pithoragarh                    
 District of UP) and Pulan in the Tibet Autonomous Region of China in the                      
 June to September trading season in 1992. The smooth flow of such                             
 commercial traffic has encouraged the two countries to agree in principle                     
 to open further points on the border to such trade.                                           
 -35>                                                                                          
                                                                                               
 Trade and economic cooperation and exchanges between the two countries                        
 continued to grow during the year under review. Bilateral trade for the                       
 first nine calendar months of 1992 was at about the same level as last                        
 year. An Orissa-based company and a Chinese steel manufacturer have entered                   
 into an agreement to set up a joint venture plant. India's trade,                             
 commercial and investment ties with Hong Kong and Taiwan are also growing                     
 and their prospects for the future look bright.                                               
                                                                                               
 The Cultural Exchange Programme is being implemented as are the various                       
 agreements on exchanges and cooperation in the fields of education, science                   
 and technology, agriculture, audit, civil services and personnel training,                    
 etc.                                                                                          
                                                                                               
 During the high-level dialogue with Chinese leaders, India's concerns about                   
 Chinese arms supplies to Pakistan and Myanmar were conveyed. China has                        
 expressed her desire to see peace and stability in South Asia and do not                      
 wish to see an escalation of the arms race in the region. The discussions                     
 also covered the changing international environment and the mutual desire                     
 of both the countries to see the establishment of an international order                      
 based on the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence and an equitable and                     
 mutually beneficial economic order in which the concerns of the developing                    
 countries will be addressed.                                                                  
                                                                                               
 Official Chinese reaction to the demolition of the mosque at Ayodhya and                      
 the resulting communal violence was muted. The Foreign Office spokesman                       
 described it as India's internal affair, though as India's neighbouring                       
 country, China hoped the problem could be settled peacefully.                                 
                                                                                               
 India's relations with China have therefore shown the resilience and                          
 maturity that is necessary for two such large and important neighbours in                     
 Asia, which will have a bearing on peace and stability of the region and of                   
 the world.                                                                                    
                                                                                               
 The thrust and momentum generated in recent years in India's relations with                   
 Japan continued in 1992-93. The 40th anniversary of the establishment of                      
 diplomatic relations and the signing of the Peace Treaty between India and                    
 Japan in 1992 added another dimension to her steadily burgeoning relations                    
 with Japan which were marked by a spirit of friendship and cooperation in                     
 the political, economic and cultural fields. The period under review also                     
 marked renewed Japanese interest in India in view of the new economic                         
 policies introduced by India.                                                                 
                                                                                               
 Prime Minister, Shri P V Narasimha Rao, visited Japan from 22 to 26 June                      
 1992 at the invitation of Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa. Discussions on                      
 various issues with the Japanese Government on both bilateral and                             
 multilateral matters were fruitful with new areas for cooperation and                         
 consultations being identified. The Prime Minister also met the Japanese                      
 Ministers of International Trade and Industry (MITI) and Finance and                          
 leaders of the five major economic organizations of Japan as well as of                       
 Japanese business and industry having special interest/ties with India. It                    
 was also decided to hold, for the first time, bilateral consultations on                      
 disarmament and nuclear issues between the two countries at the official                      
 level. It is hoped that these talks will result in enhanced mutual                            
 understanding relating to their respective security concerns and the                          
 emerging international order, particularly in the Asia Pacific region.                        
 -36>                                                                                          
                                                                                               
 Prince Akishino, second son of Emperor Akihito, accompanied by Princess                       
 Akishino, visited India from 12 to 20 November 1992 at the invitation of                      
 the Vice President. The Speaker of the House of Representatives of Japan,                     
 Mr Yoshio Sakurauchi, visited India in August 1992 to commemorate the 40th                    
 anniversary of the establishment of diplomatic relations between India and                    
 Japan and the 90th anniversary of the Indo-Japanese Association.                              
 Agriculture Minister, Shri Balram Jakhar, visited Tokyo from 26 to 29                         
 October 1992 to attend the 30th Congress of the International Cooperation                     
 Alliance. Minister of State for Environment, Shri Kamal Nath, visited Japan                   
 from 22 to 25 March 1992 to exchange views with his Japanese counterpart                      
 prior to the Earth Summit in Rio. A return visit was paid by Mr Shozaburo                     
 Nakamura, the Director General of the Japanese Environment Agency (Cabinet                    
 Minister), in September 1992 to India for discussions with Minister of                        
 State for Environment.                                                                        
                                                                                               
 In the economic sphere, the Japanese demonstrated strong interest in                          
 India's policy initiatives on economic liberalisation and the opening up of                   
 the Indian economy. Japan retained the top slot in the list of India's ODA                    
 donors. At the Aid India Consortium meeting in Paris in June 1992, Japan                      
 pledged a total of Yen 111.91 billion for 1992-93, a 5% increase over the                     
 previous year.                                                                                
                                                                                               
 Japanese investment in India registered a sharp increase during the year.                     
 From Rs 50 million in 1990, investment from Japan rose to Rs 527.1 million                    
 in 1991. Total Japanese investment commitment in India had risen to Rs                        
 4,684.40 million upto October 1992, making Japan the third largest investor                   
 in India after the United States and Switzerland.                                             
                                                                                               
 Positive interaction was also maintained with Japan at the official level                     
 in diverse areas. The India-Japan Foreign Office Consultative Talks were                      
 held in Tokyo on 13 and 14 April 1992. The Ninth India-Japan Trade Talks                      
 were held in Delhi in September-October 1992. A Memorandum of Understanding                   
 was signed between the Department of Industrial Development and Japan                         
 International Cooperation Agency (JICA) to examine the feasibility of                         
 establishing an Industrial Model Town (IMT) in India as a pilot project to                    
 attract private foreign investment to India. The detailed indepth                             
 pre-feasibility report is expected to be ready by the end of 1993. The                        
 Indo-Japan Working Group on Railways met in New Delhi from 30 November to 4                   
 December 1992 for wide-ranging discussions and follow up of Japanese aid                      
 projects and for Japanese assistance in the upgradation of technology in                      
 the Indian Railways.                                                                          
 -37>                                                                                          
                                                                                               
 At the non-governmental level too, contacts and interaction were sustained                    
 at a high level. The India-Japan Study Committee (IJSC) met in Bangalore in                   
 May 1992. They examined in particular ways of strengthening the bilateral                     
 linkages with stress on specific areas such as science and technology. It                     
 was also decided to make the meetings bi-annual in view of the                                
 intensification and broadening of areas of cooperation. Subsequently the                      
 22nd Joint Meeting of the IJSC was held on 4 and 5 February 1993 in New                       
 Delhi where it was agreed, inter alia, to undertake joint studies in areas                    
 of mutual interest. The India-Japan Joint Business Council timed its annual                   
 meeting this time in Tokyo in June to coincide with Prime Minister                            
 Narasimha Rao's visit. An Investment Promotion Seminar was organized in                       
 Japan by FICCI and the Confederation of Indian Industry in September. A                       
 delegation of the Japanese Parliamentary Association on Population and                        
 Development visited India in October 1992.                                                    
                                                                                               
 In the cultural field, a series of special events were organized both in                      
 India and Japan in commemoration of the 40th anniversary of India-Japan                       
 diplomatic ties. Japan is also in the process of assisting India in the                       
 efforts to preserve her cultural heritage, The Government of Japan sent a                     
 high level Cultural Mission to India from 28 to 31 January 1993 for                           
 exploring and suggesting ways to increase cultural exchanges between the                      
 two countries.                                                                                
                                                                                               
 A steady intensification of exchanges and interaction marked India's                          
 bilateral relations with the Republic of Korea. President and the Prime                       
 Minister congratulated Mr Kim Young Sam, the new President of the Republic                    
 of Korea, who assumed office on 25 February 1993. Shri Madhavsinh Solanki,                    
 the then Minister for External Affairs, visited the Republic of Korea from                    
 15 to 18 March 1992 at the invitation of Foreign Minister Lee Sang Ock with                   
 whom he had useful exchange of views on matters of mutual interest. An                        
 Agreement on Civil Aviation was also signed during the visit which will                       
 enable the Korean Airlines to fly to Bombay and Delhi and Air India to fly                    
 to Seoul and Pusan. The visit was also utilised to apprise the Government                     
 and business community in South Korea about India's new trade and economic                    
 reforms and the investment opportunities here. Bilateral consultations at                     
 the official level were institutionalised with the first consultations                        
 being held in Seoul during the visit.                                                         
 -38> Other visits from India included the visit of the then Minister of                       
 State for Industry, Prof P J Kurien, on 24 and 25 April 1992 to attend the                    
 Sixth Session of the World Assembly of Small and Medium Enterprises (WASME)                   
 and the visit of the then Minister of State for Tourism, Shri M 0 H Farook,                   
 accompanied by high-level officials in June 1992 for discussions with his                     
 counterpart on promotion of tourism between the two countries.                                
                                                                                               
 Economic and trade relations showed an upward trend. Bilateral trade                          
 between the two countries touched Rs 1376 crores recording a trade surplus                    
 of Rs 152 crores in India's favour for the first time. The EXIM Bank of                       
 Korea extended credit exceeding US $ 500 million for financing important                      
 ONGC projects and for purchase of Korean ships by the Shipping Corporation                    
 of India.                                                                                     
                                                                                               
 The visit of Chief of Army Staff (COAS), Gen S F Rodrigues, to the Republic                   
 of Korea from 9 to 13 November 1992 was the first ever visit by Chief of                      
 Army Staff of India to South Korea and signified the growing interaction                      
 between India and the Republic of Korea. Gen Rodrigues had meetings with                      
 his counterpart, Gen Kim Jin Yon, and other senior ROK defence officials.                     
                                                                                               
 The year also marked increased exchange of delegations of businessmen and                     
 industrialists between the two countries. The Indo-Korea joint Business                       
 Council (JBC) was held in New Delhi in November 1992. A high- level                           
 business delegation sponsored by Indian Merchants Chamber & Association                       
 visited the Republic of Korea in October 1992.                                                
                                                                                               
 At the academic level and person to person level, contacts with the                           
 Republic of Korea expanded during the year. The Fourth Indo-Korean                            
 Conference was held in New Delhi in November 1992 where scholars from                         
 Yonsei University participated with academics from India. A group of                          
 prominent citizens from Pusan also visited India while the Academy of                         
 Korean Studies undertook its first field trip to India.                                       
 -39>                                                                                          
                                                                                               
 India's traditionally cordial relations with the Democratic People's                          
 Republic of Korea were maintained. At the invitation of Vice President Li                     
 Jong Ok, the then Vice President, Dr Shanker Dayal Sharma, paid a return                      
 visit to the Democratic People's Republic of Korea from 14 to 17 April                        
 1992. The visit also coincided with the 80th birthday celebration of                          
 President Kim Il Sung. The visit was utilised to broaden exchanges, in the                    
 political, economic and cultural spheres. Dr Girija Vyas, the then Union                      
 Deputy Minister for Information and Broadcasting, visited Democratic                          
 People's Republic of Korea on 12 September 1992 to attend the 3rd Pyongyang                   
 Film Festival of the Non-Aligned and other developing countries. She also                     
 used the opportunity to meet the top DPRK leaders and discuss various                         
 aspects of bilateral relations. The cultural exchanges between the two                        
 countries continued. A two-member Nalanda Dance Troupe from India                             
 participated in the 10th Spring Friendship Art Festival of the DPRK.                          
                                                                                               
 The friendly and cordial ties between India and Mongolia were further                         
 strengthened during the year under review.                                                    
                                                                                               
 In what was the highest level delegation from India since the State visit                     
 of President of India in July 1988, the Vice President of India paid an                       
 official goodwill visit to Mongolia from 17 to 20 April 1992. The highlight                   
 of this visit was the signing of an agreement on economic and technical                       
 cooperation which provides for scholarships to Mongolian Government                           
 nominees in various fields, setting up of an Indian Technical Centre in                       
 Mongolia and a centre for promotion of small-scale industries in that                         
 country. The President of Mongolia has accepted an invitation to visit                        
 India.                                                                                        
                                                                                               
 Efforts were made to expand bilateral cooperation in the economic and trade                   
 fields. Government of India decided in principle to make available to                         
 Mongolia a line of credit upto an amount of Rs 5 crores.                                      
 -40>                                                                                          
 1992                                                                                          
 4 Central Asia                                                                                
                                                                         Top                   
 PRESIDENT ASKAR AKAEV OF KYRGHYZSTAN VISITED INDIA FROM 17 TO 19 MARCH                        
 1992. During the visit, six agreements were signed between India and                          
 Kyrghyzstan, including Declaration on Principles and Directions of                            
 Cooperation; Protocols on Establishment of Diplomatic and Consular                            
 Relations; Framework agreements on Cultural Cooperation and Trade/Economic                    
 and Technological Cooperation, and an Agreement on Economic and Technical                     
 Cooperation.                                                                                  
                                                                                               
 President S Niazov of Turkmenistan paid an official visit to India between                    
 18 and 20 April 1992. During the visit, India and Turkmenistan signed six                     
 agreements, which included Declaration on Principles and Directions of                        
 Cooperation; Protocols on Establishment of Diplomatic and Consular                            
 Relations; Framework agreements on Cultural Cooperation and Trade/Economic                    
 and Technical Cooperation.                                                                    
                                                                                               
 The visit of the Presidents of Uzbekistan, Kazakhstan, Kyrghyzstan and                        
 Turkmenistan to India during 1991-1992 had given an impetus to the                            
 bilateral relations with these countries and these were further                               
 consolidated during the current year. Ambassadors of India were accredited                    
 at the newly-opened Embassies in Tashkent (Uzbekistan) and Alma Ata                           
 (Kazakhstan). A decision was taken to open an Embassy in Dushanbe                             
 (Tajikistan) but could not be implemented on account of the outbreak of                       
 disturbances.                                                                                 
                                                                                               
 An Uzbek Parliamentary delegation led by Mr S M Yuldashev, Chairman of the                    
 Supreme Soviet of Uzbekistan, visited India in August 1992.                                   
                                                                                               
 Shri R L Bhatia, Minister of State for External Affairs, visited Uzbekistan                   
 from 8 to 13 October, Kyrghyzstan on 13 and 14 October and Kazakhstan from                    
 14 to 16 October 1992. He met Prime Minister Mutalov of Uzbekistan,                           
 President Akaev of Kyrghyzstan and President Nazarbaev of Kazakhstan.                         
 During Minister of State's visit, both sides agreed to work for the further                   
 development of bilateral relations in all spheres. The leaderships of all                     
 the three countries expressed their support for India's position that                         
 Kashmir issue should be resolved through direct bilateral Indo-Pak                            
 negotiations. Agreements establishing Joint Commissions, and Cultural                         
 Exchange Programmes were signed with the three countries. Agreements on                       
 technical and economic                                                                        
                                                                                               
 cooperation were signed with Uzbekistan and Kazakhstan.                                       
 -41>                                                                                          
                                                                                               
 Shri Salman Khursheed, the then Deputy Minister of Commerce, visited                          
 Turkmenistan, Kazakhstan, Kyrghyzstan and Uzbekistan from 27 October to 10                    
 November 1992. He led a multi-disciplinary delegation including                               
 businessmen. The delegation had wide-ranging discussions on expanding trade                   
 and economic cooperation with these countries. Preliminary discussions were                   
 held on establishing joint ventures including joint venture banks. The                        
 Indian side also announced credits of US $ 10 million each to Kazakhstan                      
 and Uzbekistan and US $ 5 million each to Kyrghyzstan and Turkmenistan.                       
                                                                                               
 The Deputy Foreign Minister of Turkmenistan, Mr Boris Shikhmuradov, visited                   
 India from I to 9 December 1992. Besides having official discussions, he                      
 also met members of the Indian business community.                                            
                                                                                               
 Medicines worth Rupees one crore were sent to Turkmenistan as humanitarian                    
 assistance and medical supplies worth Rs 50 lakhs were sent to Kyrghyzstan                    
 for the relief of earthquake victims there.                                                   
                                                                                               
 20 MT of sugar, 10 MT each of basmati rice and tea were sent to Azerbaijan                    
 as token gift.                                                                                
                                                                                               
 Tajikistan has been in a state of civil war since August 1992. India had                      
 been in touch with the countries of the region and offered to participate                     
 in any effort to find a solution.                                                             
                                                                                               
 Prime Minister, Shri Narasimha Rao, offered condolences for the victims of                    
 the Erzincan earthquake in Turkey in March 1992. Relief supplies worth Rs                     
 75 Lakhs were sent as assistance to the victims of the earthquake. Indian                     
 participation at the 61 st Izmir International Trade Fair was a success                       
 with only 7 companies contracting business worth US $ 6.5 million as                          
 compared to 22 companies who had bagged orders worth US $ 3 million the                       
 previous year. The Lord Mayor of Ankara, Mr Murat Karayalcin, visited Delhi                   
 from 8 to 10 December 1992 under ICCR's distinguished visitor's programme.                    
 -42>                                                                                          
 1992                                                                                          
 5 West Asia and North Africa                                                                  
                                                                         Top                   
 DURING THE PERIOD UNDER REVIEW, INDIA'S RELATIONS WITH THE COUNTRIES OF                       
 West Asia and North Africa continued to be marked by friendship and                           
 cooperation. Besides bilateral interaction, India coordinated positions                       
 with some countries in the region in the world fora including UN, NAM and                     
 G-15 on the international issues of common concern. India noted with                          
 appreciation the understanding and confidence shown by several Arab                           
 countries of WANA region at Government's handling of the Ayodhya issue.                       
 India together with several countries in the region found common cause in                     
 combating terrorism and religious extremism. Exchange of visits and foreign                   
 office consultations helped in consolidating ties during this period.                         
                                                                                               
 Following the establishment of diplomatic relations between India and                         
 Israel, India is looking forward to developing relations with Israel in                       
 mutually beneficial fields while continuing to advocate its support for the                   
 ongoing peace process which it is hoped will lead to a settlement                             
 acceptable to all the concerned parties, and taking into account the                          
 legitimate rights and aspirations of the Palestinian people both within and                   
 outside the occupied territories.                                                             
                                                                                               
 India was invited to participate in the multilateral phase of the Middle                      
 East Peace Process comprising five Working Groups set up to discuss                           
 regional issues of common concern viz Arms Control and Regional Security,                     
 Environment, Economic Cooperation and Development, Water Resources and                        
 Refugees. India, China and Japan are so far the only non- regional Asian                      
 countries participating in the Middle East Peace Process. Two meetings each                   
 of the Working Groups were held between May and November 1992 and India                       
 participated in all of them. India made presentations in respect of its                       
 experience in the related areas. These were well received and it is hoped                     
 that some of these may prove to be relevant enough to be taken up for                         
 greater consideration subsequently.                                                           
                                                                                               
 There were continued high level contacts between India and Algeria. The                       
 Algerian Minister of Transport visited India from 28 April to 2 May 1992                      
 and was received by Prime Minister. Discussions inter alia focussed on the                    
 need for greater cooperation in the railway sector, especially in Algeria's                   
 development programmes. Prime Minister and Mr Radhe Malek, member of the                      
 High Committee of State of Algeria shared common perceptions on the                           
 challenges of religious extremism faced by both the countries when they met                   
 on 21 November at Dakar during the G-15 Summit. In August 1992, Secretary                     
 level discussions between two foreign offices took place in Algiers                           
 focussing mainly on pending bilateral issues including the convening of the                   
 next meeting of the Joint Commission and issues relating to the NAM Summit.                   
 -43>                                                                                          
                                                                                               
 An Exim Bank Line of Credit of US $ 50 million for Algeria has been                           
 extended upto May 1993, for the purpose of providing Algeria the means to                     
 surpass previous levels of imports from India.                                                
                                                                                               
 A delegation led by Deputy Minister of Commerce visited Egypt on 17 and 18                    
 May 1992 to re-emphasise necessity of boosting bilateral trade between the                    
 two countries. Foreign office consultations at Secretary level took place                     
 in Cairo in August. The Egyptian Foreign Minister agreed to assist in                         
 satisfactorily resolving the issue of outstanding payments from Egypt of                      
 over Rs 80 million pending since the termination of Rupee trade agreement.                    
 Meanwhile, ECGC credits amounting to Rs 105.21 million have been recovered.                   
                                                                                               
 Prime Minister met President Hosni Mubarak at G-15 Summit at Dakar in                         
 November. He reiterated the outstanding invitation to President Mubarak to                    
 visit India, and President Mubarak assured Prime Minister that he would                       
 schedule a visit shortly. Both leaders while sharing views on the progress                    
 of Middle East Peace Process felt that continuing of the dialogue between                     
 the Arabs and Israel was a necessary pre-condition for peace in the region.                   
 Both India and Egypt being founding members of NAM agreed to devise means                     
 for strengthening the movement so that it could adapt to newer challenges.                    
                                                                                               
 India's first Ambassador to Israel presented his credentials on 28 October                    
 1992 and the Israeli Ambassador to India on 26 November 1992. Following the                   
 establishment of diplomatic relations, a number of visits at the official                     
 level have been exchanged between Israel and India with a view to exploring                   
 possibilities of bilateral cooperation. Some broad areas of mutually                          
 beneficial cooperation have been identified, which include agriculture,                       
 civil aviation, tourism, culture, science and technology, and solar energy.                   
                                                                                               
 The fifth session of the Indo-Jordan Trade and Economic Committee was held                    
 in Amman from 20 to 23 April 1992 during which status of trade and economic                   
 relations between the two countries was reviewed. Both sides were satisfied                   
 with the results of the efforts made by each side to increase the volume of                   
 trade between the two countries. It was also agreed that further markets                      
 would be explored by conducting surveys and that Jordan would advise                          
 government -44> departments to buy scientific equipments from India. India                    
 agreed to maintain import of rock phosphate at the 1991-92 level, the                         
 import of which has been decanalised. Jordan showed its eagerness to import                   
 from India wheat, rice, barley and corn. A review of the ITEC programme was                   
 also made.                                                                                    
 -44>                                                                                          
                                                                                               
 The then Minister of State for External Affairs, Shri Eduardo Faleiro,                        
 visited Jordan on 23 and 24 August 1992. The Jordanians suggested founding                    
 of an Indo-Arab thought forum and a commission of wise men for Asian Ethos.                   
 An invitation to Crown Prince Hassan Bin Talal to visit India was extended                    
 by the Minister.                                                                              
                                                                                               
 India supports the full implementation of the Taif Accord in letter and                       
 spirit, and welcomed the first Parliamentary elections which took place in                    
 Lebanon after a gap of 20 years. India supports the Lebanese people and                       
 Government in their commitment to national reconciliation, unity and                          
 sovereignty, and the expansion of the authority of the Lebanese Government                    
 and the Lebanese Armed Forces throughout the country in accordance with the                   
 provisions of the Taif Agreement.                                                             
                                                                                               
 The major issue with Libya during the year was the attempt to recover                         
 Indian blocked funds owed to Indian companies. Some progress was achieved.                    
 An amount of about Rs 1350 million has been paid back to the Indian                           
 companies through oil payments in 1992, and further discussions are in                        
 progress. Libyan Minister of Economic Planning, Mr Omer Mustafa Muntassar,                    
 visited India as Col Gaddafi's special envoy on 13 August 1992 and called                     
 on the Prime Minister. He briefed about steps taken by Libya to comply with                   
 UN Security Council Resolutions, and sought India's understanding in                          
 finding an amicable solution to the problems arising out of the Lockerbie                     
 air crash case. UN sanctions against Libya continued till the end of the                      
 year.                                                                                         
                                                                                               
 For logistical reasons, concurrent accreditation to Mauritania was changed                    
 from Indian Embassy in Dakar (Senegal) to Indian Embassy in Algiers                           
 (Algeria).                                                                                    
                                                                                               
 Moroccan Foreign Minister, Mr Abdul Latif Filali, visited India from 18 to                    
 23 February 1992. During his meetings with the Prime Minister and other                       
 leaders, discussions focussed on the Moroccan proposal to upgrade the                         
 Indo-Moroccan joint Committee, the Middle East Peace Process and                              
 developments relating to the Arab Maghreb Union.                                              
                                                                                               
 India's sympathy and support to the Palestinian people were reiterated by                     
 Prime Minister when he met President Yasser Arafat during his one day                         
 stopover in Tunis on 20 November 1992 on his way to Dakar to attend the                       
 G-15 Summit. President Yasser Arafat briefed Prime Minister on progress in                    
 the Middle East Peace Process, especially in the Israel-Palestinian                           
 dialogue. Solidarity with the Palestinian people was expressed at a                           
 function organized by the ICCR to commemorate the International Day of                        
 Solidarity. The then Minister of State for External Affairs, Shri Eduardo                     
 Faleiro, who was the Chief Guest, reiterated India's consistent and                           
 unequivocal support to the Palestinian cause. India regretted the expulsion                   
 by Israel of more than 400 Palestinians from the occupied territories and                     
 urged Israel to rescind the expulsion order. India as President of the                        
 Security Council was instrumental in having UN Security Council Resolution                    
 No 799 of 18 December passed, which inter alia condemned Israel for the                       
 expulsions.                                                                                   
 -45>                                                                                          
                                                                                               
 The then Minister of State for External Affairs, Shri Eduardo Faleiro,                        
 visited Somalia on 16 November and handed over relief supplies worth Rs 20                    
 lakhs in the form of medicines and baby food for the affected people of                       
 Somalia. A cheque for US $ 250,000 from the AFRICA Fund was also handed                       
 over. The Minister of State availed of the opportunity to obtain a first                      
 hand view of the prevailing chaotic situation in Somalia. He held                             
 discussions with Mr Ali Mahdi and Gen Aidid including the prospects of                        
 convening of a National Reconciliation Conference at a future date. India                     
 supported the UN Security Council Resolution 794 inviting member countries                    
 to contribute forces for the peace-keeping operations for bringing about                      
 relief to millions of starving Somalis. In pursuance of this Resolution,                      
 India also agreed to participate in the UN Peace Keeping Operation in                         
 Somalia with one Corvette and one LST and approximately with a brigade,                       
 including Paramedical units, from the Indian Navy and Army respectively.                      
                                                                                               
 During the current year, the Sudanese have shown a positive inclination to                    
 further boost the bilateral relations and to cooperate in the international                   
 domain with India. A very muted Sudanese reaction on the events in Ayodhya                    
 was expressed. Discussions took place to recover blocked funds amounting to                   
 Rs 62.58 crores though no significant progress has yet been noted.                            
                                                                                               
 The then Minister of State for External Affairs, Shri Eduardo Faleiro,                        
 visited Syria from 20 to 23 August 1992 with a view to rejuvenate political                   
 contacts and to, impart greater economic thrust to bilateral relations. He                    
 was accompanied by a business delegation. An exchange of views took place                     
 on local and regional issues including the Middle East Peace Process and                      
 the NAM Summit. He called on President Assad and Dr Yassin, Deputy Prime                      
 Minister for Economic Affairs, who expressed a desire to visit India at the                   
 head of a business delegation. Syria showed keenness in developing                            
 bilateral economic ties and assured the Minister of State that Syria would                    
 welcome the participation by Indian companies especially in the supply of                     
 machines, plants, equipments as well as infrastructure turn- key projects.                    
 -46>                                                                                          
                                                                                               
 The second session of the Indo-Syrian Joint Trade Committee was held in                       
 Delhi from 20 to 22 May. The Syrian delegation was led by Dr Abdul Rahim                      
 Subeih, Deputy Minister for Planning. Discussions on ways and means to                        
 develop diversified trade relations including barter were held. Cooperation                   
 in the field of irrigation and agriculture, possibilities of setting up                       
 industrial projects, further Indian participation in transport,                               
 communication and power sectors were discussed. The Syrians expressed                         
 desire to enhance scientific and technical cooperation.                                       
                                                                                               
 A 9-member Syrian Parliamentary delegation, headed by the Speaker of the                      
 Syrian People's Council, visited India from 8 to 17 February 1993. The                        
 members of the delegation called on the President, the Vice President, the                    
 Prime Minister, the Speaker of the Lok Sabha, the External Affairs Minister                   
 and the Minister of State for External Affairs, Shri Salman Khursheed                         
 during their stay. Wide ranging discussions on bilateral and international                    
 matters took place. The Syrian side expressed its desire to further                           
 strengthen the already existing friendly relations, India reiterated her                      
 stand on the Palestinian question and hoped for an early resumption of the                    
 Peace Talks. India also expressed dismay at the deportation of 400                            
 Palestinians by Israel.                                                                       
                                                                                               
 Tunisian Foreign Minister, Mr Habib Ben Yahia, visited India from 26 to 28                    
 August 1992. He called on the President and the Prime Minister and held                       
 talks with the objective of continuing regular political consultations                        
 between the two countries. Discussions focussed on the Middle East Peace                      
 Process and the NAM Summit at Jakarta.                                                        
                                                                                               
 The fifth meeting of the Indo-Tunisian joint Committee was held in New                        
 Delhi from 26 to 28 October 1992. It was agreed to organize a multi- sector                   
 exhibition of Indian products in Tunisia in 1993, explore possibilities of                    
 maritime cooperation, joint ventures in industry and tourism and the                          
 setting up of a Joint Chamber of Commerce.                                                    
                                                                                               
 On his way to Dakar to attend G-15 Summit, the Prime Minister stopped in                      
 Tunis on 20 November. Tunisian Prime Minister, Mr Hamid Karoui, briefed                       
 Prime Minister on developments in the region with special reference to                        
 Libya, Western Sahara, and Middle East Peace Process. The potential of                        
 further expansion of commercial and economic cooperation was underlined                       
 during the discussions in view of the process of liberalisation underway in                   
 both the countries.                                                                           
 -47>                                                                                          
                                                                                               
 India's ties with the countries of the Gulf Region are as old as the                          
 recorded history, and she has close relations with the countries of the                       
 Region in almost every field. The presence of more than 1.5 million Indian                    
 citizens working in the Gulf countries has added a major new dimension to                     
 the bilateral relationship. Before the Gulf war, the annual remittances                       
 from Indian nationals in the region were estimated to be Rs 3,500 crores.                     
 Since the end of the Gulf war, 1,09,000 Indian nationals have already                         
 returned to Kuwait and more are expected to follow. The remittances are                       
 expected to register growth.                                                                  
                                                                                               
 India has signed term contracts for import of 10 million tonnes of oil from                   
 Gulf Cooperation Council Countries for the year 1992-93. In addition,                         
 substantial purchases of crude oil from this region were also made through                    
 the spot market. The Gulf countries account for approximately two-thirds of                   
 India's oil import.                                                                           
                                                                                               
 India's total trade with the Gulf Region during the year 1991-92 was                          
 approximately Rs 11,546 crores, of which about Rs 3,218 crores was the                        
 value of her exports. The trade would increase even further when the                          
 economic sanctions against Iraq are lifted.                                                   
                                                                                               
 The security, stability and peace in this area of strategic importance is                     
 of vital interest to India and she has high stakes in their promotion in                      
 this region. It has, therefore, been India's constant endeavour to further                    
 strengthen her ties with all the countries of this area.                                      
                                                                                               
 As a part of these efforts, the Minister for External Affairs accompanied                     
 by a high level official and a business delegation, visited Kuwait in                         
 February 1992. A bilateral co-operation agreement providing for                               
 establishment of an Indo-Kuwait joint Commission was signed during the                        
 visit. India also had the opportunity of welcoming the Kuwaiti Ministers of                   
 Communication and Information who visited India in February and July 1992                     
 respectively. A Memorandum of Understanding on bilateral cooperation in the                   
 field of information was signed during the visit of the Information                           
 Minister. These visits and intensified bilateral contacts have enabled the                    
 return of more than 1,09,000 Indians to Kuwait upto the end of November                       
 1992.                                                                                         
                                                                                               
 The UAE President, Shaikh Zayed Bin Sultan Al Nahayan, paid a State visit                     
 to India in April 1992 and held detailed discussions on matters of mutual                     
 interest with the Prime Minister. Both sides agreed to expand the scope of                    
 the bilateral relationship. An agreement on the avoidance of double                           
 taxation was signed during the visit. As a result of the visit the UAE has                    
 shown increased interest in investments in India. As follow up measures, a                    
 UAE delegation visited India to explore possibilities of setting up a                         
 hospital and discussions have also taken place in UAE for investments in                      
 the oil, petrochemicals and other sectors. Further discussions on these                       
 subjects are to take place.                                                                   
 -48>                                                                                          
 After lying dormant for nearly two decades, the issue of sovereignty over                     
 Abu Musa Island in the Southern Gulf was revived afresh between the United                    
 Arab Emirates and Iran. Although the two sides have held discussions on                       
 this issue, the dispute has defied resolution. In a statement issued on 16                    
 September 1992, India expressed the hope that the existing differences                        
 would be resolved through friendly' bilateral dialogue between the                            
 countries concerned in accordance with the agreements. India, consistent                      
 with basic principles governing her foreign policy, reiterated her respect                    
 for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of all States in the Gulf                       
 region. India attached importance to the maintenance of peace, stability                      
 and security in the region.                                                                   
                                                                                               
 The then Minister of State for External Affairs, Shri Eduardo Faleiro,                        
 visited Baharain, Oman and Qatar in May-June 1992. During his visit, Shri                     
 Faleiro held extensive discussions with the leaders of these countries with                   
 a view to explore the possibilities of further expanding the scope of                         
 bilateral relationship. The Secretary General of the GCC, Mr Abdullah                         
 Bishara, visited India and held discussions with the Indian leadership                        
 aimed at forging stronger and political ties with all the GCC States. It                      
 has been decided to hold regular dialogue with the GCC Secretariat. He also                   
 interacted with a broad strata of Indian academic and media personalities.                    
 The six GCC States are Saudi Arabia, Oman, UAE, Bahrain, Qatar and Kuwait.                    
                                                                                               
 The Under Secretary for Political Affairs of Oman, Sayyid Haitham Bin Tariq                   
 Al Said, visited India in September 1992 for discussions with the officials                   
 of the Ministry of External Affairs. It was agreed to conclude a new                          
 agreement on economic and technical cooperation with a view to expand                         
 economic and commercial ties. Oman also expressed interest in cooperation                     
 in the field of agriculture. In order to achieve these objectives, India                      
 extended an invitation to the Omani Minister of Commerce while Oman                           
 welcomed the visit by Indian Minister of Agriculture. A delegation led by                     
 the President of Oman Oil Company visited India in November 1992 to explore                   
 possibilities of cooperation in the oil and petrochemicals sectors and                        
 several discussions have been initiated on this subject.                                      
 -49>                                                                                          
                                                                                               
 The then Minister of State for Petroleum, Natural Gas and Defence, Shri                       
 Krishna Kumar, visited UAE in October 1992. He called on the President of                     
 the UAE and had detailed discussions with his UAE counterpart. He also met                    
 a wide cross-section of the Indian community there.                                           
                                                                                               
 The Deputy Minister for Information of Saudi Arabia visited India in                          
 February 1992 at the invitation of the Government of India, and Secretary                     
 (West) in the Ministry of External Affairs visited Saudi Arabia and the UAE                   
 in October 1992. Secretary (West) held official level talks with his                          
 counterpart in the Foreign Ministry at Jeddah.                                                
                                                                                               
 India, through her pragmatic approach, contributed to the development of                      
 consensus and endorsement of international law & legitimacy in the UN                         
 Security Council in 1992 on various resolutions pertaining to the Gulf                        
 Region. India continued her efforts to get compensation for Indian citizens                   
 and commercial establishements which suffered losses as a result of the                       
 Gulf war.                                                                                     
                                                                                               
 A Special Kuwait Cell was established in 1991 to deal with the compensation                   
 claims of Indian nationals, including Indian companies, who sustained                         
 losses during the Gulf crisis following Iraq's invasion and occupation of                     
 Kuwait in August 1990. More than sixty thousand claims for about US $ 733.8                   
 million (about Rs 1,935 crores) have already been forwarded (as on 16                         
 February 1993) to the United Nations Compensation Commission, Geneva.                         
                                                                                               
 The UN Security Council vide its Resolution No 687 (1991) dated 3 April                       
 1991 reaffirmed that Iraq, without prejudice to the debts and obligations                     
 of Iraq arising prior to 2 August 1990, which will be addressed through the                   
 normal mechanisms, is liable under international law for any direct loss,                     
 damage, including environmental damage, and the depletion of natural                          
 resources or injury to foreign governments, nationals or corporations, as a                   
 result of Iraq's unlawful invasion and occupation of Kuwait. The Security                     
 Council, under the same Resolution, set up a fund to pay compensation for                     
 claims that fall within the above parameters and also established a UN                        
 Compensation Commission (UNCC) to administer the fund.                                        
                                                                                               
 There were about 1,72,000 Indian nationals in Kuwait before Iraq's                            
 invasion. Even before the UNCC prescribed guidelines and formats for                          
 presenting the claims, Government of India considered it desirable to                         
 collect information on compensation claims from Indian nationals and                          
 business houses, in a suitable format which was widely circulated as early                    
 as in June 1991. The Special Kuwait Cell received about 95,000 claims which                   
 were registered and computerised. But this exercise became infructuous as                     
 later the UNCC devised its own formats for claim applications.                                
 -50>                                                                                          
                                                                                               
 In June 1992, the UNCC circulated rules/procedures for filing compensation                    
 claims, Six types of forms for submission of claims, namely, 'A', 'B', 'C',                   
 'D', 'E' & 'F' have been prescribed by the UNCC. These forms were given                       
 publicity, through news media, State and Union Territory Governments, etc                     
 and fresh claim applications were invited as per UNCC requirements. The                       
 first four categories pertain to claims by individuals which are required                     
 to be forwarded to the UNCC by 30 June 1993. The claims for business losses                   
 are to be subimitted on form 'E' and government claims on form 'F'. The                       
 last date for submission of 'E' & 'F' claims is 31 December 1993.                             
                                                                                               
 The total amount of compensation claimed by Indian nationals/companies has                    
 not yet been finally compiled as claims are still being received, but it is                   
 estimated that the total claim amount will be about US $ 2,000 million.                       
                                                                                               
 The details of the Claim Forms are as follows:                                                
                                                                                               
 Form 'A': Damages arising out of departure from Iraq or Kuwait by affected                    
 individuals/families for fixed amounts between US $ 2,500 to US $ 8,000                       
 Form 'B': Damages for serious personal injury or death                                        
 Form 'C': Individual claims for damages up to US $ 100,000                                    
 Form 'D': Individual claims for damages above US $ 100,000                                    
 Form 'E': Claims of Corporations and other entities                                           
 Form 'F': Claims of governments and international organizations.                              
                                                                                               
 So far 1,52,000 'A' claims have been registered with the Special Kuwait                       
 Cell. Of these about 20% claimants appear to have made more than one                          
 application. After eliminating such duplicate claims, there will be about                     
 1,20,000 genuine claims. All these claims are being computerised by the                       
 National Informatics Centre and are under various stages of processing.                       
 Upto 16 February 1993, 66,121 claims of 'A' category for a total amount of                    
 US $ 259,921,000 have been sent to the Permanent Mission of India, Geneva,                    
 for onward transmission to the UNCC. It is proposed to send all remaining                     
 'A' claims to Geneva, for onward transmission to the UNCC by April 1993.                      
                                                                                               
 A total of 325 claims tinder category 'B' have been ed, registered and                        
 scrutinised. Of these only 37 claims for US $ 92,500 have been found to                       
 conform to the UNCC requirements and have been forwarded to the PMI,                          
 Geneva. Letters have been issued to the rest of the claimants requesting                      
 them to remove the deficiencies. It is hoped that their replies will be                       
 received by the middle of March 1993 and thereafter, the remaining 'B'                        
 forms will be forwarded to the UNCC.                                                          
 -51>                                                                                          
                                                                                               
 Claims under Category 'C' are expected to be around 20,000. Majority of                       
 these claim forms have not been filled in correctly. The claim forms are                      
 being scrutinized and the claimants will bp notified to remove the                            
 deficiencies.                                                                                 
                                                                                               
 The total number of claims received and registered under Category 'D' so                      
 far is 326. Scrutiny of these claims has been completed and letters have                      
 been issued to the claimants to remove deficiencies as per the UNCC                           
 requirements and resubmit the claims by March 1993.                                           
                                                                                               
 So far, 118 claims from the Companies, Corporations, etc have been                            
 received. Very few claims have been submitted in the UNCC form 'E'. Even                      
 these have not been correctly filled in and supported with documentary                        
 evidence. Letters are being sent to the concerned to meet the UNCC                            
 requirements. Even though the last date of submission of claims in form 'E'                   
 is 31 December 1993, it is proposed to forward the forms to Geneva in the                     
 first half of 1993. One 'E' claim for US $ 472.8 million has alredy been                      
 lodged with the UNCC.                                                                         
                                                                                               
 As regards government claims to be submitted in form 7, the concerned                         
 authorities have been advised to submit their claims in time.                                 
                                                                                               
 The tensions between Iraq and coalition partners resurfaced during December                   
 1992- January 1993. The two sides were at variance with respect to a number                   
 of issues, including border demarcation between Iraq and Kuwait, 'no fly                      
 zones' and access to the search teams from UN Special Commission. These                       
 differences resulted in a series of military actions by USA, UK and France                    
 against Iraqi targets. On 14 January 1993 a statement by India hoped that                     
 dangerous escalations would be avoided by strict adherence to the terms of                    
 the ceasefire after the Gulf war and by full recognition and observance of                    
 the sovereignty, integrity and international legitimacy of all States in                      
 the Gulf region.                                                                              
                                                                                               
 The Ministry assisted in arrangements for Haj Pilgrimage and 24,000 Hajis                     
 performed the Haj in June 1992 under the auspices of the Haj Committee.                       
 4,700 travelled by sea and 19,300 by air. A twelve member Haj Goodwill                        
 Delegation led by Shri Khurshid Alam Khan, Governor of Karnataka, visited                     
 Saudi Arabia for the pilgrimage and carried a letter from Prime Minister to                   
 King Fahd of Saudi Arabia.                                                                    
 -52>                                                                                          
                                                                                               
 The unfortunate incident that took place in Ayodhya on 6 December had its                     
 repercussions in the countries of the Gulf region. Most of the Gulf                           
 countries and inter-regional groupings such as Gulf Cooperation Council and                   
 the Organization of Islamic Conference issued critical statements                             
 condemning the incident and the communal riots that took place in the wake                    
 of the destruction of Babri Masjid at Ayodhya. The Government made every                      
 effort to explain developments in the correct perspective to the friendly                     
 countries. The Ambassadors of GCC countries as well as OIC were briefed by                    
 the Minister of State as well as the Secretaries in the Ministry of                           
 External Affairs. Indian Envoys in the Arab capitals also made efforts to                     
 explain the developments. It is assessed that as a result of these efforts,                   
 the countries by and large appreciate India's commitment to secular ideals                    
 and the sincerity with which the Government is trying to find appropriate                     
 solutions to this intensely complex problem.                                                  
                                                                                               
 India has traditionally attached importance to the relations with Iran.                       
 Iran has assumed special significance for India against the backdrop of the                   
 situation in the Gulf, developments in Central Asia and Afghanistan and in                    
 the region as a whole. Iran's large reserves of oil and gas, its status as                    
 a major power in the region and its impulses on issues of growth and                          
 development are factors conducive to cooperation of great mutual benefit                      
 and advantage.                                                                                
                                                                                               
 Iran too pays substantial attention to relations with India. Frequent high                    
 level exchanges have characterised the bilateral relations. Iranian Foreign                   
 Minister, Dr Velayati, visited India for the Sixth Session of the                             
 Indo-Iranian Joint Commission on 10 and 11 November 1992. During the Joint                    
 Commission Session, Iran conveyed firm signals of its readiness to upgrade                    
 political, economic and commercial realtions with India. Apart from three                     
 existing committees dealing with trade, industry, cultural and consular                       
 matters, etc, two new committees were set up in the Joint Commission to                       
 handle new thrust areas of agriculture and transportation. There was                          
 progress in specific areas of cooperation. Indian proposals for                               
 participation in projects in Iran are also in various stages of                               
 finalisation.                                                                                 
 -53>                                                                                          
 1992                                                                                          
 6 Africa (South of the Sahara)                                                                
                                                                         Top                   
 THE DEMOCRATIC WAVE ACROSS THE VAST AFRICAN CONTINENT HAS RESULTED IN                         
 profound changes. Some countries made progress towards multi-party                            
 democracy, in other countries the transformation has been slow, and in some                   
 there has actually been regression. The reform process in South Africa                        
 received a setback due to continuing violence specially after the initial                     
 optimism over the successful meeting of the Convention for a Democratic                       
 South Africa (CODESA-I). It is hoped that the political deadlock at                           
 CODESA-II over the formation of a representative government was only                          
 temporary.                                                                                    
                                                                                               
 India has welcomed the growing acceptance of multi-party democracy in                         
 Africa. There was a smooth transition in Zambia to multi-party democracy.                     
 Kenya and Tanzania have carried out the necessary constitutional amendments                   
 for registration of various political parties. The first multi-party                          
 election in 26 years was held in Kenya on 29 December 1992. Two                               
 distinguished Indians were part of the Commonwealth Observers Team in                         
 Kenya. Seychelles elected a Constitution Commission in July 1992. However,                    
 as the draft Constitution submitted for referendum in November 1992 could                     
 not muster the requisite minimum percentage of votes (60%), the                               
 Constitution Commission is being reconvened in January 1993 to draw up a                      
 fresh constitution. In Madagascar, the new constitution was approved in a                     
 referendum held in August. In Guinea and Mali multi-party elections were                      
 completed and new Governments came into power during the course of the                        
 year, In Gambia President Jawara was re- elected. In Zaire a transitional                     
 government was elected in August 1992 and has been charged with a mandate                     
 to organize multi-party elections within a period of 2 years. In Ghana                        
 Presidential elections were completed in November 1992. Ft Lt J J Rawlings                    
 was elected as the civilian President and installed on 7 January 1993.                        
 Parliamentary elections took place on 29 December 1992 with the opposition                    
 parties boycotting them. In Nigeria the democratic process received a                         
 setback due to widespread complaints of irregularities. The Presidential                      
 elections originally scheduled to take place in December 1992 have been                       
 postponed to June 1993. Mozambique, after signing a General Peace Agreement                   
 on 4 October 1992, is moving towards establishment of a multi- party                          
 system. Angola conducted                                                                      
                                                                                               
 elections in September 1992. The ruling MPLA party won the elections but                      
 there will be a run-off between President Dos Santos and UNITA leader Mr                      
 Jonas Savimbi as neither got the required percentage. Thus significant                        
 changes are being effected in sub-Sahara Africa.                                              
 -54>                                                                                          
                                                                                               
 Economically the continent continues to suffer, its problems being                            
 compounded by a severe drought in Southern Africa. Most of the countries                      
 have accepted the structural adjustment programme of the IMF as a major                       
 means of their economic recovery even though the conditionalities involve a                   
 lot of sacrifices. There was a trend towards greater regional cooperation.                    
 Therefore, economic groupings like Economic Community of West African                         
 States (ECOWAS) in West Africa, Southern African Development Community                        
 (SADC) in Southern Africa, Preferential Trade Area (PTA) covering Eastern,                    
 Central and Southern African countries or the Indian Ocean Commission are                     
 expected to play a greater role. Then, there is the African Economic                          
 Community which is the ultimate aim of the OAU.                                               
                                                                                               
 India has always attached special importance to its relations with Africa.                    
 With the political independence of all African countries and the prospect                     
 of reform within South Africa, the struggle against colonialism and                           
 institutionalised racialism is moving towards a successful conclusion. In                     
 the future, new relationships based on concrete economic, technological and                   
 educational cooperation will assume enhanced significance. It is                              
 increasingly being realised that in several areas Indian technology is more                   
 relevant to the needs of Africa than that provided by the developed                           
 countries. India has initiated economic collaboration arrangements with                       
 several countries of Africa. The focus of Indian cooperation would now                        
 shift more to consultancy services, projects, joint ventures and                              
 investments in various fields besides promoting India's exports to Africa.                    
 Despite constraints of resources on both sides, Indian efforts would be to                    
 embark on mutually beneficial projects. The countries of Africa seek Indian                   
 assistance for their human resource development. In this sphere India is in                   
 a position to assist; a large number of Indian scientists and technical                       
 experts are already working in Africa.                                                        
                                                                                               
 While expressing regret at the continuing violence in South Africa, India                     
 worked assiduously in various international fora to promote the restoration                   
 of the process of negotiations for bringing about a non- racial, democratic                   
 and undivided South Africa. She has welcomed the resumption of negotiations                   
 between the African National Congress (ANC) and the South African                             
 Government. The next multi-party constitutional negotiations are likely to                    
 be resumed in February 1993.                                                                  
 -55>                                                                                          
                                                                                               
 In view of the positive developments towards the formation of an interim                      
 Government of national unity, India announced the decision to set up a                        
 Cultural Centre in South Africa at a suitable location to promote "people                     
 to people" contacts, with power to discharge necessary visa functions. This                   
 is in consonance with the decision taken at the Commonwealth Heads of                         
 Government Meeting (CHOGM) held at Harare in 1991. India also decided to                      
 commence direct air links with South Africa. In accordance with the CHOGM                     
 time-table, diplomatic relations with South Africa will need to await the                     
 establishment of an interim Government.                                                       
                                                                                               
 India continued to give moral and material support to the ANC to end                          
 apartheid in South Africa. Sixteen ANC diplomats are being trained in the                     
 Foreign Service Training Institute. Other proposals for human resource                        
 development are also in the pipeline.                                                         
                                                                                               
 The highlight of India's relations with Mauritius was the visit by Prime                      
 Minister, Shri P V Narasimha Rao, in March 1992 as Chief Guest for the                        
 celebrations declaring Mauritius a Republic. This was followed by the visit                   
 of Sir Veerasamy Ringadoo, First President and former Governor General of                     
 Mauritius, in May-June. The Mauritian Foreign Minister, Mr Paul Raymond                       
 Berenger, also visited India from 5 to 12 August 1992. These and other high                   
 level visits resulted in a further consolidation of the existing close ties                   
 between the two countries.                                                                    
                                                                                               
 In the elections held in Angola on 30 September and 1 October 1992 the                        
 ruling Popular Movement for the liberation of Angola (MPLA) was declared                      
 the winner having polled 53.74% votes while National Union for the Total                      
 Independence of Angola (UNITA) could muster only 34.1%.                                       
                                                                                               
 A second round of presidential polls is to take place as neither candidate                    
 could obtain more than 50% of the votes. The UN continue to make efforts to                   
 bring about a political dialogue between the two sides. India hopes that                      
 agreement is reached and peace prevails in Angola.                                            
                                                                                               
 A General Peace Accord was signed on 4 October 1992 between the President                     
 of Mozambique, Mr Chissano, and the RENAMO leader, Mr Afonso Dhlakama, in                     
 Rome. The two leaders expressed their interest and willingness to make                        
 every effort for a lasting peace in Mozambique. A United Nations Operation                    
 in Mozambique (ONUMOZ) has been established. The UN Force is to act in                        
 conformity with the Peace Accord in ensuring peace, ceasefire and holding                     
 of elections. India has been requested to provide logistic companies for                      
 ONUMOZ. The Mozambican Foreign Minister, Dr Pascoal Manuel Mocumbi, paid an                   
 official visit to India from 25 to 27 August 1992. Mozambique would like                      
 India to play an active role in the reconstruction of its economy,                            
 particularly in the field of agriculture, transport, communication, mines                     
 and industry.                                                                                 
 -56>                                                                                          
                                                                                               
 India and Uganda have longstanding relations except for the aberration                        
 during Idi Amin's regime from 1972-76. President of Uganda, Mr Yoweri                         
 Kaguta Museveni, paid a State visit to India from 12 to 14 October 1992.                      
 The visit provided a fillip to the bilateral relations and the two                            
 countries can now move forward to forging a constructive relationship based                   
 on mutual benefit. Uganda is seeking India's assistance in various fields                     
 for the reconstruction of its economy. Some areas of cooperation have been                    
 identified like setting up food processing industry, wood products,                           
 manufacture of bicycles, edible oils and fertiliser. A Framework Agreement                    
 was also signed to sort out the problem of blocked funds in Uganda.                           
                                                                                               
 The then Minister of State for External Affairs, Shri Eduardo Faleiro, paid                   
 a visit to Ethiopia from 9 to 17 November 1992. This was the first                            
 Ministerial visit to Ethiopia in 15 years. The Transitional Government of                     
 Ethiopia, since it assumed power in May 1991, has been undertaking major                      
 political, economic and social changes in the country. India's assistance                     
 to Ethiopia's economic development was appreciated. The Ethiopian                             
 leadership, has expressed the hope that India would assist them further in                    
 their economic development. The Foreign Minister of Ethiopia led a                            
 high-level economic delegation to India from 14 to 16 December 1992. They                     
 have sought Indian cooperation in rural technology particularly                               
 agro-industries, small scale industries and technical assistance, specially                   
 in higher education. They are also seeking Indian investment.                                 
                                                                                               
 Sierra Leone witnessed a coup d'etat in April 1992. The President, Mr                         
 Joseph Momoh, fled the country. Captain Valentine Strasser took over as                       
 President at the head of a military ruling council. Another coup attempt on                   
 28 December 1992 failed.                                                                      
                                                                                               
 In Ghana, the Parliamentary elections for 200 constituencies were held on                     
 29 December 1992. With many opposition parties boycotting the elections,                      
 the National Democratic Congress Party of President Rawlings won the                          
 elections securing 189 seats.                                                                 
                                                                                               
 The civil war in Liberia continued, bringing untold misery to the people.                     
 Intermittent fighting continued throughout the year, intensifying in the                      
 latter half of the year. At least 3,000 casualties were reported. The West                    
 African Peace Keeping Force, ECOMOG, continued its efforts to bring the                       
 fighting to an end. The Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS)                    
 Summit held in Abuja in November 1992 decided to impose economic sanctions                    
 on warring factions not complying with the Yamoussoukro-IV agreement. The                     
 UN Security Council passed a resolution to impose arms embargo on Liberia,                    
 excepting ECOMOG. The UN Secretary General appointed a Special                                
 Representative to evaluate the situation and report to the Security                           
 Council. All necessary efforts were made to assist Indians in Liberia.                        
 -57>                                                                                          
                                                                                               
 President Eyadema of Togo dissolved the Government led by Prime Minister                      
 Joseph Koffigoh on 13 January 1993 for "failing to organize elections on                      
 schedule" thereby 11 putting the continuity of the state in peril". He                        
 stated that a new Prime Minister would be appointed to head a government of                   
 national unity which would be charged with the task of organizing in the                      
 shortest possible period, free democratic and fair elections.                                 
                                                                                               
 Mr James A Michel, Chief of Staff of the Seychelles Peoples Defence Forces                    
 and Minister of Finance and Information of the Republic of Secychelles                        
 visited India from 12 to 17 October 1992 at the invitation of Minister of                     
 State for Defence and discussed matters relating to bilateral defence                         
 cooperation.                                                                                  
                                                                                               
 The Government of India was deeply concerned over the adverse effects of                      
 the unprecedented drought prevailing in Southern Africa and the consequent                    
 distress among the people of the region. Despite her severe economic                          
 constraints, India sent relief assistance comprising medicines, baby food                     
 and water purification tablets to some of the more severely affected                          
 countries like Botswana, Madagascar, Mozambique, Namibia, Zambia and                          
 Zimbabwe as well as some countries further. up north like Ghana, Kenya and                    
 Ethiopia. While this was a modest contribution, it was symbolic of the                        
 concern that the people of India felt for the people of the countries of                      
 Africa.                                                                                       
                                                                                               
 During the year under review, India continued to play a significant role as                   
 Chairman of the Action For Resisting Invasion, Colonialism and Apartheid                      
 (AFRICA) Fund which was set up by the 8th NAM Summit in Harare in September                   
 1986 as an expression of the Movement's support and solidarity with the                       
 Frontline States. The mandate of the AFRICA Fund was renewed by the 9th NAM                   
 Summit in Belgrade in 1989 till the 10th NAM Summit. The 10th meeting of                      
 the Senior Officials of the AFRICA Fund Committee in Cairo in May 1992                        
 reviewed the outcome of all the various initiatives taken by the Fund. The                    
 Prime Minister as Chairman of the AFRICA Fund Committee made a statement on                   
 the AFRICA Fund to the 10th NAM Summit in Jakarta in September 1992. In his                   
 presentation, the Prime Minister endorsed the recommendations of the AFRICA                   
 Fund Committee that while the mandate of the Fund ends at the 10th Summit,                    
 the member states of the Movement would continue to support the liberation                    
 movements in South Africa till the objective of bringing about a non-racial                   
 unified and democratic South Africa is achieved. The 10th NAM Summit                          
 commended the role played by India as Chairman, and the Committee member                      
 countries and expressed its appreciation and gratitude to all donor                           
 countries for their generous contributions. The Summit also accepted the                      
 proposal of the Chairman, Prime Minister of India, to provide US $ 250,000                    
 for the humanitarian relief in Somalia and the remaining balance to the                       
 Southern Africa Development Community (SADC) for drought relief in Southern                   
 Africa, human resource development in South Africa and voter education                        
 there before the elections. The Summit further recommended that while the                     
 mandate of the Fund ends at the Summit, member countries of the Movement                      
 should Continue to strengthen the liberation movements in South Africa with                   
 fresh expressions of political and material support.                                          
 -58>                                                                                          
                                                                                               
 India on her part, as a contributor to the Fund, continued to make efforts                    
 for full utilisation of its contribution of Rs 50 crores in kind and of the                   
 contribution of Rs 2.56 crores by individuals, private and public                             
 organizations in India. Further, in accordance with the decision of the                       
 10th NAM Summit, a cheque for US $ 250,000 was given to the UN Special                        
 Representative in Somalia by the then Minister of State for External                          
 Affairs, Shri Eduardo Faleiro, in Mogadishu in November 1992. Shri Eduardo                    
 Faleiro in January 1993 presented another cheque for US $ 290,000 to SADC                     
 for utilisation in accordance with NAM's decision.                                            
                                                                                               
 The activities of the AFRICA Fund have been greatly appreciated- by the                       
 Frontline States and the liberation movements and have earned all round                       
 recognition. Its experience has set an example in South-South cooperation                     
 and collective solidarity. It was India's privilege to be associated with                     
 this effort both as a contributor to the Fund and its Chairman.                               
 -59>                                                                                          
 1992                                                                                          
 7 Europe                                                                                      
                                                                                               
 Eastern Europe                                                                                
                                                                         Top                   
 A. OVERALL TRENDS THE ANNUAL REPORT OF THE MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS IN                    
 1991-92 HAD indicated the sweeping changes that had affected the erstwhile                    
 USSR and continued to take place in the countries of Eastern Europe. The                      
 changes that have taken place and are continuing in Eastern Europe and the                    
 former Soviet Union are expected to have a major impact on international                      
 relations. The process of reformulation of international relations and the                    
 building of new international structures has begun. Developments in the                       
 countries of Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union will have a very                      
 important bearing on the evolution of this new order.                                         
                                                                                               
 The changes taking place in Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union are                    
 not only of a political dimension but also embrace far-reaching economic                      
 reforms with the objective of closer integration into the international                       
 economic system and efforts to firmly establish a pluralist form of                           
 democracy although the pace and content in respect of these activities                        
 varies from country to country. These processes, taking place                                 
 simultaneously, have given rise to a plethora of problems within these                        
 countries and also those which have an external dimension including, inter                    
 alia, the rise of ethnic nationalism, migration of populations, a                             
 re-orientation of the Trans-Atlantic and European security structures,                        
 multiplicity of political parties and movements and self-doubt about                          
 several aspects of the change including the likelihood of substantial                         
 economic recovery in an acceptably reasonable time-frame.                                     
                                                                                               
 India has welcomed the advent of democracy and a pluralist form of                            
 Government in the East European countries. India has also welcomed the                        
 efforts being made by these countries to re-model their economic structures                   
 to integrate them into the international economic system based on market                      
 principles. At the same time, it is India's belief that the political and                     
 economic changes in these countries provide the framework for even closer,                    
 mutually beneficial political, economic, commercial, scientific and other                     
 forms of cooperation. The changes in these countries have brought them                        
 ideologically more in line with India's own non-ideological orientation and                   
 democratic beliefs. They also provide opportunities for India, particularly                   
 in economic terms.                                                                            
 -60>                                                                                          
                                                                                               
 Several steps were taken to consolidate India's traditionally friendly,                       
 cooperative and mutually beneficial relations with the independent                            
 Republics that emerged from the former Soviet Union. These included high                      
 level political interchanges. Diplomatic relations have been established                      
 with all the Republics that emerged from the former Soviet Union. India's                     
 diplomatic presence has been expanded. Indian Embassies are now functioning                   
 in Kiev and Minsk and Consulates General in Vladivostok and St. Petersburg.                   
 India's relations with these countries are being reconstructed on new                         
 lines. The expectation, however, is that India's relations with all the                       
 successor States would stabilise. India had very good relations with the                      
 former Soviet Union and it is the intention that these relations will                         
 endure with the successor Republics.                                                          
                                                                                               
 Efforts are being made and would be pursued to maintain the close political                   
 relations that India had previously enjoyed with the East European                            
 countries. The economic dimension of the relationship has necessarily to                      
 take into account the changes not only in these countries but also the                        
 on-going changes in India.                                                                    
                                                                                               
 Following the dissolution of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia,                    
 India had on 11 May 1992 extended recognition to the Republics of Slovenia,                   
 Croatia and Bosnia & Herzegovina and the Indian Embassy in Belgrade                           
 continued to be accredited to the newly formed Federal Republic of                            
 Yugoslavia. In respect of Macedonia, taking all relevant factors into                         
 account, India has not accorded recognition.                                                  
                                                                                               
 The on-going crisis in the former Yugoslavia is a matter of serious concern                   
 and anxiety. India is grieved at the loss of innocent lives and the                           
 economic and social distress that has resulted from the crisis. India's                       
 approach to the crisis has from the very inception been based on principle.                   
 She welcomes all efforts to bring about an immediate peaceful settlement                      
 and stress the need for an early political resolution without resort to any                   
 form of force or violence.                                                                    
                                                                                               
 As a gesture of solidarity, India has decided to contribute humanitarian                      
 relief amounting to Rs 1 million for the former Yugoslavia. The amount is                     
 to be used to purchase medicines, etc, through the Indian Red Cross for use                   
 by the ICRC.                                                                                  
                                                                                               
 The year also saw the peaceful and constitutional division of the Czech and                   
 Slovak Federal Republic with effect from 1 January 1993. India has                            
 recognised both the new Republics that have emerged, viz the Czech Republic                   
 and the Slovak Republic. Diplomatic relations continue, without break, with                   
 both these countries. India's Ambassador in Prague has been appointed as                      
 the first resident Ambassador to the Czech Republic and the first non-                        
 resident Ambassador to the Slovak Republic. The Embassy of the CSFR in New                    
 Delhi has been divided into two portions. Both countries have diplomatic                      
 representation in India on a continuing basis.                                                
 -61>                                                                                          
                                                                                               
 B. DESCRIPTIVE PART                                                                           
                                                                                               
 The emergence of Russia as an independent State, together with the process                    
 of democratisation and economic reforms entailed certain adjustments in                       
 bilateral relations on both sides. While the process involved some                            
 transitional difficulties mainly in economic interaction, both countries                      
 are aware of the continued convergence of interests and the new                               
 opportunities that have opened up for the further development of mutually                     
 beneficial cooperation in the new context.                                                    
                                                                                               
 High level political and official contacts with Russia underlined the                         
 importance both countries attach to the bilateral relationship. Prime                         
 Minister, Shri P V Narasimha Rao, and President Yeltsin have since their                      
 January 1992 meeting kept in touch including through exchange of letters                      
 and President Yeltsin paid an official visit to India in late January 1993.                   
 President and Prime Minister have been invited to visit Russia.                               
                                                                                               
 Former State Secretary, Mr Gennady Burbulis, visited India in May 1992 at                     
 the invitation of Finance Minister. He was accompanied by Ministers of                        
 Foreign Economic Relations, Economy, and Fuel and Energy and State                            
 Counsellor for Conversion of Defence Industry. He called on the President,                    
 Vice President and Prime Minister and held discussions with Raksha Mantri                     
 and Ministers of State for External Affairs, Commerce and Power. An                           
 agreement establishing an Indo-Russian joint Commission and another                           
 agreement on trade and economic cooperation were signed during the visit.                     
                                                                                               
 The high point of Parliamentary contacts between Russia and India was the                     
 visit of a Russian Parliamentary delegation led by the Supreme Soviet                         
 Chairman, Mr Ruslan Khasbulatov, to India in August 1992. Apart from                          
 discussions with the Honourable Speaker of the Lok Sabha, Deputy Chairman                     
 of the Rajya Sabha and Members of Parliament, Speaker Khasbulatov also                        
 called on the President and the Prime Minister. He spoke warmly of the                        
 historical legacy of Indo-Russian relations and the need to sustain and                       
 deepen them.                                                                                  
 -62>                                                                                          
                                                                                               
 Raksha Mantri, Shri Sharad Pawar, paid an official visit to Moscow in                         
 September 1992. Substantive discussions were held with acting Prime                           
 Minister, Mr Gaidar, and Defence Minister, Gen Grachev, apart from other                      
 Russian dignitaries. Raksha Mantri discussed with his host bilateral and                      
 international security issues and continuing military-technical cooperation                   
 between India and Russia. The Chiefs of the Air and Naval Staff of the                        
 Indian Armed Forces also paid goodwill visits to Russia in October and                        
 November 1992 respectively.                                                                   
                                                                                               
 President Yeltsin visited India from 27 to 29 January 1993. He was                            
 accompanied by the first Deputy Chairman of the Council of Ministers, Mr                      
 Shumeiko, Foreign Minister, Defence Minister, Minister of Security and                        
 Minister of External Economic Relations, among others. President Yeltsin                      
 had meetings with the President and Prime Minister. The Ministers                             
 accompanying him had separate bilateral discussions.                                          
                                                                                               
 During the visit of President Yeltsin, a treaty of friendship and                             
 cooperation and agreements on Rupee-Rouble exchange rate, on defence                          
 cooperation, on Indo-Russian consultations, on cultural and scientific                        
 cooperation, on information, on combating illicit traffic in narcotics and                    
 on cooperation between the Ministry of Home Affairs of India and the                          
 Russian Security Ministry, and an MOU on science and technology were                          
 signed. Four letters were also exchanged on trade and related matters.                        
                                                                                               
 The visit laid a durable foundation for future friendship and close                           
 interaction between India and the Russian Federation. President Yeltsin                       
 indicated Russia's desire to build a dynamic growth-oriented multi- faceted                   
 relationship with India and stated that a friendly and stable relationship                    
 between two big Asian powers like Russia and India will contribute to the                     
 cause of regional stability and peace. The convergence of views on issues                     
 of mutual interest and common concern would enable fruitful and purposeful                    
 cooperation between the two countries both bilaterally and in the                             
 multilateral context. In effect, following President Yeltsin's visit a new                    
 chapter has opened in Indo-Russian relations - a chapter that takes into                      
 account the changed global context as also the changes that have taken                        
 place in both the countries.                                                                  
                                                                                               
 India and Russia have cooperated fruitfully in international organizations                    
 including the UN. India supported the UN General Assembly resolution (based                   
 on the joint Russo-Afghan Declaration of 14 May 1992) appealing to the                        
 Governments of Afghanistan and Russia to start talks on the humanitarian                      
 question of the return and accounting of POWs and MIAs.                                       
 -63>                                                                                          
                                                                                               
 The first meeting of the Indo-Russian joint Commission is expected to be                      
 held in the near future.                                                                      
                                                                                               
 Three important issues merit mention in relations with the Ukraine. The                       
 most important is the rapid development of bilateral relations, starting                      
 with the visit in January 1992 of a team of Secretaries, including Foreign                    
 Secretary, which laid the foundation for further high-level contacts and                      
 establishment of diplomatic relations. Foreign Secretary was received by                      
 President Kravchuk, who expressed his keenness to continue the close                          
 relations that existed between the former USSR and India.                                     
                                                                                               
 President Kravchuk subsequently visited India in March 1992 during which                      
 four important agreements were signed. Prime Minister and President                           
 Kravchuk signed the Treaty of Friendship and Cooperation on 27 March 1992                     
 which was subsequently ratified and Instruments of Ratification were                          
 exchanged in November 1992 in Kiev. The other agreements were : (i)                           
 Agreement on Trade and Economic Cooperation; (ii) Agreement on cooperation                    
 in fields of Science and Technology; and (iii) Agreement on Cooperation in                    
 the spheres of Culture, Arts, Education, Tourism, Sports and Mass Media.                      
                                                                                               
 In October 1992, Raksha Mantri, Shri Sharad Pawar, visited Kiev, during                       
 which he had meetings with President Kravchuk, Defence Minister Morozov,                      
 Foreign Minister Zlenko and Minister for Heavy Industry and Conversion                        
 Antonov. This visit served to continue the high-level dialogue between the                    
 two countries and determined the method of payments settlements to be used                    
 in selected sectors of trade between the two countries.                                       
                                                                                               
 The Indian Embassy was opened in Kiev on 7 May 1992, the first among the                      
 new CIS Republics. Since then, the Ambassador has joined and more officials                   
 are expected to join shortly. The Ukrainian Embassy in Delhi is due to open                   
 shortly and their Ambassador has been chosen.                                                 
                                                                                               
 A number of draft agreements were exchanged and official level visits have                    
 also taken place, aimed principally at working out the details of the                         
 agreements and understandings reached at the political level. A number of                     
 public sector and private business persons have visited Kiev and other                        
 important cities. In this connection, the Indian Exhibition organized by                      
 Indian Trade Promotion Organization (ITPO) in Kiev in September 1992 gave                     
 Ukrainian officials and the emerging private sector a comprehensive idea of                   
 the potential of India as a trade partner. Earlier, in August, the Indo-CIS                   
 Chamber of Commerce had organized a successful exhibition in Kiev.                            
 -64>                                                                                          
                                                                                               
 After recognizing the sovereignty and independence of the Republic of                         
 Belarus in December 1991, Protocols establishing diplomatic and consular                      
 relations at Resident Mission level were signed on 17 April 1992 at Minsk.                    
 A new Embassy of India in Minsk was opened on 14 May 1992 and is functional                   
 since then. Prime Minister has invited Chairman of the Supreme Soviet of                      
 Belarus and Chairman of the Council of Ministers to visit India and the                       
 timing of these visits is under discussion. To maintain and expand                            
 traditional bonds of friendship and cooperation with Belarus a number of                      
 agreements on political, economic, commercial, cultural, science and                          
 technology cooperation, etc are at various stages of negotiation.                             
                                                                                               
 Prime Minister met the Presidents of all the three Baltic Republics at Rio                    
 de Janeiro on 13 June 1992. He recalled that India had established                            
 diplomatic relations with all the three Republics and, in due course, would                   
 open Missions in their capitals.                                                              
                                                                                               
 The process of interchange, in particular in the commercial and cultural                      
 sectors, has been initiated. Proposals of technical assistance under the                      
 ITEC programme are also under consideration.                                                  
                                                                                               
 with Armenia, Georgia and Moldova in the commercial and cultural sectors as                   
 also in the matter of technical assistance under ITEC have been initiated.                    
 The President of Moldova is expected to visit India during 1993.                              
                                                                                               
 Relations with Hungary continued to develop with a series of working level                    
 visits. Official consultations on foreign policy were held in Budapest in                     
 October during the visit of Secretary (West), Shri K Srinivasan. The                          
 Science and Technical Cooperation Agreement was renewed for a further                         
 period of five years in December 1992 when the Hungarian Minister without                     
 portfolio, Prof Erno Pungor visited India. A bilateral agreement on tourism                   
 was signed earlier in October between Secretary (Tourism) and the visiting                    
 Hungarian Chairman of the Tourism Board, Mr Kazmir Kardos. On the cultural                    
 side, the State Secretary for Culture, Mr Elemer Biszterszky visited India                    
 in February 1992 and following his discussions with Secretary (Culture),                      
 the two sides agreed on an implementation plan for the Cultural Exchange                      
 Programme which had been renewed the previous year.                                           
                                                                                               
 The trade picture during the year reflected both the opportunities and                        
 challenges resulting from the changes in the economic and commercial field                    
 in the two countries. Keeping in mind the growing importance of consumer                      
 goods in India's exports to Hungary, India was selected as the Chief Guest                    
 -65> for the Budapest International Autumn Trade Fair. The Indian                             
 participation at the Europa'92 Telecommunication Exhibition in Budapest was                   
 also in high profile. In the field of joint ventures and collaborations,                      
 efforts were underway on both sides to take advantage of economic                             
 liberalisation programmes in India.                                                           
 -65>                                                                                          
                                                                                               
 Important Indian visitors to Hungary during the year were the Chairman of                     
 Atomic Energy Commission, the Chairman of the Indian Trade Promotion                          
 Organization, Chairman of the Telecommunications Commission, the                              
 Maharashtra Minister of Industries and a delegation from the Ministry of                      
 Industry to study the labour situation in Hungary.                                            
                                                                                               
 1992 was also an active year for cultural activities. The 100th death                         
 anniversary of the famous Hungarian Indologist Alexander Choma de Korosi                      
 was commemorated by a series of events both in India and Hungary. Among                       
 them was the dedication of a stupa by His Holiness Dalai Lama during his                      
 visit to Budapest. Noted artistes like sitarist Shahid Parvez Khan and the                    
 Kathak group led by Rohini Bhate visited Hungary and the Hungarian Choral                     
 Quintet performed in several cities in India.                                                 
                                                                                               
 At the political level, preparations are underway for a meeting of the                        
 Indo-Hungarian Joint Commission. A Parliamentary delegation from Hungary                      
 led by the Speaker is expected to visit India in the summer of 1993. The                      
 State Secretary for Foreign Affairs, Mr Janos Martonyi, is also expected in                   
 India to continue the practice of regular bilateral official consultations.                   
 High level state visits to and from Hungary are also under consideration                      
 for 1993.                                                                                     
                                                                                               
 Poland continued its march towards marketisation of its industry, trade,                      
 commerce and economic structures in spite of certain hardships in                             
 transition and maintained the on-going process of integration with European                   
 institutions. Following the privatisation of foreign trade in Poland and                      
 the changes in economic policies in both countries, the process of direct                     
 contact between Indian and newly emerging Polish businessmen accelerated                      
 during the year.                                                                              
                                                                                               
 Consultations at the level of Foreign Ministries of both countries were                       
 held in Warsaw in October 1992. Secretary (West) and Under Secretary of                       
 State of Polish Ministry of Foreign Affairs led their teams. It was found                     
 that a basis for further strengthening of Indo-Polish relations continues                     
 to exist.                                                                                     
                                                                                               
 A Polish Parliamentary delegation led by the Chairman of the Sejm visited                     
 India in December 1992 at the invitation of the Indian Parliament. The                        
 visit permitted an extensive and frank exchange of views between Indian                       
 -66> parliamentarians and freely elected Polish parliamentarians. The                         
 delegation also called on the President and the Vice President.                               
 -66>                                                                                          
                                                                                               
 It is anticipated that President Walesa will pay a visit to India in 1993.                    
 It is expected that in early 1993 an agreement on cooperation in the field                    
 of science and technology, a programme of cooperation for 1993-94 in the                      
 field of science and technology and a cultural exchange programme between                     
 India and Poland would be signed.                                                             
                                                                                               
 India's relations with the Czech & Slovak Federal Republic continue to be                     
 close and friendly despite its preoccupation since June 1992 with the                         
 impending break-up into two independent States, Czech Republic and Slovakia                   
 on 31 December 1992.                                                                          
                                                                                               
 The 45th anniversary of establishment of diplomatic relations between India                   
 and CSFR was marked by exchange of messages in November 1992 at the Foreign                   
 Minister/Minister of State level. The death in November 1992 of Alexander                     
 Dubcek, the hero of the 1968 'Prague Spring' movement was condoled. Prime                     
 Minister sent a special message of condolence.                                                
                                                                                               
 The six day visit of the Slovak Minister for International Relations to                       
 India in April 1992 preceded by two weeks President Havel's transit through                   
 New Delhi. During his visit to Prague in October 1992, Shri K Srinivasan,                     
 Secretary (West), had bilateral talks with the Federal First Deputy Foreign                   
 Minister.                                                                                     
                                                                                               
 A reference has already been made above to India's recognition of the two                     
 new States that have emerged from the division of the CSFR. Prime Minister                    
 sent messages of congratulations to both the Prime Ministers of the Czech                     
 and Slovak Republics in which he recalled, inter alia, the tradition of                       
 friendly and mutually beneficial cooperation in the commercial, economic,                     
 scientific, defence, cultural and other spheres. He also conveyed that                        
 Government of India would endeavour to strengthen this tradition with both                    
 the Czech and Slovak Republics for mutual benefit. Trade Agreements with                      
 both the new Republics, providing for commerce in convertible currency, are                   
 being negotiated.                                                                             
 Minister of State for External Affairs, Shri R L Bhatia, paid an official                     
 visit to Poland on 9 and 10 February, Slovak Republic from 11 to 13                           
 February, Czech Republic from 14 to 16 February and Hungary on 17 and 18                      
 February 1993. Besides meeting with the Foreign Ministers in these                            
 countries and discussing bilateral matters and issues of common concern, he                   
 called on the Heads of State or Government. The purpose of the visit was to                   
 maintain the close political, economic and defence relations that India                       
 enjoys with these countries and to study ways for developing new                              
 relationships in the light of far-reaching changes taking place in these                      
 countries.                                                                                    
 -67>                                                                                          
                                                                                               
 The Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia officially passed into history                   
 on 27 April 1992 with the adoption by the SFRY Parliament of the                              
 Constitution of the new Federal Republic of Yugoslavia comprising Serbia                      
 and Montenegro. Elections to the new FRY Parliament were held on 31 May                       
 1992. The Parliament approved Dr Dobrica Cosic as the first President of                      
 the FRY and Milan Panic as its first Prime Minister. Subsequently, a                          
 further round of elections were held on 20 December 1992 in the FRY for                       
 various posts. In the meanwhile, the UN had adopted comprehensive mandatory                   
 sanctions against Yugoslavia on 30 May 1992. These sanctions were further                     
 intensified in November 1992. The sanctions were imposed for alleged                          
 involvement of Serbia in the continuing war in Bosnia- Herzegovina and for                    
 non-cooperation by Serbs in Bosnia-Herzegovina and in UNPAs. The situation                    
 in Kosovo in the Republic of Serbia continued to be tense with total                          
 non-cooperation by the ethnic Albanians with the Federal and Serbian                          
 authorities. Long term CSCE Missions were sent to Serbian provinces of                        
 Kosovo, Vojvodina and Sandzak.                                                                
                                                                                               
 After recognition by the EC and a large number of countries, after 15                         
 January, Croatia was admitted as a UN member in May 1992. Elections were                      
 held in Croatia on 2 August. President Franjo Tudjman was re-elected and                      
 the ruling Croatian Democratic Union Party was once again elected to power.                   
 Barring the situation in the UNPAs and the Pink Zones, the situation in                       
 Croatia returned rapidly to normal.                                                           
                                                                                               
 Slovenia was admitted to the UN in May 1992. It had also been recognized by                   
 a large number of countries after 15 January 1992. Elections were held in                     
 Slovenia on 6 December 1992. President Milan Kucan was re- elected and the                    
 Liberal Democratic Party emerged as the single largest party in Parliament.                   
 The situation in Slovenia was stable throughout the year.                                     
                                                                                               
 Following Greek protests over the use of the name Macedonia, the EC and                       
 most other nations in the region withheld their recognition. Macedonia was                    
 recognized only by nine countries. To overcome the problem of recognition,                    
 Macedonia decided to seek admission into the UN. A decision by the UN is                      
 awaited. Due to the growth of tension in Macedonia, the Security Council                      
 approved the deployment of UNPKF along Macedonia's borders with both Serbia                   
 and Albania as a preventive measure.                                                          
 -68>                                                                                          
                                                                                               
 The situation in Bosnia-Herzegovina continued to pre-occupy the attention                     
 of the international community throughout the year. The recognition of the                    
 Bosnia-Herzegovina Government by the EC and a large section of the                            
 international community saw civil war break out in the Republic due to the                    
 objection to international recognition by the Serbs in that Republic. The                     
 cost of this civil war has been considerable in terms of damage to men and                    
 material and loss of human lives. The UN Protection Force was deployed in                     
 Bosnia-Herzegovina in August 1992 and a large number of UN Resolutions                        
 adopted related to the situation in this Republic, especially with the                        
 humanitarian aspects of peace-keeping and on no-fly zone.                                     
                                                                                               
 The EC Conference on Yugoslavia was transformed into a larger International                   
 Conference on Former Yugoslavia (ICFY), with the active involvement of the                    
 UN, based in Geneva, with two British and American Co-Chairmen representing                   
 the UN Secretary General.                                                                     
                                                                                               
 The Security Council passed twenty Resolutions on the former Yugoslavia                       
 from April to December 1992. These were in addition to the six Resolutions                    
 adopted in 1991-92. The Resolutions, inter alia, related to deployment of                     
 UNPROFOR in Bosnia-Herzegovina, Croatia and Macedonia; sanctions against                      
 Yugoslavia; the situation in UNPAs and Pink Zones in Croatia; conveying                       
 humanitarian assistance to Bosnia-Herzegovina; monitoring of airports and                     
 declaration of no-fly zone over Bosnia- Herzegovina; detention camps in                       
 Bosnia-Herzegovina; violation of human rights; war crimes and also that                       
 relating to Yugoslavia's membership in the UN. The General Assembly passed                    
 two Resolutions on the situation in Bosnia-Herzegovina and one on                             
 Yugoslavia's membership.                                                                      
                                                                                               
 India abstained on 3 Resolutions of the Security Council and 2 Resolutions                    
 of the General Assembly. The overall Force Commander of UN Forces in former                   
 Yugoslavia is a serving Indian Army officer, Lt Gen Satish Nambiar.                           
                                                                                               
 Besides the UN and EC, other international organizations which debated the                    
 situation on Yugoslavia, included the CSCE, the G-7, the OIC, NATO, WEU and                   
 NAM. Yugoslavia's membership of several organizations, including the UN,                      
 NAM and G-15 was placed in suspense.                                                          
                                                                                               
 Yugoslavia was Chairman of NAM during the conflict with in it. The NCB                        
 Meeting in Bali and the NAM Summit in Jakarta devoted sometime over the                       
 situation in Yugoslavia. Yugoslavia handed over the Chairmanship of NAM to                    
 Indonesia on the eve of the Summit through a letter at the Ministerial                        
 Meeting. Croatia was admitted as an Observer in NAM and Bosnia-Herzegovina                    
 and Slovenia as Guests. Macedonia showed an interest to join the movement.                    
 -69>                                                                                          
                                                                                               
 India and Bulgaria continued to maintain traditionally close and friendly                     
 relations in the political and cultural fields. In the cultural field,                        
 several Indian Professors visited Bulgaria and a Kathak dance troupe led by                   
 Rohini Bhate participated in the Bourgas International Dance Festival and                     
 gave performances in Sofia and Veliko Turnovo. Secretary (Culture),                           
 Ministry of Human Resource Development, visited Bulgaria at the invitation                    
 of the Minister of Culture of Bulgaria to review Indo-Bulgarian cultural                      
 relations.                                                                                    
                                                                                               
 Bulgaria's first post-1945 non-communist Government led by Prime Minister                     
 Filip Dimitrov's Union of Democratic Forces (UDF) having 110 seats of 240                     
 lost the confidence of the National Assembly in November 1992 when the                        
 24-member ethnic Turkish Movement for Rights and Freedoms (MRF) withdrew                      
 its support. After the Bulgarian Socialist Party (BSP) was unable to select                   
 an acceptable candidate for Prime Minister, the MRF nominated, Prof Lyuben                    
 Berov, Economic Adviser to the President, who with the support of BSP                         
 received on 30 December the Assembly's approval for a new non-party                           
 Cabinet.                                                                                      
                                                                                               
 Indo-Romanian ties continued to develop. The holding of elections in                          
 Romania in October 1992 contributed to the growth of pluralist democracy in                   
 that country.                                                                                 
                                                                                               
 Secretary (West) visited Bucharest in August 1992 for Foreign Office                          
 consultations and it is expected that a Parliamentary delegation from India                   
 will visit Romania during 1993.                                                               
                                                                                               
 A draft Cultural Exchange Programme is presently under discussions and once                   
 signed would lead to closer people to people contact.                                         
                                                                                               
 The Rupee clearing arrangement which was to end on 31 December 1992 has                       
 been extended till 31 March 1993 after which it is expected that all                          
 commercial transactions would be in freely convertible currencies. An                         
 Indo-Romanian Chamber of Commerce was set up in India in October and the                      
 Romanian side. have indicated that they will set up a similar body soon in                    
 Romania.                                                                                      
                                                                                               
 A Civil Aviation Agreement was signed with Romania in August 1992 in New                      
 Delhi which allows for three Romanian Airlines flights per week to India                      
 and vice versa.                                                                               
 -70>                                                                                          
 Western Europe                                                                                
                                                                         Top                   
 During the year, India's initiatives on forging closer relations with                         
 countries in Western Europe were given sharper focus. Government took into                    
 account impending changes across the European continent in light of the                       
 Maastricht Treaty which aims at economic, monetary and political union of                     
 the EC member countries, as well as the entering into effect of a Single                      
 European Market by January 1993.                                                              
                                                                                               
 The Annual Indo-EC Troika-level talks were held in Delhi in March 1992. The                   
 Foreign Ministers of Portugal, UK and the Netherlands visited India for the                   
 talks. The Troika Foreign Ministers reassured India that the current                          
 preoccupations of the European Community with developments in Central and                     
 Eastern Europe and the Republics of the former Soviet Union should not be                     
 seen as a disinclination of their interest in the developing world,                           
 especially India. A new framework cooperation agreement between India and                     
 the EC was initialled in December 1992, which recognizes India as a major                     
 partner and paves the way for expansion and diversification of Indo-EC                        
 cooperation in the fields of trade, investment, technological and                             
 scientific exchanges, and cultural cooperation.                                               
                                                                                               
 Substantial progress was made during the year in intensifying the already                     
 close relations with the UK. The groundwork was laid during the visit of                      
 the British Foreign Secretary in January 1992, when it was agreed that a                      
 regular bilateral dialogue would be maintained at various levels and would                    
 also be institutionalised between the two Foreign Offices. Pursuant to this                   
 decision, a number of high-level visits were exchanged during the year. The                   
 visit of the Prince of Wales to India in February 1992 was yet another                        
 milestone in the growing friendly relations between India and the UK.                         
                                                                                               
 On 22 September 1992, India and the UK signed an Extradition Treaty and an                    
 Agreement concerning the Investigation and Prosecution of Crime and the                       
 Tracing, Restraint and Confiscation of the Proceeds and Instruments of                        
 Crime (including crime involving currency transfers) and Terrorist Funds.                     
 These two agreements were of historic and pathbreaking importance and                         
 strengthened the commitment of both countries to work together in combating                   
 terrorism. The Agreements are expected to become effective in early 1993                      
 after completion of ratification procedures.                                                  
                                                                                               
 British Prime Minister, Mr John Major, visited India from 23 to 28 January                    
 1993. He was the first British Prime Minister to be invited since                             
 Independence to be Chief Guest on the Republic Day. His visit marked the                      
 culmination of a process of high level exchanges initiated in January 1992                    
 and symbolised the maturity of Indo-British relations which now stand                         
 firmly placed in a modern, forward-looking context. Mr Major was                              
 accompanied by a high level business delegation. The British Prime Minister                   
 reaffirmed the UK's commitment to close cooperation with India in combating                   
 terrorism. He also expressed support for India's secular and democratic                       
 traditions as well as economic reforms. The visit of Mr Major provided a                      
 strong impetus to bilateral trade as well as investment and joint ventures,                   
 availing of the opportunities opened up by India's economic liberalisation                    
 programme.                                                                                    
 -71>                                                                                          
                                                                                               
 India has traditionally enjoyed close relations with France, to which we                      
 attach importance in both the European and the global contexts. Prime                         
 Minister's official visit to France from 28 to 30 September 1992 served to                    
 consolidate these relations. Both sides confirmed their desire to impart                      
 new dimensions and depth to bilateral relations, in particular in the areas                   
 of investment, technology and trade. In order to build on the impetus                         
 provided by Prime Minister's visit, a number of Ministerial visits were                       
 exchanged with France and a regular dialogue at the level of Foreign                          
 Secretaries was also institutionalised.                                                       
                                                                                               
 The Festival of India in Germany, which concluded in July 1992, was widely                    
 acknowledged as a great success and played an important role in bringing                      
 the peoples of India and Germany closer together. The first meeting of the                    
 Indo-German Consultative Group, set up by the Prime Minister and the German                   
 Chancellor, was held in Bonn on 16 September 1992. This Group recommended a                   
 number of measures for strengthening bilateral cooperation in various                         
 fields. Actions were initiated to implement these recommendations. German                     
 Chancellor, Mr Helmut Kohl, visited India from 18 to 22 February 1993. The                    
 Jawaharlal Nehru Award for International Understanding was conferred upon                     
 him on 19 February 1993. This Award symbolised not only the high esteem in                    
 which the Chancellor is held in India for his personal contributions to the                   
 cause of world peace and development, but also the cordiality and closeness                   
 of bilateral relations to which both countries attach great importance.                       
                                                                                               
 Germany is already India's leading partner in Western Europe in terms of                      
 trade, investment and technology transfer, aid and S & T cooperation. The                     
 German Chancellor's visit provided an opportunity to further consolidate                      
 these relations. During the year, a number of Ministerial visits were also                    
 exchanged between India and Germany and a dialogue at the level of Foreign                    
 Secretaries was initiated.                                                                    
 -72>                                                                                          
                                                                                               
 The State visit of the President of Portugal to India from 26 January to 4                    
 February 1992 marked a high point in Indo-Portuguese relations. Prime                         
 Minister also paid a transit visit to Lisbon on 15 June 1992. Government                      
 approved a Portuguese proposal for the setting up of a Consulate General of                   
 Portugal in Goa.                                                                              
                                                                                               
 Prime Minister paid a transit visit to Madrid on 10 June 1992. The Spanish                    
 Prime Minister paid an official visit to India from 7 to 10 February 1993                     
 during which a number of important bilateral agreements were concluded.                       
 Relations with Spain, particularly in the areas of trade and economic                         
 relations, continued 'to expand.                                                              
                                                                                               
 India's trade and economic relations with Italy also continued to grow. The                   
 Bologna University in Italy organized a major Symposium on India from 17 to                   
 20 September 1992 to which a large number of scholars, scientists and                         
 historians were invited. Government were represented at the Symposium by                      
 Shri Madhavrao Scindia, the then Minister of Civil Aviation and Tourism.                      
                                                                                               
 The Austrian Minister for Economy, Mr Walter Schussel, visited India from                     
 13 to 18 October 1992. His visit coincided with that of an Austrian                           
 business delegation, indicating the growing interest on both sides in                         
 establishing joint ventures and collaborations taking advantage of the                        
 favourable investment climate resulting from India's economic reforms.                        
                                                                                               
 During the year, Foreign Secretary/Secretary level consultations between                      
 Foreign Offices were also held with Greece, Italy, Spain and Sweden.                          
                                                                                               
 In addition to making concerted efforts to expand relations with West                         
 European countries in the fields of trade, investment and technology                          
 transfer, Indian Missions faced the challenging task of responding to                         
 public concerns in Europe on areas ranging from human rights to the                           
 environment. There was a growing tendency among certain countries of                          
 Western Europe to lay emphasis on human rights issues and establish                           
 linkages to developmental assistance. The projection of India's commitment                    
 to democracy, human rights and the rule of law was vigorously undertaken by                   
 Indian Missions, generally with a considerable measure of success.                            
                                                                                               
 As a result of India's active diplomacy, Governmental reactions on the                        
 Ayodhya incident in most of the West European countries tended to be                          
 favourable. Official Statements by the British Government and the EC showed                   
 an understanding and support for Government's action to restore calm and                      
 emphasise the continuity of the secular and democratic traditions of India.                   
 -73>                                                                                          
                                                                                               
 The European Parliament also passed a supportive and balanced resolution on                   
 Ayodhya. Indian Missions continued to be engaged in the task of ensuring                      
 that there were no setbacks as a result of the Ayodhya incident to the                        
 growing relations between India and Western Europe in the economic arena.                     
 -74>                                                                                          
 1992                                                                                          
 8 The Americas                                                                                
                                                                         Top                   
 North America INDIA HAS ALWAYS PURSUED FRIENDLY RELATIONS WITH THE UNITED                     
 STATES, BASED                                                                                 
                                                                                               
 on shared democratic values and traditions. The changes in the                                
 international environment brought about by the end of the Cold War have                       
 provided both the countries with an opportunity to re-evaluate bilateral                      
 relations. The past year has been marked by increased diversification of                      
 India's bilateral ties, an intensification in the pace of exchanges between                   
 the two countries and greater political appreciation of each other's                          
 perspectives on various issues, important differences in the positions of                     
 the two countries on these issues notwithstanding.                                            
                                                                                               
 Important American personalities who visited India during the year included                   
 Senators David Boren, Claiborne Pell, Carl Levin, Howard Metzenbaum, Paul                     
 Simon, Daniel P Moynihan, Representative Jim McDermott and Mr Kurt Schmoke,                   
 Mayor of Baltimore. From Indian side, Minister of State for Commerce                          
 visited Chicago to participate in the COMDEX Spring '92 Exhibition and                        
 Raksha Mantri undertook an official visit to the US.                                          
                                                                                               
 At the official level, there were visits by Ambassador Peter Burleigh,                        
 Counter Terrorism Coordinator, Mr Melvyn Levitsky, Assistant Secretary of                     
 State for International Narcotics Matters, Mr James Lilley, Assistant                         
 Secretary of Defence, Ms Teresita Schaffer, Deputy Assistant Secretary for                    
 Near East and South Asia, Mr Sichan Siv, Deputy Assistant Secretary for                       
 South Asia, Mr R Grant Smith, Deputy Assistant Secretary for International                    
 Narcotics Matters and Mr Vincent Decain, Assistant Director of the US Arms                    
 Control & Disarmament Agency. Important visits at the official level from                     
 India to the US included those by Foreign Secretary and Defence Secretary.                    
                                                                                               
 The election of Mr Bill Clinton as the 42nd President of the United States,                   
 and the induction of the Democratic Administration has opened new vistas                      
 for enhancing relations with the United States. Although President Clinton                    
 has not articulated his Administration's policies towards India in any                        
 detail, he made several positive references to India during the campaign.                     
 -75>                                                                                          
                                                                                               
 An MEA delegation which attended the second round of Indo-US bilateral                        
 talks in Washington in November 1992 also visited the Democratic campaign                     
 headquarters in Little Rock, Arkansas, to meet members of President                           
 Clinton's Transition Team. This initiative, the first by any foreign                          
 country since Mr Clinton's election, was designed to establish initial                        
 contact with the new Administration. It is Government's expectation that                      
 interaction with the new Administration will not only consolidate the basic                   
 continuity, in Indo-US relations but help in building a more meaningful and                   
 mature relationship based on mutual understanding and trust.                                  
                                                                                               
 The US remained India's largest trading partner as well as the biggest                        
 foreign investor in India. Total trade turnover during 1991-1992 was around                   
 US $ 4.91 billion. India had a favourable balance of trade with the US,                       
 with imports amounting to US $ 1.99 billion and exports US $ 2.92 billion.                    
                                                                                               
 The US has welcomed the recent economic liberalisation measures taken by                      
 India, has encouraged this process and supported India's request for loans                    
 in multilateral financial institutions. US companies accounted for nearly                     
 30 per cent of all Indian joint ventures with foreign companies. Investment                   
 from the US increased from Rs 344.8 million in 1990 to Rs 1858 million in                     
 1991 and by 31 October 1992 had touched Rs 10073 million.                                     
                                                                                               
 The US-India Business Council and the Indo-US joint Business Council met in                   
 a joint session on 7 and 8 December 1992 at the US Chamber of Commerce in                     
 Washington. The JBC meeting discussed issues relating to intellectual                         
 property rights, technology transfer, trade and environment and financial                     
 services.                                                                                     
                                                                                               
 After some initial difficulties, subsidies under the US's Export                              
 Enhancement Programme were also extended to India and India contracted the                    
 purchase of 1.5 million metric tonnes of wheat from the US.                                   
                                                                                               
 The issue of protection of Intellectual Property Rights continued to remain                   
 a major trade-related irritant in bilateral ties. High level consultations                    
 have narrowed the gap on copyrights, trademarks and access to US motion                       
 pictures, but differences continue to persist on patents, especially in                       
 relation to food, pharmaceuticals and chemicals. On 29 April 1992, the US                     
 withdrew GSP concessions on specified imports of drugs and chemicals from                     
 India as a retaliatory measure. India has also been redesignated a                            
 "priority foreign country" under the Special 301 provisions. India has                        
 expressed her disappointment and regret on this unilateral move since these                   
 issues are under discussion at the Uruguay Round of the GATT multilateral                     
 trade negotiations.                                                                           
 -76>                                                                                          
                                                                                               
 High technology transfers from the US had emerged as an important facet of                    
 bilateral interaction. The Cray XMP-14 Supercomputer at the National Centre                   
 for Medium Range Weather Forecasting in New Delhi was upgraded to a Cray                      
 XMP-216 under a bilateral agreement. However, due to increased                                
 proliferation concerns heightened by the Gulf War, the US has of late been                    
 more stringent in releasing dual-use high-technology items, including                         
 spare-parts. Negotiations for a second Supercomputer for the Indian                           
 Institute of Science, Bangalore, did not fructify because of US insistence                    
 on intrusive and restrictive security and end-use conditions. The US                          
 attitude has adversely affected a number of Indian programmes, particularly                   
 in the Department of Space. On 11 May 1992, the US annuounced the                             
 imposition of a two year ban on American trade and technology transfers                       
 with and to ISRO and Glavkosmos of Russia over a deal for the supply of                       
 cryogenic rocket engines which the US regards as being violative of the                       
 Missile Technology Control Regime (MTCR).                                                     
                                                                                               
 On 16 June 1992, the US Department of Commerce amended Export                                 
 Administration Regulations by notifying a list of countries to which no                       
 American Company can export any product without licence if it has reason to                   
 believe that the product will be used for missile design, development,                        
 production and use. The list includes India and specifically mentions the                     
 Agni and Prithvi projects and the SLV, ASLV, PSLV and GSLV programmes.                        
 India has conveyed her concern to the US to name her civilian space                           
 programme in the notification as it has no connection with her missile                        
 programme. The US policy of linking technology transfers to                                   
 nonproliferation objectives is a negative trend in the bilateral ties.                        
                                                                                               
 To enable a better appreciation of each other's perspectives, India has                       
 initiated a bilateral dialogue with the US on disarmament, non-                               
 proliferation and regional security issues. Two rounds of discussions have                    
 been held so far, covering the entire range of global arms control trends,                    
 regional security issues and initiatives, designed to promote stability and                   
 confidence building. These talks have facilitated a better understanding of                   
 each other's position.                                                                        
                                                                                               
 Human rights has become a priority issue for both the US Administration and                   
 Congress. Pakistan-supported Kashmiri groups and proponents of "Khalistan"                    
 have joined hands and have employed professional lobbyists to intensify                       
 their propaganda compaign against India in the US. As a result of this                        
 lobbying and the one-sided reports by international human rights                              
 organizations, some US congressmen were influenced to introduce anti-India                    
 bills relating to human rights. Attempts were also made to cut the meagre                     
 US developmental aid to India over alleged human rights violations in                         
 Punjab and Kashmir, though eventually no bills or amendments specifically                     
 targetting India were adopted. The US Administration has also expressed                       
 concern, from time to time, about the human rights situation in Kashmir and                   
 Punjab. At the same time the Administration has showed an understanding of                    
 the extraordinary situation in these two states created on account of                         
 cross-border terrorism. The US Government has implicitly acknowledged                         
 Pakistan's involvement in training and arming of terrorists in Kashmir and                    
 Punjab. US officials have indicated to Indian officials that they have                        
 taken this up strongly with Pakistan. The provisions of US law require a                      
 determination to be made about countries sponsoring terrorism. This is                        
 reported to be under consideration with respect to Pakistan.                                  
                                                                                               
 -77>                                                                                          
                                                                                               
 Bilateral defence cooperation has been proceeding satisfactorily in a                         
 structured manner, aided by frequent exchanges of high level visits. A                        
 number of senior US military officers have visited India including Admiral                    
 Kelso, US Chief of Naval Operations, Admiral Larson, CINCPAC, Gen Sullivan,                   
 Chief of Staff, US Army, Lt General Corns, USARPAC, Vice Admiral Arthur,                      
 former Commander of the Seventh Fleet, and his successor, Vice Admiral                        
 Timothy Wright.                                                                               
                                                                                               
 Raksha Mantri visited the USA from 5 to 9 April 1992 at the invitation of                     
 US Defence Secretary. The Chief of Naval Staff and Chief of Air Staff also                    
 visited the US during 1992. Despite intensified defence cooperation,                          
 procurement of defence items from the US is limited to commercial purchases                   
 in small amounts.                                                                             
                                                                                               
 For the first time Indo-US Joint Naval exercises were held off the Western                    
 seaboard on 29, May 1992. Four warships, two from each side, participated                     
 in the 24 hour exercises. These exercises were held in the wider context of                   
 India's desire to strengthen professional contacts between the Indian Navy                    
 and navies of other friendly countries. The Indian Army co-hosted the XVII                    
 Pacific Armies Management Seminar in Delhi jointly with the US Army Pacific                   
 (USARPAC) in January 1993 within the framework of Indo-US Army-to-Army                        
 cooperation.                                                                                  
                                                                                               
 Under the aegis of the Indo-US Joint Commission, specific projects in the                     
 agriculture and health sciences are underway. An important on-going project                   
 is the Indo-US Vaccine Action Programme. Funding problems in the future are                   
 anticipated because of the depletion in the corpus of the United States                       
 India Rupee Fund (USIF-the PL-480 Funds) which will run out by 1997.                          
 -78>                                                                                          
                                                                                               
 The budgetary situation in the US has led to a decline in dollar funding of                   
 bilateral exchanges and projects. In science and technology collaborative                     
 projects, the US has introduced issue of intellectual property rights                         
 thereby hindering further intensification of cooperation in an area long                      
 considered to be of mutual benefit. This has led to projects being                            
 restricted to basic research rather than applied R & D which would involve                    
 sharing of IPR.                                                                               
                                                                                               
 A major aid package for population control in Uttar Pradesh has been worked                   
 out for which around US $ 225 million will be made available by USAID over                    
 a period of 10 years.                                                                         
                                                                                               
 India and the US have been cooperating fruitfully in the area of narcotics                    
 control.                                                                                      
                                                                                               
 Under an agreement signed on 25 September 1992, the US will provide $                         
 45,000 to the Narcotics Control Bureau for buying equipment which will help                   
 in narcotics control at Bombay airport.                                                       
                                                                                               
 Government accord high priority to the strengthening of Indo-US relations                     
 within the framework of shared interests through a process of dialogue.                       
 India's endeavour is to narrow differences where they exist and expand                        
 cooperation in a substantive manner in areas of mutual benefit. The overall                   
 ambience of Indo-US relations has improved qualitatively although certain                     
 irritants in bilateral relations remain.                                                      
                                                                                               
 Founded on historical and shared ties of the Commonwealth, Indo-Canadian                      
 relations have been traditionally friendly.                                                   
                                                                                               
 Canada has welcomed India's new economic policies. There are at present 70                    
 joint ventures and technical collaborations between India and Canada in                       
 areas such as telecommunications, mining equipment and surface and air                        
 transportation. More than half of these were finalised since the initiation                   
 of the economic reforms programme.                                                            
                                                                                               
 Canada has been supportive of India in multilateral financial institutions.                   
 Canadian aid to India during 1992 amounted to approximately C $ 100                           
 million. Total bilateral trade for the year 1991- 92 was of the order of Rs                   
 1070 crores. India's adverse balance of trade with Canada was reduced from                    
 Rs 278 crores in 1990-91 to Rs 62 crores in 1991-92. Canadian exports to                      
 India in 1992-93 have registered a substantial increase because of the                        
 purchase of wheat by India.                                                                   
                                                                                               
 The on-going operational cooperation between India and Canada to combat                       
 terrorism and other criminal activities has been fruitful.                                    
 -79>                                                                                          
                                                                                               
 The Vice President of India delivered the inaugural Lal Bahadur Shastri                       
 Memorial Lecture to launch the silver jubilee celebrations of the Shastri                     
 Indo-Canadian Institute (SICI) which has been instrumental in promoting                       
 educational exchanges.                                                                        
                                                                                               
 A Canadian Parliamentary delegation, led by the Speaker of the House of                       
 Commons, Mr John Fraser, visited India in January, 1993. The Rt Hon Charles                   
 Joseph Clark, President of the Queen's Privy Council for Canada and                           
 Minister Responsible for Constitutional Affairs, visited India in March,                      
 1993 for high-level bilateral consultations.                                                  
 Central and South America and the Caribbean                                                   
                                                                         Top                   
 During the period under review, India's relations with the Latin American                     
 countries and the Caribbean witnessed a definite improvement. Interactions                    
 at the highest political levels, conclusion of a number of important                          
 bilateral agreements and a stream of visitors to India towards the latter                     
 half of the year, were some indications of the renewed intensity in India's                   
 relations with this important region of the world.                                            
                                                                                               
 The Prime Minister attended the UN Convention on Environment and                              
 Development (UNCED), popularly called the 'Earth Summit' at Rio de Janeiro,                   
 Brazil, from 3 to 14 June 1992. He was accompanied, amongst others, by the                    
 Ministers of State for External Affairs and Environment & Forests. He had                     
 bilateral meetings with President F Collor of Brazil and President Salinas                    
 of Mexico.                                                                                    
                                                                                               
 During the NAM Summit from 1 to 6 September 1992 in Jakarta, Prime Minister                   
 had a meeting with the Foreign Minister of Venezuela. Minister of State for                   
 External Affairs, Shri R L Bhatia, had a meeting with the Foreign Minister                    
 of Trinidad and Tobago, and the then Minister of State for External                           
 Affairs, Shri Eduardo Faleiro, informally met the Foreign Minister of                         
 Suriname, which holds an observer's status in the NAM.                                        
                                                                                               
 Shri Eduardo Falerio undertook a tour of three important Caribbean                            
 countries, namely, Suriname from 19 to 22 September, Trinidad from 1 to 4                     
 October and Jamaica from 5 to 7 October. This was the first bilateral visit                   
 to the region since Vice President's visit in 1988. The tour provided an                      
 opportunity to further strengthen and consolidate the already strong                          
 historical and traditional links with these countries. A genuine effort was                   
 made to harness the vast trade potential flowing from a growing                               
 appreciation in these countries of India's achievements in science and                        
 technology and other related fields. Besides having a fruitful exchange of                    
 views on various matters of mutual interest with the Governments of the                       
 three countries, the visit enabled both the sides to identify areas for                       
 mutual cooperation in trade, investment, culture, technical and economic                      
 exchanges. It was decided to establish a Joint Commission between India and                   
 Suriname.                                                                                     
 -80>                                                                                          
                                                                                               
 A delegation, led by former. President of the Federation of Indian Export                     
 Organization (FIEO), undertook a trade promotion tour of Chile, Colombia,                     
 Mexico and Venezuela from 5 to 18 July. This visit was a follow up of the                     
 visit of a FIEO delegation which accompanied Prime Minister to Caracas in                     
 November 1991 to participate in the parallel meeting of Businessmen 'from                     
 the G-15 countries. This visit closely followed on the heels of a visit by                    
 another high-level delegation from the Associated Chambers of Commerce                        
 (ASSOCHAM) to Argentina, Brazil, Chile and Mexico in May 1992. Both the                       
 delegations had the opportunity to study the structural reforms and the new                   
 macro-economic policies being followed by these countries in order to learn                   
 from their experiences.                                                                       
                                                                                               
 The Cuban Government deeply appreciated India's decision to sell 10,000                       
 tonnes of rice to them on credit. The decision was taken keeping in view                      
 the policy of expanding trade with friendly countries in the region. India                    
 also voted in favour of the resolution moved by Cuba in the UN General                        
 Assembly on the US economic embargo against Cuba.                                             
                                                                                               
 In order to meet the cultural needs of the people of Indian origin which                      
 constitute a major percentage of the total population in the Caribbean,                       
 India decided to establish Cultural Centre in a permanent building in                         
 Suriname. For this a plot of land has been given. The Cultural Centre has                     
 been running since 1981. Cultural agreements were also signed with the                        
 Governments of Suriname and Jamaica.                                                          
                                                                                               
 Mr Maxmilliano Cox, a senior official in the Chilean Agricultural Ministry,                   
 visited New Delhi on 7 and 8 October. In his meeting with the Minister of                     
 State for Agriculture, promotion of exchanges in the fields of agriculture                    
 and forestry between the two countries was discussed.                                         
                                                                                               
 Mr Harold Pollack, Minister of Natural Resources of Suriname, visited India                   
 from 20 to 22 October. He held meetings with Minister of State for External                   
 Affairs and Minister of state for Mines. Possibilities of cooperation in                      
 the mining sector and of India assisting Suriname in exploiting its water                     
 resources were discussed.                                                                     
                                                                                               
 To mark the 500th anniversary of the arrival of Columbus in America, the                      
 Diplomatic Missions from the Latin American countries organized an -81>                       
 exhibition-cum-seminar at the Centre of Spanish Studies, Jawaharlal Nehru                     
 University.                                                                                   
 -81>                                                                                          
                                                                                               
 The Adviser to President Dr Cheddi Jagan of Guyana, Mr Vikrarn Oditt,                         
 called on the then Minister of State for External Affairs, Shri Eduardo                       
 Faleiro, and handed over a written message from his President addressed to                    
 Prime Minister. The Adviser was in New Delhi also to attend a UNIDO-                          
 sponsored Conference held in November 1992. During the visit, several broad                   
 areas were identified for mutual cooperation.                                                 
                                                                                               
 At the third G-15 Summit in Dakar, Senegal, held in November 1992, Prime                      
 Minister had an opportunity again to interact with the leaders from the                       
 Latin American and the Caribbean Countries who are members of the Group.                      
                                                                                               
 As part of economy drive, after much deliberation, it was decided to close                    
 down Indian Missions in Kingston and Bogota. Efforts would be made to see                     
 that bilateral relations with these countries are not affected.                               
 -82>                                                                                          
 1992                                                                                          
 9 United Nations and International Conferences                                                
                                                                         Top                   
 THE YEAR UNDER REVIEW MARKED A SIGNIFICANT MILESTONE IN THE ACTIVITIES OF                     
 the UN. A reinvigorating UN with a more sharply focussed agenda was                           
 increasingly perceived as having moved to centrestage and as having assumed                   
 an increasingly significant role in directly or indirectly shaping events                     
 the world over. These ranged from the situation in Federal Republic of                        
 Yugoslavia/Bosnia-Herzegovina, the Middle East Peace Process, the                             
 humanitarian crisis in Somalia to the United Nations Transitional Authority                   
 on Cambodia (UNTAC) supervised settlement in Cambodia, etc. In addition,                      
 the UN continued to medicate on issues ranging from Central America and                       
 Cyprus to Mozambique and issues relating to Commonwealth of Independent                       
 States.                                                                                       
                                                                                               
 The UN also focussed on issues such as environment, human rights, economic                    
 issues, drug abuse control, emergency humanitarian assistance and the                         
 restructuring and revitalisation of the UN including the question of                          
 equitable representation on and increase in the membership of the Security                    
 Council.                                                                                      
                                                                                               
 India's traditional commitment to multilateralism, as also her important                      
 role in international affairs, were highlighted by her membership of the                      
 Security Council, where India played an innovative, moderating and                            
 pragmatic role on a whole range of issues. India's two-year term in the                       
 Security Council came to an end on 31 December 1992. India held the                           
 Presidency of the Council in December.                                                        
 POLITICAL ISSUES                                                                              
                                                                         Top                   
 The Security Council continued to monitor the follow up on decisions on the                   
 destruction of Iraq's weapons of mass destruction, compensation for                           
 individuals and organizations which had suffered losses as a result of the                    
 invasion of Kuwait and the demarcation of the Iraq-Kuwait boundary. The                       
 Iraq-Kuwait Boundary Demarcation Commission completed its work this year.                     
 India joined other members of the Council in endorsing its work.                              
                                                                                               
 India maintained her consistent position that while Iraq would have to                        
 comply with the mandatory resolutions of the Security Council, the Council                    
 should give serious consideration to the possibility of relaxing the                          
 sanctions regime in view of the humanitarian crisis. India also supported                     
 Security Council Resolution 778 which permitted certain categories of                         
 frozen Iraqi assets to be released to the UN for humanitarian and                             
 compensation purposes.                                                                        
 -83>                                                                                          
                                                                                               
 The question of Palestine remained a major issue in 1992. India joined two                    
 historic consensus resolutions adopted by the Security Council on the                         
 forced deportation of Palestinians from the Occupied Territories. India                       
 maintained its consistent support for the peace process in West Asia.                         
 India's Permanent Representative to the UN Shri C R Gharekhan was appointed                   
 by the Secretary General as his Special Representative for West Asia                          
 beginning 1993. This appointment has been welcomed by all the States in the                   
 Middle East Peace Process.                                                                    
                                                                                               
 In 1992, the situation in the former Yugoslavia was the focus of attention                    
 in the Security Council and the General Assembly. India co- sponsored the                     
 Resolution in the UN for the admission of Slovenia, Croatia and                               
 Bosnia-Herzegovina as members of the UN and joined in Security Council                        
 Resolutions imposing sanctions on FRY in an attempt to ensure that FRY                        
 adopted a more supportive role in bringing peace to Bosnia-Herzegovina.                       
                                                                                               
 India fully supported the Security Council Resolutions aimed at resolving                     
 the conflicts in Croatia and Bosnia-Herzegovina. However, India abstained                     
 on Resolutions permitting the use of force for protection of humanitarian                     
 convoys on the grounds that this was contrary to her principled position                      
 that all use of force sanctioned by the UN must remain under full UN                          
 command and control. India also abstained on the Resolution denying FRY's                     
 right to participate in the General Assembly.                                                 
                                                                                               
 The efforts of UN Protection Force (UNPROFOR), the UN operations in former                    
 Yugoslavia under the command of an Indian national, Lt General Satish                         
 Nambiar, received universal appreciation.                                                     
                                                                                               
 India joined other members of the Security Council in approving the                           
 deployment of a UN battalion in Macedonia, which though still unrecognised                    
 as a member State of the UN, had requested for a UN presence on its                           
 territory in view of the perceived threat from its neighbours.                                
                                                                                               
 The tragic situation in Somalia was the focus of Security Council's                           
 attention, particularly in the second half of 1992. India supported the UN                    
 action in rushing humanitarian assistance to Somalia and has participated                     
 in this operation. In addition, the remaining assets from the AFRICA Fund,                    
 after it had been wound up, as mandated by the Tenth NAM Summit in Jakarta                    
 in September 1992, were released for relief efforts in Somalia.                               
 -84>                                                                                          
                                                                                               
 UNTAC, the UN operation in Cambodia, initiated measures to organize                           
 elections to a Constituent Assembly in Cambodia by May 1993. India has                        
 welcomed the progress achieved so far by UNTAC and has contributed                            
 civilian-and military personnel to these UN operations.                                       
                                                                                               
 UN operations in other parts of the world met with success and setbacks                       
 during 1992. The successful completion of the UN operation in El Salvador                     
 was welcomed by India. Similarly, UN operations in Angola were successful                     
 in organizing Presidential and Legislative elections in Angola in late                        
 September. India participated in both the operations. India maintained her                    
 traditional support for the efforts to resolve the long-standing problem of                   
 Cyprus, with a view to endorsing the latter's sovereignty, unity and                          
 territorial integrity. India also supported the establishment of a new                        
 major UN operation in Mozambique to oversee the implementation of the peace                   
 accords signed between the Government and RENAMO. India also supported                        
 Security Council action in sending UN observers to South Africa to monitor                    
 developments after the Boipatong massacre and to assist in the resumption                     
 of negotiations on political reform. Several issues relating to the                           
 Commonwealth of Independent States were also the subject of deliberations                     
 in the Security Council including the situation in Nagorno Karabakh. India                    
 welcomed the applications for UN membership of new States that had emerged                    
 following the break-up of the Soviet Union and fully supported the. efforts                   
 to bring peace to the region.                                                                 
                                                                                               
 A major Indian initiative in 1992 was the tabling of a Resolution at the                      
 47th General Assembly on the question of equitable representation and                         
 increase in membership of the Security Council. The Resolution was tabled                     
 after extensive consultations with a representative cross-section of                          
 countries and was adopted by consensus. In its statement India emphasised                     
 the need to apply the principle of democracy within the UN itself and                         
 underlined that if the Security Council was to represent the collective                       
 will of the international community and ensure its moral sanction, the                        
 members of the UN must have a wider representation on the Security Council.                   
                                                                                               
 In response to a call made at the Security Council Summit held in 1992, the                   
 UN Secretary General had put forward a report entitled "An Agenda for                         
 Peace" on preventive diplomacy and peace-making and peace-keeping. This was                   
 the subject of extensive consultations and deliberations during the year                      
 both in the Security Council and the General Assembly. India played an                        
 important role in ensuring that respect for the principles of sovereignty                     
 and territorial integrity of nations was maintained. She also played a                        
 critical role in ensuring that when sanctions are imposed by the Security                     
 Council the special economic problems faced by other countries are                            
 sympathetically considered.                                                                   
 -85>                                                                                          
                                                                                               
 India also participated actively in the high-level group under the aegis of                   
 NAM on the restructuring of the UN. India's active involvement at every                       
 stage ensured that NAM proposals took into account her sensitivities.                         
                                                                                               
 The Special Committee of the UN on Peace Keeping Operations held two                          
 meetings in 1992 to prepare a comprehensive report on UN peace-keeping                        
 operations and to consider the Secretary General's report - An Agenda for                     
 Peace. India played an active role in ensuring that the report incorporated                   
 the principle of consent of the host nation and approval of all concerned                     
 parties before such peace-keeping operations could be undertaken. She also                    
 took a principled stand on the need for the member States to pay their dues                   
 and put peace-keeping operations on a durable and stable financial footing.                   
                                                                                               
 As rapporteur of the Special Committee Against Apartheid, India played an                     
 important role in drafting of the Resolutions on South Africa and the                         
 preparation of the annual report of this Committee. India played its-                         
 traditionally active moderating role in the UN Decolonisation Committee,                      
 particularly on the issue of UN-supervised referendum on self-determination                   
 in Western Sahara.                                                                            
                                                                                               
 The 47th General Assembly adopted after a vote a resolution on                                
 "Implementation of the Declaration of the Indian Ocean as a Zone of Peace",                   
 with India voting in favour. The Ad Hoc Committee on the Indian Ocean is to                   
 hold a ten day session in 1993 and would submit recommendations for                           
 consideration by the 48th General Assembly. As early as possible                              
 thereafter, the Conference on the Indian Ocean is to be convened at Colombo                   
 with the participation of the permanent members of the Security Council and                   
 the major maritime users of the Indian Ocean.                                                 
                                                                                               
 During 1992, a series of meetings under the aegis of the Antarctica Treaty                    
 System were held including the first meeting of experts on Antarctic                          
 Environment which was held in Buenos Aires in June 1992 and the XVII                          
 Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting held in Venice in November 1992.                        
 India participated actively to ensure that her concerns were fully                            
 reflected -86> in the deliberations and outcome of these meetings. In the                     
 General Assembly, in a departure from previous practice, the two                              
 traditional resolutions on Antarctica were amalgamated. As a result, India                    
 joined other members of the Antarctica Treaty Consultative Parties in the                     
 non- participation in the vote on the Resolution but made an explanation of                   
 the position on the question of South African participation in the                            
 Antarctica Treaty.                                                                            
 -86>                                                                                          
 DISARMAMENT ISSUES                                                                            
                                                                         Top                   
 Through 1992, India continued to play its traditionally leading role in the                   
 three main multilateral disarmament fora, viz, the Conference on                              
 Disarmament in Geneva, the UN Disarmament Commission and the First                            
 Committee of the UN General Assembly in New York.                                             
                                                                                               
 India's approach to disarmament has continued to be guided by the basic                       
 philosophy that in the nuclear age, disarmament measures, specially nuclear                   
 disarmament, should be undertaken in a time bound manner to ensure the                        
 survival of mankind. India continues to maintain that the priorities for                      
 disarmament which are postulated in the consensus final document of the                       
 First Special Session of the UN General Assembly devoted to Disarmament are                   
 relevant. India's approach to general and complete disarmament has been                       
 best elaborated in the Action Plan for a Nuclear Weapon Free and                              
 Non-Violent World Order tabled at the Third Special Session of the UN                         
 General Assembly devoted to disarmament in 1988.                                              
                                                                                               
 In the Conference on Disarmament (CD), which is the sole multilateral                         
 negotiating body, India played a leading role in the group of neutral and                     
 non-aligned countries, otherwise known as G-21. The G-21 worked closely                       
 with delegations from other member countries to unanimously conclude a                        
 historic draft text on a Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC). The CWC is                        
 comprehensive, non-discriminatory and has universal application. It seeks                     
 to eliminate an entire class of weapons of mass destruction. The CWC takes                    
 into account the concerns, of developing countries in regard to their                         
 economic and technological development. India has also ensured for itself a                   
 seat on the Executive Council based on industrial criteria.                                   
                                                                                               
 The Indian delegation was appointed as Special Coordinator to seek                            
 agreement on an organizational arrangement for a crucial agenda item                          
 "Nuclear Test Ban" for which an ad-hoc group is sought to be set up in                        
 1993. India continued to highlight the urgent need for commencing                             
 negotiations for a Nuclear Test Ban Treaty, stressing that its scope should                   
 be consistent with the preamble of the Partial Test Ban Treaty of 1963 that                   
 seeks to achieve a total ban on all tests of nuclear weapons in all                           
 environments and for all time. India also took part in the meeting of the                     
 ad-hoc Group of Governmental Experts on Verification, established by a                        
 decision of the Third Review Conference of the Parties to the BW                              
 Convention.                                                                                   
 -87>                                                                                          
                                                                                               
 At the UN Disarmament Commission, consideration of the agenda item                            
 "objective information on military matters" was completed. The Commission                     
 also adopted by consensus the draft resoultion on the "Report of the                          
 Disarmament Commission".                                                                      
                                                                                               
 The outstanding achievement at the 47th session of the UN General Assembly                    
 was the unanimous commendation by member States of the CWC for signature                      
 and ratification. The CWC is the first multilaterally negotiated,                             
 comprehensive and verifiable disarmament agreement, which India hopes would                   
 become a model for other disarmament agreements. India played a leading                       
 role in the formal establishment of the UN Register of Conventional Arms.                     
 India had also participated in the Panel of Governmental Experts that                         
 worked out the details of the Register. On the issue of the 1995 Conference                   
 on the NPT, India called for a reconsideration and amendment of the                           
 Treaty's provisions to make it into a universal and non-discriminatory                        
 regime for non-proliferation. India introduced two resolutions entitled                       
 "Scientific and Technological Developments and their Impact on                                
 International Security" which received 128 votes in support and the                           
 "Convention of Prohibition of the Use of Nuclear Weapons" which was passed                    
 with an overwhelming majority.                                                                
                                                                                               
 Bilateral discussions with the USA on regional security and non-                              
 proliferation issues continued in 1992. The Foreign Secretary visited                         
 Washington from 9 to 11 March 1992, where he held wide ranging discussions                    
 with a number of US officials. India's position on signing the NPT was                        
 reaffirmed. India also highlighted its position that regional security                        
 cannot be confined to an artificially demarcated zone. In June, a US                          
 delegation led by Deputy Assistant Secretary of State, Ms Teresita.                           
 Schaffer, held discussions in New Delhi on issues concerning                                  
 non-proliferation and disarmament. India's security concerns in the context                   
 of the changing global environment were explained and it was emphasized                       
 that a regional security paradigm must encompass the security concerns of                     
 all states of the region. As a follow up to the visit of the US delegation,                   
 another round of bilateral talks were held in Washington on 12 and 13                         
 November 1992. Global security issues including US-Russian arms reduction                     
 agreements, the Chemical Weapons Convention and developments in the West                      
 Asia were discussed. Bilateral discussions on disarmament and                                 
 non-proliferation issues were held with the United Kingdom during the year.                   
 -88>                                                                                          
                                                                                               
 Outside the three main multilateral disarmament fora, India continued to                      
 provide support to disarmament initiatives taken by non-governmental                          
 organizations and actively participated in meetings organized by them.                        
 ECONOMIC ISSUES                                                                               
                                                                         Top                   
 In 1992, the major economic issues considered by the General Assembly were                    
 environment and sustainable development, the triennial review of                              
 operational activities and the restructuring of the UN in economic and                        
 social spheres. While the deliberations in the UN on environment and                          
 development flowed from the outcome of the UN Conference on Environment and                   
 Development (UNCED) held in Rio de Janeiro in June, the issues of                             
 restructuring of the UN and the triennial review of operational activities                    
 assumed a high profile, overshadowing the more traditional resolutions on                     
 issues such as debt, net transfer of resources, AIDS, privatisation and                       
 poverty.                                                                                      
                                                                                               
 The UN Conference on Environment and Development held in Rio de Janeiro in                    
 June 1992 marked a major milestone in the evolution of an international                       
 consensus on development and environment related issues. At this Summit, a                    
 detailed programme of action - Agenda 21 and a Statement of Principles on                     
 Forests was adopted. Two important- Conventions were opened for signatures                    
 at UNCED - a Framework Convention on Climate Change and Convention on                         
 Bio-diversity- both of which were signed by India at Rio. The Indian                          
 delegation to the UNCED Summit was led by the Prime Minister who was the                      
 first to address its Summit level segment. Prime Minister emphasised that                     
 we cannot have conservation of the environment without the promise of                         
 development even as we cannot have sustained development without the                          
 preservation of the environment. India played an active role in the                           
 preparatory process for and at the UNCED Summit, emphasising the close                        
 interlinkage between economic development issues and protection of the                        
 environment.                                                                                  
                                                                                               
 During the 47th General Assembly, several Resolutions were adopted as a                       
 follow-up of the decision taken at UNCED. These included a Resolution                         
 launching negotiations on a Convention to control Drought and                                 
 Desertification, a Resolution to prepare for a Conference on small island                     
 developing states, a Conference on highly migratory fish stocks and a                         
 Resolution on the establishment of a high-level Commission on Sustainable                     
 Development (CSD). The CSD will be a 53-member functional Commission of                       
 ECOSOC and will monitor and review the implementation of Agenda 21. During                    
 the 47th General Assembly too India played an active role in emphasising                      
 the linkage between environment and development and in ensuring that the                      
 focus on the CSD included a provision of new and additional resources for                     
 developing countries as well as the promotion and monitoring of transfer of                   
 technologies to developing countries on concessional and preferential                         
 terms.                                                                                        
 -89>                                                                                          
                                                                                               
 At the 47th General Assembly, it was also decided that the second UN                          
 Conference on Human Settlement would be held in Turkey in 1997. India                         
 played a major role in the establishment of the preparatory process for                       
 this meeting. On other traditional economic issues such as trade, finance,                    
 investment and technology, India continued to play an important role in                       
 galvanising the opinion of like-minded developing countries.                                  
                                                                                               
 In 1992, a triennial review of operational activities of the UN was                           
 undertaken. India played a major role in formulation of the draft                             
 Resolution and in ensuring that coordination and execution of operational                     
 activities would remain the national responsibility and in ensuring that                      
 the Resident Coordinator's mandate is confined to development activities.                     
                                                                                               
 As a follow-up of Resolution 46/182 which was adopted at the last General                     
 Assembly in 1992, the General Assembly considered the question of emergency                   
 humanitarian assistance. India played an active role in ensuring that the                     
 principle that it is the primary responsibility of the concerned State to                     
 provide for such assistance and that whenever and wherever UN undertakes                      
 coordination of humanitarian assistance, it is done with full involvement                     
 of the recipient Government at all stages.                                                    
                                                                                               
 The Summit Level Group on South-South Consultation and Cooperation (G- 15)                    
 is an important global institution for furthering measures aimed at                           
 developing concrete programmes of South-South cooperation and indentifying                    
 and articulating global economic issues of common concern to the developing                   
 countries with a view to initiating a North-South dialogue thereon. India                     
 has made important contributions to the G-15 process and in 1992, these                       
 activities were further strengthened.                                                         
                                                                                               
 Under the programme of South-South cooperation, further progress was made                     
 with regard to the specific projects identified at the First and Second                       
 Summits of the G-15 which were held in Kuala Lumpur and Caracas in 1990 and                   
 in 1991 respectively. It may be recalled that the G-15 Heads of                               
 State/Government had mandated India to develop projects on the                                
 establishment of Gene Banks for Medicinal and Aromatic Plants and also on                     
 Solar Energy Applications.                                                                    
 -90>                                                                                          
                                                                                               
 Under the project for the establishment of Gene Banks for Medicinal and                       
 Aromatic Plants, the first meeting of the Regional Coordinators and the                       
 Scientific Advisory Committee was held in New Delhi from 24 to 26 June                        
 1992. Likewise, the meeting of G-15 experts on Solar Energy Application was                   
 convened in New Delhi from 2 to 5 September 1992. The Expert Committees,                      
 during these meetings, drew up a concrete plan of action in order to                          
 identify priorities and implement the agreed measures.                                        
                                                                                               
 The Third Summit meeting of the G-15 was held in Dakar, Senegal, from 21 to                   
 23 November 1992. India was represented at the Summit meeting by Prime                        
 Minister, Shri P V Narasimha Rao. The Third Summit was noteworthy in                          
 respect of the many new cooperation projects which were tabled and approved                   
 for further action. India's contribution in respect of Solar Energy                           
 Applications and Gene Banks was appreciated. India, furthermore, offered                      
 additional projects, viz Vocational Training Centre to be established in                      
 Africa and Computer Training Centre in New Delhi. These new Indian offers                     
 were warmly received in the Summit meeting and approved for implementation.                   
 The Third G-15 Summit meeting emphasised the need to foster South-South                       
 contacts at the level of business leaders, technical experts and                              
 institutions dealing with trade, technology, banking and industry in the                      
 countries of the South. The Summit also felt that a constructive North-                       
 South dialogue, free from rhetoric and ideological rigidities of the past,                    
 would enable better management of the interdependent global economy and                       
 mutual benefits to the countries of the North as well as the South.                           
                                                                                               
 With the conclusion of the Dakar Summit, the chairmanship of G-15 devolves                    
 of India as she would be hosting the Fourth Summit which tentatively is                       
 scheduled to be held in New Delhi in the latter half of November 1993.                        
                                                                                               
 The Summit meeting of the Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN),                    
 met on 27 and 28 January 1992, approved India as a Sectoral Dialogue                          
 Partner. The sectoral dialogue will concentrate on trade, technology,                         
 tourism and human resource development. The sectoral dialogue would                           
 facilitate development of braod-based ties between India and the ASEAN                        
 countries.                                                                                    
                                                                                               
 On global economic issues, the major focus remained on the future of the                      
 Uruguay Round of Multilateral Trade Negotiations. The future of the Uruguay                   
 Round had been cast into doubt following the inability of some of the major                   
 industrialised countries to agree on a package of reforms in the                              
 agriculture sector. Apart from the impasse over agriculture, in many of the                   
 so-called new areas, viz, trade related intellectual property rights                          
 (TRIPs) and world trade in services, a consensus proved elusive. There are                    
 apprehensions that any further delay in concluding the Uruguay Round would.                   
 lead to a breakdown of genuinely multilateral world trading system into                       
 regional groupings and an increasing resort to unilateral and bilateral                       
 measures. Towards the end of the year, however, with a resolution of the                      
 vexed agriculture issue in sight, the hopes of early completion of the                        
 Round were revived.                                                                           
 -91>                                                                                          
 SOCIAL AND HUMANITARIAN ISSUES                                                                
                                                                         Top                   
 India continued to play an active role in the consideration by UN bodies                      
 such as the General Assembly, ECOSOC and the Commission on Human Rights, of                   
 social and humanitarian issues. India's stand on such issues was based on                     
 its principled stand on matters pertaining to human rights and social                         
 justice and its deep and abiding Commitment to the protection and promotion                   
 of human rights. India participated in the deliberations of the UN                            
 Sub-Commission on the Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of                          
 Minorities held in August 1992. India has repeatedly emphasised that human                    
 rights are indivisible and that while democracy was the best guarantor of                     
 human rights, there would be no realisation of human rights without                           
 economic development or enjoyment of human rights. India also highlighted                     
 the threat to human rights posed by the phenomenon of extra- territorially                    
 sponsored terrorism.                                                                          
                                                                                               
 India was also active in the preparatory meetings for the World Conference                    
 on Human Rights which is to be held in June 1993. India is the Vice                           
 Chairman of the Asian group in the Bureau of the Preparatory Committee.                       
                                                                                               
 Human rights continued to be the primary focus of the Third Committee of                      
 the General Assembly at which other issues including self-determination,                      
 narcotic drugs, social development, etc were also debated.                                    
                                                                                               
 India effectively rebutted Pakistani allegations of human rights violations                   
 by India. The incidents at Ayodhya were also raised by Pakistan and certain                   
 other countries in the Third Committee under the cluster of items on human                    
 rights. While effectively rebutting Pakistani allegations, India's response                   
 highlighted the prompt and comprehensive action taken by the Government of                    
 India in connection with the Ayodhya incident.                                                
 -92>                                                                                          
 BUDGETARY AND ADMINISTRATIVE ISSUES                                                           
                                                                         Top                   
 The Indian delegation continued to play an active role in the deliberations                   
 of the Fifth Committee. A major issue this year was the establishment of a                    
 Peace-keeping Reserve Fund of US $ 150 million for the financing of                           
 peace-keeping operations. India was supportive of this proposal.                              
 ELECTIONS/APPOINTMENTS                                                                        
                                                                         Top                   
 India was elected to the Council of International Civil Aviation                              
 Organization (ICAO) and to the UN Board of Auditors. India was also re-                       
 elected to the UN Human Rights Commission and to the Advisory Committee on                    
 Administrative and Budgetary Questions (ACABQ) for a three-year term.                         
                                                                                               
 India's Permanent Representative to the UN was appointed as Secretary                         
 General's Special Representative to the multilateral track of the Middle                      
 East Peace Process with the rank of Under Secretary General. Similarly,                       
 Shri Nitin Desai was appointed as Head of the Department for Policy                           
 Coordination and Sustainable Development, with the rank of Under Secretary                    
 General of the UN.                                                                            
 ACTIVITIES OF THE NON-ALIGNED MOVEMENT                                                        
                                                                         Top                   
 In the run up to the Tenth NAM Summit, a series of meetings were held                         
 during the year. Prime Minister led the Indian delegation to the Tenth NAM                    
 Summit. His speech at the inaugural session set the tone of the                               
 deliberations. The Tenth NAM Summit reaffirmed the relevance of the                           
 Movement and prioritised its agenda for the future which would include                        
 issues such as development, disarmament, decolonisation, environment, human                   
 rights and restructuring of the UN.                                                           
                                                                                               
 the UN, India consulted closely with other Non-Aligned members of the NAM                     
 caucus in the Security Council and played an active role in the Non-                          
 Aligned Coordinating Bureau. India is a member of the high level NAM                          
 Working Group on Restructuring of the UN and the NAM Task Force on Somalia.                   
 Throughout the year, India was instrumental in forging common Non-Aligned                     
 positions on a range of issues under consideration in the UN.                                 
 COMMONWEALTH                                                                                  
                                                                         Top                   
 India participated actively in the Commonwealth meetings held during the                      
 year including the Meeting of the Working Group of Senior Officials of the                    
 -93> Commonwealth High-level Appraisal, Group, held in September, and the                     
 Commonwealth Senior Officials Meeting held in Kampuchea in November 1992.                     
 These meetings reviewed the follow up action flowing from the Commonwealth                    
 Heads of Government Meeting held in Harare in October 1991. India also                        
 participated in the Commonwealth Observer Group constituted to monitor the                    
 violence in South Africa.                                                                     
 -93>                                                                                          
 CONFERENCES                                                                                   
                                                                         Top                   
 Conference Division is entrusted with the responsibility of providing the                     
 logistical support and managerial assistance in the organisation of                           
 international conferences convened by the Ministry of External Affairs and                    
 other Ministries/ Departments of Government of India. During 1992, 22                         
 International Conferences/Meetings were successfully organized by this                        
 Division, prominent amongst which were:                                                       
                                                                                               
 (i) SAARC Environment Ministers' Conference: This Conference was held in                      
 New Delhi from 8 to 10 April, 1992, and was attended by Environment                           
 Ministers of all SAARC countries.                                                             
                                                                                               
 (ii) The Second Meeting of Independent South Asian Commission on Poverty                      
 Alleviation: The Commission held its second meeting under the Chairmanship                    
 of the former Prime Minister of Nepal, HE Mr K P Bhattarai, in New Delhi                      
 from 27 to 29 May 1992. Delegates from SAARC countries and the SAARC                          
 Secretary General participated in the meeting. The Prime Minister's Office                    
 was also associated with the Conference.                                                      
                                                                                               
 (iii) The Meeting of Scientific Advisory Committee and Regional                               
 Coordinators of G-15 Countries on Gene Banks for Medicinal and Aromatic                       
 Plants: This meeting was held from 24 to 26 June, 1992 in New Delhi. The                      
 meeting, attended by experts from India and other G-15 countries, was                         
 convened to finalise the report for presentation at the G-15 Summit on the                    
 subject.                                                                                      
                                                                                               
 (iv) SAARC Meeting of Experts on Joint Promotion of SAARC Countries as a                      
 Tourist Destination: This meeting was held in Goa from 18 to 20 August,                       
 1992, to evolve ways and means to promote SAARC region as a tourist                           
 destination jointly.                                                                          
                                                                                               
 (v) Meeting of Experts of G-15 Countries on Solar Energy Projects: This                       
 meeting was held in New Delhi from 2 to 5 September 1992 to finalise its                      
 report for presentation at the G-15 Summit. -94>                                              
                                                                                               
 (vi) SAARC Cultural Festival: This was held from 9 to 24 October 1992. The                    
 Cultural/Education Ministers of all the SAARC Countries who came to attend                    
 this Festival, which was inaugurated by the Prime Minister in New Delhi,                      
 were taken to different cities in India, where they were Chief Guests and                     
 inaugurated various functions connected with this Festival.                                   
                                                                                               
 (vii) Third Meeting of SAARC Committee on Economic Cooperation: This                          
 meeting was held in New Delhi on 2 and 3 November, 1992, to evolve                            
 methodology for economic cooperation amongst SAARC countries.                                 
                                                                                               
 (viii) Meeting of Steering Group of ESCAP Committee on Regional Economic                      
 Cooperation: The Meeting was held in New Delhi from 24 to 27 November 1992.                   
                                                                                               
 This Division continued to render advice to other Ministries/Departments                      
 and autonomous organizations.                                                                 
                                                                                               
 An illustrative list of the Conferences/functions arranged by this Division                   
 is given in Appendix VI.                                                                      
 INTERNATIONAL LAW: DEVELOPMENTS AND ACTIVITIES                                                
                                                                         Top                   
 At its 47th Session, the Sixth Committee (Legal Committee) of the United                      
 Nations General Assembly considered 14 Agenda items during its                                
 deliberations from 18 September to 25 November 1992. The major Agenda items                   
 among these related to the work of the International Law Commission (ILC),                    
 the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL), the                      
 United Nations Special Committee on the Charter and the strengthening of                      
 the role of the Organization, protection of the environment in times of                       
 armed conflict, draft convention on jurisdictional immunites of states and                    
 their property and the United Nations Decade of International Law. The                        
 Indian delegation commented on the progress made by the ILC at its 44th                       
 Session in the areas of draft Code of Crimes against the peace and security                   
 of mankind, particularly the question of establishment of an international                    
 criminal court, state responsibility and the international liability for                      
 injurious consequences arising out of acts not prohibited under                               
 international law. The Indian delegation participated actively in the                         
 Committee's deliberations on other items, including its consultations on                      
 several matters. At this Session, the General Assembly also decided to                        
 include on its agenda for the 48th Session a new item regarding seeking of                    
 an advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice on abductions                       
 abroad.                                                                                       
 -95>                                                                                          
                                                                                               
 The UNCITRAL held its 25th Session in May 1992 in New York. During the                        
 Session, the draft Model Law on International Credit Transfers was                            
 finalised and submitted to General Assembly for its recommendations. During                   
 the Annual Session, the Commission held the Congress on International Trade                   
 Law in the context of its successful completion of 25th year. Several                         
 delegates from different countries participated in the Congress and                           
 appreciated the work done by UNCITRAL in the field of international trade                     
 law.                                                                                          
                                                                                               
 The Legal Sub-Committee of the UN Commitee on Peaceful Uses of Outer Space                    
 held its 31st Session in Geneva from 23 March to 10 April 1992. The                           
 substantive issues discussed during the Session related to draft principles                   
 of nuclear power sources in Outer Space, definition and delimitation of                       
 Outer Space, character and utilisation of the geostationary orbit, and                        
 legal aspects related to the Outer Space benefits taking into account the                     
 needs of the developing countries. The Sub-Committee registered substantial                   
 progress on the draft principles concerning the nuclear power sources and                     
 the agreed principles were approved by the UN General Assembly at its                         
 regular 47th Session in December 1992. On other matters the discussions                       
 held have yet to achieve agreement.                                                           
                                                                                               
 The Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO) held the second technical                         
 conference on the establishment of the Indian Ocean Tuna Commission, at                       
 Rome in July 1992. The aim of the draft convention prepared by the FAO and                    
 negotiated by the member states of the FAO during the conference was to                       
 achieve optimum utilisation of highly migratory fish, particularly tuna, in                   
 the Indian Ocean. The conference concluded its work successfully by                           
 adopting the draft convention and recommending it for its final adoption by                   
 the Governing Council of the FAO.                                                             
                                                                                               
 The 8th Session of the Governing Council of the UN Compensation Commission                    
 (UNCC) was held in Geneva from 14 to 18 December 1992. India is a member of                   
 the Governing Council by virtue of its membership of the Security Council.                    
 It is the function of the UNCC to implement the Security Council's                            
 Resolution 687 in respect of compensation for the claims arising out of the                   
 Iraqi war. Some of the issues discussed were business losses including                        
 claims based on deferred payment agreements with Iraq, establishment of                       
 criteria for priority for payments for the individual category claims,                        
 contribution of Iraq to the Compensation Fund and the establishment of a                      
 Budgetary Committee of the Governing Council.                                                 
                                                                                               
 The 31st Annual Session of the Asian African Legal Consultative Committee                     
 (AALCC) was held in Islamabad from 25 January to 1 February 1992. The                         
 Session provided a forum for the legal experts of countries from Asia and                     
 Africa to come together for an exchange of views on several contemporary                      
 international legal issues such as environment and development, the UN                        
 Decade of International Law, status and treatment of refugees, Law of the                     
 Sea, definition of terrorism and distinguishing it from struggles for                         
 national liberation, and the Geneva Conventions on Law of War and                             
 deportation of the Palestinians. Views were also exchanged on legal issues                    
 concerning International Trade Law being discussed in the UNCITRAL and                        
 other fora.                                                                                   
 -96>                                                                                          
                                                                                               
 As in the past years, the Ministry undertook negotiations, and processed                      
 for signature and ratification/accession of several multilateral and                          
 bilateral treaties involving India. The bilateral treaties which India                        
 entered into with other countries includes the Extradition Treaty and                         
 Agreement on Confiscation of the Proceeds and Instruments of Crime, etc                       
 with the United Kingdom.                                                                      
                                                                                               
 The Extradition Treaty provides for extradition of persons, disallowing the                   
 plea of political offence in case of specified serious crimes, assumption                     
 of jurisdiction in respect of certain of these offences even when they were                   
 committed outside the territory of the state, possibility of extradition of                   
 a person situated within one state but guilty of committing crimes through                    
 others in the affected states. The Confiscation Agreement provides for                        
 tracing, restraint and confiscation of proceeds and instruments of crime                      
 both in case of drugs trafficking and terrorism, mutual judicial assistance                   
 for search and seizure of documents and material including the recording of                   
 evidence.                                                                                     
                                                                                               
 India became a party to the multilateral conventions on the rights of the                     
 child, the Montreal Protocol on Substances that deplete the Ozone Layer and                   
 the Basel Convention on the control of transboundary movement of hazardous                    
 waste and the disposal including the convention on biological diversity and                   
 convention on climate change. A list of treaties entered into by India                        
 during the year is placed at Appendix II.                                                     
 -97>                                                                                          
 1992                                                                                          
 10 Foreign Economic Relations                                                                 
                                                                         Top                   
 DURING THE YEAR, THE ECONOMIC DIVISION PLAYED AN IMPORTANT ROLE IN THE                        
 furtherance of India's economic and commercial interests abroad. Steps were                   
 undertaken to reorient the functioning of Indian Missions so that they                        
 could play more active role in promotion of India's exports both in terms                     
 of commodities and projects. Special emphasis has been given on promoting                     
 exports in extreme focus areas. Regular and close liaison was maintained                      
 with the trade and industry organizations to make the Economic Division's                     
 functioning more responsive to the country's economic needs. All Missions                     
 were asked to prepare comprehensive economic and commercial notes on                          
 countries of their accreditation, which were passed on to the trade and                       
 industry associations for dissemination among the business community.                         
 Commercial queries and information on tenders and projects were also                          
 conveyed to concerned parties and trade promotion bodies in India.                            
                                                                                               
 Action has been initiated to create a comprehensive data bank on bilateral                    
 economic relations with India's important trading partners so that useful                     
 input could be provided for economic policy decisions. To assist the                          
 commercial representatives in Indian Missions, the Economic Division                          
 brought out the third edition of the Trade Directory containing useful                        
 information on export promotion bodies, commodity boards, important public                    
 sector organizations, trade and industry bodies, institutions dealing with                    
 credit and finance besides references of Government officials dealing with                    
 trade promotion and investment issues. The Division also initiated an                         
 action programme for update of directories published by trade promotion                       
 bodies and trade and industry bodies and even by private commercial firms                     
 so that these could be made available to the Indian commercial                                
 representatives abroad for wider dissemination of commercial information.                     
                                                                                               
 The Economic Division also assisted in mobilising foreign participants and                    
 visitors to trade fairs in India. Trade and industry delegations visiting                     
 abroad were extended all possible assistance to make their visits                             
 productive and useful. The Division was also instrumental in activating the                   
 joint Business Councils and promoting them as forums for furthering India's                   
 economic interests through participation of private entrepreneurs and                         
 business and industry organizations.                                                          
 -98>                                                                                          
                                                                                               
 In close cooperation with the Inter-Ministerial Committee on joint Ventures                   
 abroad, Indian Missions have been asked by the Economic Division to monitor                   
 the performance of Indian Joint Ventures abroad. An appropriate mechanism                     
 for such monitoring is presently under finalisation.                                          
                                                                                               
 The Economic Division also oversees the operation of the Indian Technical                     
 and Economic Cooperation (ITEC) Programme and the Special Commonwealth                        
 African Assistance Programme (SCAAP). The Programmes have been suitably                       
 reoriented to meet the requirements of South-South cooperation as well as                     
 for supporting Indian economic and commercial interest abroad. The                            
 Programmes have also been extended to cover countries in Eastern Europe and                   
 Latin America.                                                                                
                                                                                               
 Human resource development forms a basic element of the Programmes. During                    
 the year, over 900 foreign ' nominees were imparted specialised training in                   
 India. New courses in frontier technologies such as computer hardware and                     
 software were introduced. Special training modules in diplomacy, banking,                     
 foreign trade, entrepreneurship, etc, were organized for nominees from                        
 Central Asian countries.                                                                      
                                                                                               
 During the year an average of 40 experts were on deputation under the ITEC                    
 programme in various countries. Indian experts for the first time were                        
 deputed to the Central Asian countries. The major beneficiaries have been                     
 Afghanistan, Cambodia, Ethiopia, Gambia, Ghana, Mauritius, Namibia,                           
 Seychelles, Uganda, Yemen and Zambia.                                                         
                                                                                               
 Nearly 500 military personnel from about 30 countries attended                                
 Army/Navy/Air Force courses of instructions in India. A large number of the                   
 trainees came from South Asian and African countries. Considerable interest                   
 exists among their countries in availing of training facilities in Indian                     
 military institutions.                                                                        
                                                                                               
 Emergency relief assistance has been extended to Afghanistan, Botswana,                       
 Ethiopia, Kenya, Kyrghyzstan, Madagascar, Mozambique, Mongolia, Namibia,                      
 Pakistan, Turkmenistan, Turkey, Zambia and Zimbabwe. These countries have                     
 suffered from natural disasters. Assistance provided to them included baby                    
 food, milk powder, blankets, medicines, etc.                                                  
                                                                                               
 The major projects undertaken during the year under ITEC assistance                           
 included the Indira Gandhi International Child Hospital (IGICH) Expansion                     
 Project in Afghanistan, the 7th phase of the Angkor Vat Restoration Project                   
 in Cambodia, the Hand Tool Manufacturing and Demonstration Centre in the                      
 Philippines, and the Court House Project in Mauritius. In addition, a                         
 number of feasibility studies and pilot projects have been undertaken or                      
 initiated under the programme. Some of these are to be undertaken in the                      
 Central Asian countries.                                                                      
 -99>                                                                                          
                                                                                               
 The visit of a delegation from Cambodia comprising two Senior                                 
 Archaeologists took place under the ITEC Programme in September 1992 for                      
 archaeological study and conservation of monuments.                                           
                                                                                               
 A study visit from Mexico took place in November 1992. The visitors were                      
 exposed to a vast range of Indian industry. They also visited the India                       
 International Trade Fair (IITF) in New Delhi. Cooperation in the Small                        
 Scale Sectors was identified for future collaboration. Like in the previous                   
 year, 15 September was celebrated as the 'ITEC Day' by select Missions                        
 abroad. The occasion was utilised to maintain and strengthen contact with                     
 former ITEC alumni and was also utilised for forming ITEC alumni                              
 associations. A documentary produced by XP Division entitled 'Building                        
 Bridges' on the ITEC Programme was also arranged to be telecast locally by                    
 the Indian Missions.                                                                          
                                                                                               
 In the context of India's liberalised economic policies and the consequent                    
 emphasis on expanding trade, investment and technology flows, Ministry of                     
 External Affairs has worked through its Missions and Posts abroad in giving                   
 priority to India's economic and commercial interests. In the period under                    
 review, the activities of the Economic Coordination Unit (ECU) have                           
 reflected the growing focus on economic and commercial issues.                                
                                                                                               
 ECU has given special attention to the requirement of external economic                       
 publicity in the context of the need to effectively disseminate information                   
 about the economic reform programme to the international business                             
 community. The composite media package aimed at projecting India as an                        
 attractive investment destination that was prepared by ECU was                                
 comprehensively updated in April 1992 and further revisions are underway.                     
 The floppy diskette entitled 'Doing Business with India' which was                            
 introduced last year as an innovative way of disseminating information                        
 about policies and procedures for investors has been regularly updated                        
 during the current year.                                                                      
                                                                                               
 Apart from preparing this promotional material which was intended primarily                   
 for use by Indian Missions abroad but has also been in demand from the                        
 major economic Ministries when they have sent delegations abroad or when                      
 foreign business delegations have come to India, ECU has also been playing                    
 a more direct role in the country's efforts to attract investment. It has                     
 been directly involved in arranging programmes for visiting business                          
 delegations, facilitating their interaction with concerned Ministries and                     
 business entities and organizing investment promotion events in target                        
 countries. Two of the important events coordinated by ECU were investment                     
 promotion seminars organized in Los Angeles and the West Coast of the USA                     
 in April 1992, and in Taiwan in October 1992. It also helped with the                         
 Business International Round Table in Delhi in May 1992. In addition, ECU                     
 has also provided back-up support to the promotional events organized by a                    
 number of Indian Missions including those in Bonn, Brussels, The Hague,                       
 Singapore, etc. Recognising the importance of following up on the leads                       
 established at these various investment promotion events, it has been                         
 specially active in ensuring timely and close coordination between                            
 potential investors and the concerned Ministries and organizations in                         
 India.                                                                                        
 -100>                                                                                         
                                                                                               
 Another important aspect of ECU's investment promotion efforts has been its                   
 interactions with the economic Ministries with the purpose of keeping                         
 Indian Missions, especially those in target countries informed on a regular                   
 and immediate basis of the on-going changes in India's economic policies.                     
 It has also instituted a system of obtaining regular feedback from Missions                   
 on responses/reactions to India's economic reform programme among the                         
 industrialised countries in general and the international business                            
 community in particular. This feedback has formed the basis of periodic                       
 reports that this Ministry has sent to the Foreign Investment Promotion                       
 Board on on-going investment promotion efforts and on the bottlenecks that                    
 still remain to be removed to facilitate significant inflows of foreign                       
 capital.                                                                                      
                                                                                               
 Finally, as a natural corollary to these activities, ECU has liaised                          
 closely with apex industry organizations, business houses, concerned                          
 Ministries and State Governments on ways and means of facilitating                            
 investment procedures and improving the overall quality of investment                         
 promotion efforts. The attempt here has been to focus on specific projects                    
 and specific issues. One of the results of such interaction was the                           
 preparation of a shelf of projects that could be offered for equity                           
 participation to potential investors from Gulf region. This initiative was                    
 taken by way of specific follow-up action to the interest expressed by the                    
 UAE President in obtaining specific project profiles for investment during                    
 the course of his visit to India in April and it culminated in the visit of                   
 a business delegation to Abu Dhabi in November with the objective of                          
 discussing investment proposals in areas in which UAE had expressed a                         
 preliminary interest.                                                                         
 -101>                                                                                         
 1992                                                                                          
 11 Policy Planning And Research                                                               
                                                                         Top                   
 THE POLICY PLANNING WING WAS ACTIVELY ENGAGED IN PREPARING BRIEFS AND                         
 background notes on issues concerning India's foreign policy in the rapidly                   
 evolving international situation.                                                             
                                                                                               
 It is also the nodal point for interaction with joint Intelligence                            
 Committee, the University Grants Commission and its affiliated Area Study                     
 Centres attached to various Universities. These activities were                               
 strengthened during the year.                                                                 
                                                                                               
 It has also given financial assistance for Seminars and Conferences on                        
 international issues. The Wing has also financed study and research                           
 projects undertaken by scholars and academic organizations on subjects                        
 relevant to Ministry of External Affairs.                                                     
                                                                                               
 The Research Wing rendered all possible help to the Territorial Divisions                     
 as well as Indian Missions abroad on India's international boundary                           
 problems or whenever any specific information or documents on international                   
 relations were required.                                                                      
                                                                                               
 The Research Wing examined the incorrect depiction of India's international                   
 boundaries in maps printed in foreign publications, both official and                         
 private. The matter of incorrect maps was then taken up with the concerned                    
 Government or the publishers through Indian Missions abroad for necessary                     
 corrective measures. It coordinated the accord of approval to new Survey of                   
 India maps depicting international boundaries of India. It also coordinated                   
 with the Survey of India and the Ministry of Defence the supply of                            
 mapsheets to various Government and semi- Government agencies for use in                      
 their official work.                                                                          
                                                                                               
 The Research Wing dealt with the requests from research scholars in                           
 consultation with the concerned Territorial Division for access to the                        
 records of the Ministry relating to the restricted areas or the closed                        
 period as laid down in the Access Rules. It also scrutinised the excerpts                     
 of the closed period records submitted by the research scholars for                           
 clearance in consultation with the concerned Territorial Divisions.                           
 -102>                                                                                         
                                                                                               
 An important task of the Wing is to edit and supervise printing of the                        
 Annual Report of the Ministry on the basis of the material prepared by the                    
 various Divisions.                                                                            
                                                                                               
 The Printing of Old Records (POR) Unit of the Research Wing edited and                        
 printed selected old policy files of the Ministry. The POR Unit also                          
 undertook the review/weeding of old files in the Record Management Section                    
 of the Ministry and also advised the Missions abroad in the same work.                        
 Similarly, the Unit reviewed old records of the Ministry which were                           
 transferred to the National Archives of India in the past.                                    
                                                                                               
 The Research Section of the Wing coordinated the distribution of periodical                   
 reports received from Indian Missions abroad.                                                 
                                                                                               
 To support the research efforts, a library equipped with modern facilities                    
 and large resource material is maintained with over one hundred thousand                      
 books and documents in its collection. During last year, 1255 books, 32                       
 maps, 450 pamphlets, and 36 reels of microfilm were added. The Library                        
 subscribes to 600 periodical titles.                                                          
                                                                                               
 The Library is equipped with in-house computer system with 9 terminals, two                   
 of which support data entry and retrieval in Indian languages, a                              
 microfilm/fiche reader printer and a plain paper photocopier.                                 
                                                                                               
 Documentation/Bibliographic Services as well as other library operations                      
 and services were computerised using an integrated software package                           
 developed in India. ' Information about books and selected periodical                         
 articles received in Library since 1986 is available on-line through each                     
 terminal. All new documents received in Library-books, maps, microfilms,                      
 selected articles from periodicals, etc-are being fed into the in-house                       
 computer system to create Database on Foreign Affairs. Using this Database,                   
 the Library provides Current Awareness Service and Bibliographical                            
 Services. In addition, the Library regularly issued a monthly Chronicle of                    
 Events, a Foreign Affairs Documentation Bulletin and an annotated monthly                     
 list of recent additions to the Library.                                                      
                                                                                               
 Library users including research scholars can access on-line computer-                        
 based information held in Library in different databases through Foreign                      
 Affairs Information Retrieval System (FAIRS). Photocopying and computer                       
 print-out facilities are also available to all Library users including                        
 research scholars.                                                                            
 -103>                                                                                         
 1992                                                                                          
 12 External Publicity                                                                         
                                                                         Top                   
 DURING THE YEAR UNDER REVIEW, THE EXTERNAL PUBLICITY DIVISION WAS actively                    
 engaged in discharging its responsibility of projecting India's position on                   
 various issues and developments in India as well as countering propaganda                     
 directed against India. Simultaneously, due, emphasis was given to                            
 dissemination of credible information relating to the positive aspects of                     
 India's economic, scientific and technological progress and underlining the                   
 sustained march of Indian democracy.                                                          
                                                                                               
 A thrust was given to the wide publicity on the new policy initiative                         
 undertaken by the present Government, particularly, the drive for economic                    
 liberalisation including the country's concerted efforts to attract foreign                   
 investment. This was done through the publication of a number of booklets,                    
 including the "New Economic Policies"; in various languages. Over 6,000                       
 copies of a package, consisting of a diskette and four brochures on "Doing                    
 Business with India", were distributed world- wide.                                           
                                                                                               
 The External Publicity Division continued to assist Indian Missions/Posts                     
 abroad with publicity material in different languages for distribution to                     
 local dignitaries, prominent persons, opinion-makers and academic                             
 institutions, etc. The important new publications included "India-A                           
 Democracy on the Move", "Muslims in India", and a set of media kits and                       
 tourist literature. These publications depict India's achievements in the                     
 fields of foreign policy, science and technology, agriculture and rural                       
 development, education and poverty alleviation as well as our social and                      
 cultural norms and values and the secular and democratic set-up of the                        
 country. These publications have been especially designed with the                            
 objective of acquainting foreign audiences with the multi-faceted nature of                   
 the Indian polity and the sustained progress of independent India.                            
                                                                                               
 "India Perspectives", which is now being published in 10 languages with the                   
 launch of the German edition in October 1992 has emerged as a major                           
 component in publicity efforts. The magazine widened the scope of its                         
 readers and feedback from Indian Missions was encouraging. However, while                     
 the total requirement of the Missions for "India Perspectives" works out to                   
 be more than 56,000 copies per month, only 51,000 copies were printed                         
 because of paucity of funds.                                                                  
 -104>                                                                                         
                                                                                               
 The Division continued to regularly brief the foreign and Indian Press                        
 about India's policy on various issues. Government's swift response on the                    
 Ayodhya issue and all steps taken to counter communal forces were                             
 disseminated to all the Missions abroad in order to enable them to present                    
 India's point of view to foreign officials, foreign governments as well as                    
 Media, opinion makers and others. During the period under review almost                       
 daily press briefings were held for the media and press releases issued. In                   
 all, more than 596 Official Spokesman's statements/press releases were                        
 issued. The policy of offering hospitality to select mediamen from abroad                     
 and rendering assistance in their travel within the country to enable them                    
 to meet a cross section of the Indian people was also continued. The Indian                   
 Missions abroad, too, kept in regular touch with the foreign media to brief                   
 them about the current developments in India and provide them with factual                    
 material on matters of current interest. This was facilitated by                              
 transmission of twice-daily bulletins to 71 Missions abroad. Besides, 40                      
 Missions received bi-weekly bulletins while 32 Missions, identified as                        
 "Core- Missions", received clippings from the Indian Press/Press Summary on                   
 a daily basis.                                                                                
                                                                                               
 A special emphasis has been placed on the circulation of audio-visual                         
 material to Indian Missions abroad which have been equipped with TV sets                      
 and VCRs. The Missions are regularly supplied with video news cassettes,                      
 capsules of "India Magazine" as well as documentaries on diverse subjects                     
 relating to India. Various sources including Doordarshan, Films Division                      
 and private producers have been tapped in this regard. A number of Missions                   
 have also been authorised to install dish antennae to enable them keep in                     
 touch with the latest developments and to tune into programmes of                             
 Doordarshan, wherever possible.                                                               
                                                                                               
 The anti-India campaign, launched by Pakistan, is being countered on all                      
 fronts. The XP Division countered this through briefings to foreign                           
 Journalists and supply of material giving facts of the situation to Indian                    
 Missions abroad. Publicity material on the activities of the militants and                    
 Pakistan's clandestine support to the terrorists was widely distributed to                    
 foreign governments as well as opinion-makers, officials, media persons and                   
 others. This multi-pronged approach led to an understanding of India's                        
 point of view in many circles. Countering malicious and mischievous                           
 anti-India campaign by Pakistan is an on-going process in the Division.                       
 Important news items, relating to Punjab and Kashmir, are regularly sent to                   
 Indian Missions abroad for further dissemination. Fact sheets, made                           
 available by the Ministry of Home Affairs, relating to alleged human-rights                   
 violations in India, are sent to some of the Missions to enable them                          
 counter these allegations.                                                                    
 -105>                                                                                         
                                                                                               
 The XP Division continued to make available feature articles from Indian                      
 News Agencies to the Indian Missions abroad. Special articles were also                       
 commissioned on the occasion of Republic Day and the Independence Day for                     
 highlighting India's multi-dimensional achievements in diverse fields. This                   
 facilitated efforts of the Missions to bring out special supplements in                       
 foreign newspapers on these two occasions. Two feature articles titled                        
 "India and NAM" and "NAM Summit in Jakarta" were commissioned on a special                    
 basis and distributed to Indian Mission in Jakarta on the eve of the 10th                     
 NAM Summit. Several feature articles were commissioned by PTI and sent to                     
 all the Missions abroad for use as special supplement on the occasion of                      
 the Republic Day in 1993.                                                                     
                                                                                               
 The audio-visual arm of the Division completed/produced several films                         
 during the period including "Axis-Mundi" (on restoration work at Angkor                       
 Vat), "Continuity in Change" (on the life, culture, history and essence of                    
 India) and "Building, Bridges" (on the ITEC Programme). These have been                       
 distributed to all Missions after duplication and conversion into various                     
 colour systems/schemes. Some of these have also been telecast at various                      
 places abroad on suitable occasions. Meanwhile, a documentary on                              
 contemporary Indian art, featuring two Indian painters, has recently been                     
 completed. Several other films are in advance stages of production.                           
                                                                                               
 A number of retrospectives of the late Shri Satyajit Ray have been held in                    
 Pakistan, Bangladesh, Hong Kong, Singapore, Muscat, Canada, UK,                               
 Phillipines, Chile, Argentina, Trinidad and Tobago and other places and are                   
 scheduled in several others. Telecasts of Indian films abroad either on a                     
 commercial or non-commercial basis have also been arranged by the Division                    
 and Indian Missions abroad. A major Indian participation in the Tashkent                      
 Film Festival was organized and a Raj Kapoor package, which later travelled                   
 to other Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) cities, was also arranged                   
 in coordination with the Directorate of Film Festivals (DFF). Offers to                       
 coordinate and promote, commercially and culturally, Indian films abroad                      
 are being made in conjunction with NFDC, Doordarshan, Films Division and                      
 DFF.                                                                                          
                                                                                               
 The Division hosted 7 journalists from abroad during the period and                           
 committed itself to visits of 9 more foreign journalists. So far mediamen                     
 from China, Saudi Arabia, Pakistan, Israel, Turkey, Malaysia and Austria                      
 have visited India under this programme. Pursuant to Prime Minister's                         
 directive of inviting economic journalists to enable them have first- hand                    
 information about the economic changes in India, core Missions in selected                    
 countries were asked to extend invitations to prominent economic                              
 journalists. Feedback received by the Division suggests that such visits                      
 have succeeded in generating goodwill and promoting the cause of favourable                   
 projection of India's views and concerns on international issues.                             
 -106>                                                                                         
                                                                                               
 XP Division looked after logistics/media arrangements for VVIP visits                         
 abroad. During the period under review, the Division has handled media                        
 arrangements and logistics for journalists accompanying the Vice President                    
 to North Korea and Mongolia, the President to China and the Prime Minister                    
 to Tokyo, Rio de Janeiro, Madrid, Lisbon, Jakarta, Paris, Kathmandu, Tunis                    
 and Dakar.                                                                                    
                                                                                               
 The Division facilitated media arrangements for the foreign journalists                       
 accompanying the VVIPs on their visits to India. Liaison Officers from XPR                    
 Section was attached with each visiting delegation. The following VVIPs                       
 visited India during the period:                                                              
                                                                                               
 The Thai Crown Prince, the UN Secretary General, the President of                             
 Turkmenistan, the President of UAE, the Russian State Secretary, the Prime                    
 Minister of Bangladesh, the President of Mauritius, the General Secretary                     
 of Vietnam, the Sultan of Brunei, the President of Sri Lanka, the President                   
 of Uganda, the Prince & Princess of Japan and the Aga Khan.                                   
                                                                                               
 XPR Section also arranged the media coverage for the incoming visits of 12                    
 Foreign Ministers from different countries and 4 other VIP and                                
 Parliamentary delegations.                                                                    
 -107>                                                                                         
 1992                                                                                          
 13 Protocol                                                                                   
                                                                         Top                   
 DURING THE YEAR 1992-93, HEADS OF MISSION OF THE FOLLOWING EIGHTEEN                           
 countries left India on completion of their terms:                                            
                                                                                               
 1 Bangladesh                                                                                  
                                                                                               
 2 Zambia                                                                                      
                                                                                               
 3 Trinidad & Tobago                                                                           
                                                                                               
 4 Bulgaria                                                                                    
                                                                                               
 5 USA                                                                                         
                                                                                               
 6 Pakistan                                                                                    
                                                                                               
 7 Iraq                                                                                        
                                                                                               
 8 Hungary                                                                                     
                                                                                               
 9 Indonesia                                                                                   
                                                                                               
 10 Sudan                                                                                      
                                                                                               
 11 Singapore                                                                                  
                                                                                               
 12 Venezuela                                                                                  
                                                                                               
 13 Malaysia                                                                                   
                                                                                               
 14 Iran                                                                                       
                                                                                               
 15 Laos                                                                                       
                                                                                               
 16 New Zealand                                                                                
                                                                                               
 17 Portugal                                                                                   
                                                                                               
 18 Lebanon                                                                                    
 -108>                                                                                         
                                                                                               
 During the same period, Heads of Mission of the following seventeen                           
 countries presented their Credentials to the President of India:                              
                                                                                               
 1 Jordan                                                                                      
                                                                                               
 2 Myanmar                                                                                     
                                                                                               
 3 Thailand                                                                                    
                                                                                               
 4 Tanzania                                                                                    
                                                                                               
 5 Panama                                                                                      
                                                                                               
 6 Ethiopia                                                                                    
                                                                                               
 7 Bangladesh                                                                                  
                                                                                               
 8 Zambia                                                                                      
                                                                                               
 9 USA                                                                                         
                                                                                               
 10 Algeria                                                                                    
                                                                                               
 11 Hungary                                                                                    
                                                                                               
 12 Pakistan                                                                                   
                                                                                               
 13 Peru                                                                                       
                                                                                               
 14 Angola                                                                                     
                                                                                               
 15 Israel                                                                                     
                                                                                               
 16 Sudan                                                                                      
                                                                                               
 17 Iran                                                                                       
                                                                                               
 Israel, Brunei Darussalam and Angola opened their first Resident Missions                     
 in India. The Consulate General of Pakistan started functioning in Bombay.                    
                                                                                               
 A list containing names of foreign dignitaries who visited India during the                   
 year, alongwith dates of such visits, as also a list containing information                   
 about visits by Indian dignitaries to foreign countries, are at Appendices                    
 XVI & XVII.                                                                                   
 -109>                                                                                         
 1992                                                                                          
 14 Passport and Consular Services and Indians Overseas                                        
                                                                         Top                   
 THE PRESSURE OF HEAVY DEMAND FOR PASSPORT AND MISCELLANEOUS SERVICES at the                   
 Passport Offices in India continued in 1992 with the receipt of 24,72,428                     
 applications for fresh passports.                                                             
                                                                                               
 The output of the Passport Offices went up considerably with the issue of                     
 22,68,425 fresh passports representing an increase of 40.4%. Detailed input                   
 and output figures regarding fresh passport and miscellaneous services are                    
 at Appendix VII.                                                                              
                                                                                               
 The main areas of focus during the past financial year were the further                       
 improvement and simplification of passport services for which purpose the                     
 following measures were introduced:                                                           
                                                                                               
 (a) With effect from 1 November 1992, passport application forms started                      
 being sold by select head and sub-post offices throughout India. A total of                   
 almost 2000 new outlets for passport application forms were thereby                           
 created. In view of this, as required by the Department of Posts, the                         
 acceptance of passport application forms printed by travel agents was                         
 discontinued from 31 March 1993 after an overlap period of five months to                     
 enable them to use up their stocks.                                                           
                                                                                               
 (b) A major difficulty faced by Indian nationals related to issue of                          
 duplicate passports in lieu of lost or damaged passports. The entire system                   
 has been rationalised and simplified so that an Indian who has genuinely                      
 lost or damaged his passport is not deprived of a passport for urgent                         
 travel, while necessary investigations and clearances are obtained. Some                      
 exceptions to this facility have, however, been made in certain cases in                      
 order to prevent abuse of this facility.                                                      
                                                                                               
 (c) Specified miscellaneous services, such as addition/deletion of                            
 children's names, extra visa pages, etc can be granted by any Passport                        
 Office. -110>                                                                                 
                                                                                               
 In the case of renewal of passports, issue of police clearance certificates                   
 and change of address, name or date of birth, the applicant, if in India,                     
 should normally approach the original Passport Issuing Authority (PIA). In                    
 an emergency, these services can be granted by any Passport Office, after                     
 obtaining clearance from the original PIA. A Mission abroad can grant these                   
 services after checking with the original PIA.                                                
                                                                                               
 (d) With effect from July 1992, the system of recognising Travel Agents for                   
 dealing with Passport Offices was dispensed with. Now all Travel Agents are                   
 free to deal with Passport Offices without having to go through any                           
 formality of recognition or payment of fee and the public accordingly has a                   
 much greater choice instead of the limited number of Travel Agents who had                    
 hitherto been recognised.                                                                     
                                                                                               
 (e) It was found that several passport applications were being received in                    
 the name of non-existent persons at non-existent addresses, or persons                        
 already outside India. In order to prevent passports from falling into the                    
 hands of unauthorised people, w.e.f. July 1992, passports in the case of                      
 first time applicants,- started being delivered to the applicants                             
 themselves or posted to them. For all other cases, such as renewal of                         
 passports, issue of passports after the expiry of the full validity of the                    
 10-year old passport and miscellaneous services, any authorised person                        
 including any Travel Agent may deal with the Passport Offices on behalf of                    
 the applicants and receive the completed passport on the basis of a letter                    
 of authority from the applicant.                                                              
                                                                                               
 (f) The Consular, Passport and Visa (CPV) Division has a computerised                         
 system of monitoring complaints received from the public both with regard                     
 to delays in the issue of passports as well as complaints against                             
 officials. The Divisions monitors the complaints and its intervention has                     
 helped in the resolution of several cases. At the same time, wherever a                       
 complaint gives reason to suspect malafide behaviour on the part of any                       
 passport official or staff member, the CPV Division undertakes                                
 investigation of the concerned case and action against the erring official                    
 is taken, based on the investigation. Nine officials were placed under                        
 suspension on various charges, sanction for prosecution issued in respect                     
 of three and Departmental action taken against twelve.                                        
                                                                                               
 (g)Passports are normally to be issued on a first-come-first- served basis                    
 with reference to the date of application. All Passport Offices have been                     
 instructed that when the applicant's turn comes up, if the police report                      
 has not been received and a period of four weeks has elapsed, the passport                    
 should be issued if the application is otherwise in order. Notwithstanding                    
 the above, in genuine cases of emergency supported by satisfactory                            
 documentation to establish the urgency, passports are issued on a priority                    
 basis. Such cases cover exporters and businessmen with firm commitments,                      
 persons requiring to go abroad urgently for medical treatment, people with                    
 valid employment offers from other countries, officials and private                           
 individuals required to go abroad to attend seminars and conferences, etc                     
 as well as students with admission abroad in recognised universities or                       
 those appearing for entrance examinations of foreign universities. Valid                      
 supporting documentation is a must to ensure that this facility is not                        
 misused as it has been found that a single passport issued out of turn                        
 delays several other cases.                                                                   
 -111>                                                                                         
                                                                                               
 Several administrative measures were also taken to increase the output of                     
 the Passport Offices. These were particularly critical as a major backlog                     
 got generated in 1991 with the unexpectedly high receipt of 24.03 lakh                        
 applications for fresh passports whereas issues were 16.15 lakhs with a                       
 supply of 16.43 lakh blank passport booklets used for both fresh passports                    
 and miscellaneous services. These measures were:                                              
                                                                                               
 (a) Urgent steps were taken to work out a schedule of enhanced deliveries                     
 with the India Security Press (ISP), Nasik which prints the booklets. For                     
 1993-94, ISP has committed itself to a supply of 40 lakh booklets which                       
 should ensure that there is no shortfall vis-a-vis the anticipated demand                     
 for passports. The Ministry has also welcomed a Finance Ministry proposal                     
 for the establishment of a second passport printing facility.                                 
                                                                                               
 (b) The cadre strength of Central Passport Organization existing in 1991-92                   
 was sanctioned in 1980 based on an inflow of about 13 lakh applications for                   
 fresh passports received in 1979 in the then 18 Passport Offices. Since                       
 then the number of Passport Offices has increased with no additional                          
 sanctioned strength and work has grown tremendously. The cadre strength was                   
 clearly inadequate to handle the increasing number of applications. In                        
 order to remedy this situation, Government have sanctioned 400 additional                     
 posts in the Central Passport Organization. The necessary formalities to                      
 fill these posts are in the process of being completed.                                       
                                                                                               
 (c) Delhi Passport Office has been partially computerised: details of all                     
 passport applications received in the past two years are on a computerised                    
 database. The computerisation of CPV Division is underway and a number of                     
 software programmes relating to countrywide data on passport receipts and                     
 issues, miscellaneous services granted by the Passport Offices, cases of                      
 lost and damaged passports, complaints and grievances and data on Indians                     
 arrested abroad or who have died abroad as well as foreigners arrested in                     
 India or who have died in India, are available on the database. The                           
 necessary sanctions for computerisation of the Regional Passport Office,                      
 Bombay and for the extension of computerisation in CPV Division have been                     
 issued. The work has thus far been entrusted to the National Informatics                      
 Centre (NIC) which is in the process of acquiring the necessary hardware.                     
 -112>                                                                                         
                                                                                               
 The experience of computerisation thus far has been limited but extremely                     
 useful, since it has established that mere computerisation, without a                         
 review and streamlining of procedures for passport issue, would not result                    
 in meeting the objective of reducing delays in the issue of passports.                        
 Accordingly, the' Government has initiated an exercise to examine the                         
 entire system of issue of passports with a view to tightening procedures                      
 and reducing delays without sacrificing security considerations.                              
                                                                                               
 (d) Passport fraud continues to be a problem. An inter-Ministerial group is                   
 examining methods to make the passport booklet more secure and resistant to                   
 tampering besides working out the plans for making the passport booklets                      
 compatible with agreed international standards for machine readability.                       
                                                                                               
 To facilitate travel of Members of Parliament, Supreme Court Judges, Heads                    
 of National Academic Institutions, their spouses and dependent children                       
 under 18 years within the SAARC countries, SAARC stickers enabling                            
 visa-free entry into all SAARC member countries were introduced with effect                   
 from I March 1992. implementation of this scheme is handled by the PV II                      
 Section of the CPV Division.                                                                  
                                                                                               
 A Bill to amend the Passports Act, 1967 has been passed by Parliament it                      
 was passed by the Lok Sabha in December 1992 and by the Rajya Sabha during                    
 the Budget Session, 1993. The Bill inter alia aims to allow the Government                    
 to fix the fees for passport services commensurate with the cost of such                      
 services and to increase the penalties for violations of the Act.                             
                                                                                               
 The CPV Division did 1,60,401 attestations in 1992. The matter of charging                    
 a fee for attestation is under active consideration.                                          
 -113> During 1992, several consular cases were handled with reference to                      
 problem of Indian nationals abroad. Figures regarding various categories of                   
 cases may be seen at Appendix IX There are at present nine active                             
 extradition requests from foreign countries and ten requests by India being                   
 handled by the Division.                                                                      
                                                                                               
 The responsibilities of the Division were expanded from facilitating travel                   
 abroad by Indian nationals through the issue of passports and providing                       
 consular assistance wherever necessary to coordinating other aspects of                       
 dealings with Indians overseas. It is estimated that at present there are                     
 about 10 million persons of Indian origin residing in different parts of                      
 the world. This figure includes those who continue to hold Indian                             
 citizenship and are the responsibility of the Government of India.                            
                                                                                               
 Overseas Indians are increasingly being recognised as a valuable asset for                    
 India and as a useful bridge between India and the country of their                           
 domicile. It is the policy of the Government of India that persons of                         
 Indian origin who have taken foreign nationality should identify themselves                   
 with and integrate into the mainstream of life in their country of                            
 adoption. The Government, however, remains alive to their general welfare                     
 and, in particular, to their cultural and economic interest in India.                         
                                                                                               
 Indian Missions abroad maintain close contacts with overseas Indians in a                     
 wide variety of fields and render them all possible assistance with the CPV                   
 & OI Division acting as a nodal point in India.                                               
 -114>                                                                                         
 1992                                                                                          
 15 Administration and Organization                                                            
                                                                         Top                   
 SHRI DINESH SINGH ASSUMED CHARGE AS MINISTER OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS ON 17                        
 January 1993. Earlier, Shri Madhavsinh Solanki demitted charge on 31 March                    
 1992, In the intervening period, Prime Minister, Shri P V Narasimha Rao,                      
 held charge of the Ministry of External Affairs. Shri R L Bhatia joined as                    
 Minister of State for External Affairs on 2 July 1992. Shri Eduardo                           
 Faleiro, who took over as Minister of State for External Affairs on 24 June                   
 1991, demitted charge on 17 January 1993. Shri Salman Khursheed took over                     
 as Minister of State in this Ministry on the same date.                                       
                                                                                               
 Following Government's directive on economy, it was decided that Indian                       
 Embassies in Malawi, Zaire and Colombia may be closed down. This would also                   
 help offset part of the expenditure incurred on the new Missions                              
 established in Ukraine, Kazakhstan, Belarus and Israel and the new                            
 Consulates in Shanghai in China and St. Petersberg and Vladivostok in                         
 Russia. In addition, the Consulate in Tashkent, capital of Uzbekistan, has                    
 been upgraded to an Embassy.                                                                  
                                                                                               
 The Ministry, therefore, now has 144 Resident Missions/Posts aborad                           
 including the three slated for closure.                                                       
                                                                                               
 There has been a major reorganization and streamlining of the work at                         
 Headquarters to reflect the changes in the global scenario. Some                              
 Territorial Divisions have been merged to ensure better coordination of                       
 policies in the concerned area. New Divisions have also been created to                       
 enable the Ministry to focus more closely on developments within the                          
 region. For work of specialised nature, separate Units have been set up                       
 where required. The list of Divisions is given at Appendix XVIII.                             
                                                                                               
 A regular time schedule is being adhered to for holding the meetings of the                   
 various Boards which recommend postings and transfers of officials at all                     
 levels. Greater transparency has been introduced in the posting procedures                    
 and the available posts are circulated well in advance to all concerned                       
 officials at headquarters and abroad.                                                         
 -115>                                                                                         
                                                                                               
 The Departmental Promotion Committees to consider promotion to various                        
 grades are being convened with minimum possible delay.                                        
                                                                                               
 The meetings of the Joint Consultative Machinery for redressal of staff                       
 grievances are also being held regularly.                                                     
                                                                                               
 55 vacancies of Heads of Missions which arose from time to time have been                     
 filled since July 1991 and periods for which Missions functioned without a                    
 Head was kept to the absolute minimum.                                                        
                                                                                               
 The total strength of IFS and IFS(B) at Headquarters and Indian Missions                      
 and Posts abroad is 3396. This includes certain posts borne on the budget                     
 of Ministry of Commerce but excludes ex-cadred posts and those held in                        
 abeyance. In addition, 9 posts are held by ex-cadre HOMs. The cadre-wise                      
 strength is at Appendix X. The list of officers qualified in various                          
 foreign languages is at Appendix XII.                                                         
                                                                                               
 The Ministry continued its efforts for acquisition of properties and                          
 construction of buildings for Indian Missions abroad particularly in those                    
 cities where real estate market was favourable. Purchase of five apartments                   
 in Washington for Indian Embassy officers was finalised.                                      
                                                                                               
 The Regional Passport Office, Delhi, is to move to Bhikaji Cama Place, on                     
 acquisition of space in that building complex.                                                
                                                                                               
 Construction work in the Chancery-cum-Residence projects at Dubai and                         
 Kuwait was completed during the year. Construction work in the                                
 Chancerycum-Residence projects at Kuala Lumpur and New York would also be                     
 completed during the year.                                                                    
                                                                                               
 Tenders for construction of Chancery-cum-Residence projects at Riyadh have                    
 been floated and the tender documents for Indira Gandhi Centre for Indian                     
 Culture at Port Louis are being finalised. Pre-construction planning for                      
 projects at Abu Dhabi, Beijing, Islamabad Phase II, Kathmandu, Kiev,                          
 Moscow, Muscat and Tashkent is on hand.                                                       
                                                                                               
 Administrative inspections of Indian Missions in Dhaka, Canberra, Sydney,                     
 Wellington, Bangkok, Cairo and Nairobi were carried out by the Foreign                        
 Service Inspectors (FSIs) with the objective of reviewing and improving the                   
 functioning of these Missions. Soon after the establishment of formal                         
 diplomatic relations with Israel, the FSIs visited Tel Aviv to set up the                     
 new Indian Mission.                                                                           
                                                                                               
 Computers have been supplied to several more Divisions in the Ministry and                    
 in Missions abroad with a view to increasing efficiency.                                      
 -116>                                                                                         
 1992                                                                                          
 16 Foreign Service Training Institute.                                                        
                                                                         Top                   
 THE FOREIGN SERVICE TRAINING INSTITUTE INTRODUCED CHANGES IN EMPHASIS which                   
 included the re-modelling of programmes to acquaint participants with the                     
 new economic policies, and the introduction of language courses in the                        
 Basic Professional Courses which are held several times every year. It also                   
 gave a thrust to inter-institutional interaction, and held special                            
 programmes for diplomats from friendly foreign countries requesting for                       
 training here.                                                                                
                                                                                               
 As a result, 13 diplomats from 6 newly independent Central Asian countries                    
 attended the first such professional course from 30 September to 30                           
 November 1992. The programme for these diplomats included the study of                        
 diplomatic practice and protocol, international law, formulation and                          
 implementation of foreign policy, training in computer skills, effective                      
 communication and representational skills. In their efforts to set up their                   
 diplomatic services, these newly independent countries had projected their                    
 requirements to the Institute or the Government of India. The second                          
 professional course for diplomats commenced on 18 January 1993 and had 15                     
 diplomats from the ANC, and 11 others from Hungary, Romania, Kyrghyzstan,                     
 Kazakhstan, Uzbekistan, Vietnam and Zambia. The training was adjusted to                      
 meet the needs of these countries, as appropriate.                                            
                                                                                               
 Another feature was the holding of an orientation-cum-briefing programme                      
 for Heads of Indian Missions and Posts. The first such programme took place                   
 from 30 March to 10 April 1992. In this programme, emphasis was given to                      
 the new economic policies of Government. Such programmes are being planned                    
 for the future also.                                                                          
                                                                                               
 In keeping with the idea of improving FSTI's contacts with similar                            
 institutes abroad, the Dean visited Mexico from 23 to 25 September 1992 to                    
 attend the meeting of Association of Directors of Diplomatic Academies &                      
 Institutes of International Relations (ADDAIIR). To further this effort,                      
 delegations from Zimbabwe, Sierra Leone and Malaysia visited the Institute                    
 during the period. Efforts are being made to widen inter-institutional                        
 interaction.                                                                                  
 -117>                                                                                         
                                                                                               
 The language laboratory was set-up and made functional. It has been widely                    
 used this year.                                                                               
                                                                                               
 Under a UNDP Project, one Foreign Service Officer was sent for M A Degree                     
 Course in international law, diplomacy and international economics to                         
 Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy, Tufts University, for the academic                      
 year 1992-93 which commenced from September 1992.                                             
                                                                                               
 Apart from these features, the basic functions of the FSTI continued with                     
 the training of IFS Probationers and of members of staff posted abroad,                       
 etc. There had been a special thrust in respect of the latter towards area                    
 and language orientation, as also familiarity with operating computers for                    
 word processing and Electronic Mail. A list of programmes conducted is as                     
 follows:                                                                                      
                                                                                               
 (i) Professional Course in Diplomacy and International Relations for IFS                      
 Probationers (1991 batch) (15 participants)*                                                  
                                                                                               
 (ii) Orientation-cum-Briefing Programme for HOM/HOPs (24 participants)                        
                                                                                               
 (iii) "Introduction to India"-Third Familiarisation Programme for Diplomats                   
 (23 participants)                                                                             
                                                                                               
 (iv) Sixth Orientation Programme for Spouses (13 participants)                                
                                                                                               
 (v) Professional Course for Diplomats from Central Asian countries (13                        
 participants)                                                                                 
                                                                                               
 (vi) 31st, 32nd and 33rd Basic Professional Courses for IFS (B) personnel                     
 being posted abroad (36, 49, and 49 participants respectively) *In the                        
 initial part of this course, some trainees from friendly foreign countries                    
 were also present.                                                                            
 -118>                                                                                         
 1992                                                                                          
 17 Implementation of Official Language Policy and Propagation of Hindi                        
 Abroad                                                                                        
                                                                         Top                   
 UNLIKE OTHER MINISTRIES/DEPARTMENTS, THIS MINISTRY HAS MULTIPLE                               
 responsibilities: implementation of Official Language Policy of the Union                     
 of India at Headquarters, Regional Passport Offices located in India and                      
 Indian Missions/Posts abroad, and propagation of Hindi abroad through                         
 Indian Missions and Posts. The whole set of work is accomplished by the                       
 Hindi Section of the Ministry. In addition, Hindi Section also caters to                      
 the entire translation work from English to Hindi and vice- versa of the                      
 Ministry, Passport Offices and Indian Missions/Posts abroad.                                  
                                                                                               
 To facilitate the use of Hindi in the Ministry, its Passport offices and                      
 Indian Missions abroad and also to provide guidance, where necessary, there                   
 is a Hindi Advisory Committee in the Ministry. The Official Language                          
 Implementation Committee, headed by Joint Secretary (Admn), is working to                     
 oversee the progressive use of Hindi in the official work.                                    
                                                                                               
 The Ministry continued with various Hindi Schemes. Workshops were organized                   
 for those having working knowledge in Hindi in order to remove their                          
 hesitation in doing their official work in Hindi. A Hindi Module for IFS                      
 probationers of 1991 batch was also organized. A phased programme has also                    
 been chalked out to organize similar workshops in various Passport Offices                    
 in, India!                                                                                    
                                                                                               
 During the year under review, Hindi Week was observed and various                             
 Competitions were organized at the Headquarters, in some of the Indian                        
 Missions abroad and also in some of the Passport Offices located in India                     
 with a view to create an atmosphere conducive to use of Hindi in these                        
 offices.                                                                                      
 -119>                                                                                         
                                                                                               
 The Ministry has purchased 50 Devanagari Typewriters with a view to                           
 achieving the target set in the annual programme regarding implementation                     
 of the Official Language Policy of the Government for the year 1992-93.                       
 Passport Office, Hyderabad, whereof 80% staff possesses working knowledge                     
 of Hindi, has been notified under Rule 10(4) of the Official Languages                        
 Rules 1976 thereby increasing the number of notified Passport Offices under                   
 this Rule to 7. Computer Cell of the Ministry has also chalked out a phased                   
 programme of introducing bilingual capacity in the computers installed in                     
 the Ministry.                                                                                 
                                                                                               
 With a view to assessing the progress in implementation of Official                           
 Language Policy of the Union in the Passport Offices, Officers from Hindi                     
 Section have inspected Passport Offices located at Bhubaneshwar, Patna,                       
 Calcutta, Cochin, Trivandrum, Bangalore, Madras, Calicut and                                  
 Tiruchirapalli. Committee of Parliament on Official Language also inspected                   
 the Passport Offices in Hyderabad and Madras with the same objective.                         
                                                                                               
 This year too, the Ministry continued with the Rajbhasha Running Shield                       
 scheme for its Passport Offices located in India to encourage them to do                      
 their maximum work in Hindi. As a result, Passport Offices at Ahmedabad,                      
 Bhopal, Delhi and Lucknow gave good account of themselves in this field.                      
                                                                                               
 As regards propagation of Hindi abroad, sets of standard Hindi literature                     
 were sent to Indian Missions abroad this year also. We received demands for                   
 Hindi teaching material, Hindi books for research scholars, Hindi                             
 magazines, typewriters, etc from a number of our Missions abroad and                          
 requisite material was supplied to them.                                                      
                                                                                               
 Indian Embassy in Seoul assisted the Hangkuk University in organizing a                       
 Hindi essay elocution competition in which Korean Students of Hindi                           
 participated with great enthusiasm. The Ministry extended help in sending                     
 gift items and books for the function. Similar function was organized by                      
 Indian Embassy in Paramaribo (Suriname) for which gift items were again                       
 sent by the Ministry. On the special demand of Indian High Commission in                      
 Georgetown books worth over Rs 2 lakh were sent to it for donation to local                   
 organizations engaged in teaching of Hindi.                                                   
                                                                                               
 The Ministry liaised between Indian Missions and the Department of                            
 Education and Central Hindi Institute to ensure coordination and smooth and                   
 timely execution of work related to the nomination, travel and enrolments                     
 of foreign students coming to India on Government of India scholarship to                     
 study Hindi at the Central Hindi Institute.                                                   
 -120>                                                                                         
                                                                                               
 Classes for the children of the officials of the Missions and members of                      
 staff of other offices of Central Government located abroad continued to be                   
 held by Indian Missions for which all suitable help was accorded.                             
                                                                                               
 An encouraging picture is emerging as a result of the efforts of the                          
 Ministry to propagate Hindi abroad and it is hoped that more will be                          
 accomplished through sustained efforts in this direction.                                     
 -121>                                                                                         
 1992                                                                                          
 18 Cultural Relations                                                                         
                                                                         Top                   
 THE INDIAN COUNCIL FOR CULTURAL RELATIONS, FOUNDED IN 1950 WITH THE                           
 objective of establishing and strengthening cultural relations and mutual                     
 understanding between India and other countries of the world, has been                        
 steadfastly working towards this direction.                                                   
                                                                                               
 One of the major highlights of this year was the organization of First                        
 South Asian Festival of SAARC countries. The Festival was planned in the                      
 spirit of SAARC, as a people-to-people event, aimed at enhancing the                          
 interaction and affinities among the people of SAARC countries.                               
                                                                                               
 The Festival was inaugurated on 9 October 1992 at Teen Murti House Lawns by                   
 Prime Minister, Shri P V Narasimha Rao, and continued till 24 October 1992.                   
 All the seven countries of the region participated. The delegation from                       
 each country was led by a Minister. The closing event of. the Festival was                    
 held in Trivandrum on 24 October 1992. Vice President, Shri K R Narayanan,                    
 was the chief guest at the closing event.                                                     
                                                                                               
 The Festival had several components as detailed below:                                        
                                                                                               
 1. Performing Arts The best traditions of the performing arts from each of                    
 the seven SAARC countries with the focus on the people, on folk music and                     
 dance were presented. More than 300 artistes took part in various                             
 performances.                                                                                 
                                                                                               
 2. Exhibitions                                                                                
                                                                                               
 (a) Masterpieces of Classical Art Unique exhibits highlighting the 5000                       
 years of civilization and heritage of SAARC countries including the                           
 original pieces from Taxila, Mohenjodaro, Harappa and the Gandhara period                     
 were shown.                                                                                   
                                                                                               
 (b) Masters of Contemporary Art Consisted of works by Zainul Abedin                           
 (Bangladesh), Sanjay Dorji (Bhutan), Satish Gujral (India), Ahmed Abbas                       
 (Maldives), MAR Chughtai (Pakistan) and George Keyt (Sri Lanka).                              
 -122>                                                                                         
                                                                                               
 (c) Young, Contemporary Artists from SAARC countries                                          
                                                                                               
 (d) Crafts with Craftsmen in Action                                                           
                                                                                               
 (e) Exhibition of Children's Paintings                                                        
                                                                                               
 (f) Exhibition of Photographs on the Theme 'My Land My People'                                
                                                                                               
 3. Seminars                                                                                   
                                                                                               
 (a) Future Potential for Cultural and Educational Links and Interaction                       
 among SAARC countries                                                                         
                                                                                               
 (b) Contemporary Literary Scene: A Search for Roots ?                                         
                                                                                               
 (c) SAARC Media Dialogue                                                                      
                                                                                               
 4. SAARC Film Festival                                                                        
                                                                                               
 Events of the Festival were held in the Union Territories of Delhi and                        
 Chandigarh and in other 30 cities and towns in Andhra Pradesh, Assam,                         
 Gujarat, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Punjab,                      
 Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal.                                         
                                                                                               
 To coordinate the various components of the Festival a National Organizing                    
 Committee was constituted. Prime Minister, Shri P V Narasimha Rao, was the                    
 Patron of the Organizing Committee. Shri Eduardo Faleiro (the then Minister                   
 of State for External Affairs) and Shri R L Bhatia (Minister of State for                     
 External Affairs) were its Co-Chairmen.                                                       
                                                                                               
 Another significant event of this year was the Festival of China in India.                    
 The Festival of China in India was jointly announced in December 1991 by                      
 the Prime Minister, Shri P V Narasimha Rao, and the Chinese Premier, Mr Li                    
 Peng, during the latter's visit to India. India was the first country to                      
 which China sent a major cultural festival. The festival consisted of                         
 exhibitions, seminars and talks, performing arts events, TV films and film                    
 festival. It opened on 2 December 1992 at Siri Fort Auditorium with a                         
 Performance by the Shandong Peking Opera. Over 80 performers visited India                    
 during the festival. Apart from the Opera, a major presentation of                            
 Acrobatics was held in a number of cities in India. The third major                           
 performing art event was the presentation by 15- member Puppet Art                            
 Ensemble. The Painting Exhibition, displayed at the National Gallery of                       
 Modem Art in Delhi, consisted of 60 oil paintings, 30 traditional style                       
 paintings and 21 works of calligraphy. The exhibition also travelled to                       
 Bombay. Apart from this, two other exhibitions namely that of photographs                     
 entitled "'China in Prosperity" consisting of 150 photographs and of                          
 Chinese handicrafts were also on view.                                                        
 -123>                                                                                         
                                                                                               
 Other major performances organized by the Council were as follows:                            
 1 4-member Musical Group 'Southern Crossings' (Australia).                                    
                                                                                               
 2 8-member Philippe Genty Group (France).                                                     
                                                                                               
 3 6-member Musical Group 'Sextet' (Egypt).                                                    
                                                                                               
 4 15-member Theatre Group 'Tarnima' (Egypt).                                                  
                                                                                               
 5 El Cuarteto Musical Group (Venezuela).                                                      
                                                                                               
 6 12-member Kustbandet Jazz Group (Sweden).                                                   
                                                                                               
 7 5-member Johnson Mountain Boys Group (USA).                                                 
                                                                                               
 8 5-member Mimi Lorenzini Jazz Group (France).                                                
                                                                                               
 9 6-member Clarian Fracture Zone Jazz Group (Australia).                                      
                                                                                               
 10 3-member Brahm. Trio Salzburg Group (Austria).                                             
                                                                                               
 11 21-member Century Theatre (UK).                                                            
                                                                                               
 12 22-member Philippines Ballet Group (Philippines).                                          
                                                                                               
 13 Kanze School of NOH Theatre (Japan).                                                       
                                                                                               
 The 1991 Maulana Abul Kalam Azad Memorial Lecture was delivered by former                     
 President of India, Shri R Venkataraman, on 7 May 1992 at Parliament House                    
 Annexe. The theme of the lecture was "Maulana. Azad and the Unity of                          
 India".                                                                                       
                                                                                               
 The 1991 Jawaharlal Nehru Award for International Understanding was                           
 conferred on Smt Aruna Asaf Ali, the veteran freedom fighter and social                       
 worker. The function was held on 14 November 1992 at Ashok Hall,                              
 Rashtrapati Bhavan.                                                                           
                                                                                               
 During the period under review, the Council sponsored 61 performing                           
 cultural troupes to participate in important international festivals as                       
 well as to give individual performances at the invitation of foreign                          
 governments and institutions abroad. The artists and troupes sent abroad                      
 included:                                                                                     
 1 20-member Dance group of Dr (Mrs) Kanak Rele (visited North Korea and                       
 Singapore).                                                                                   
                                                                                               
 2 Ms Naina. Devi (visited USA).                                                               
                                                                                               
 3 27-Member Chorus Repertory Theatre Group led by Shri Rattan Thiyam                          
 (visited Japan).                                                                              
                                                                                               
 4 9-member Bharatanatyam troupe led by Ms Saroja Vaidyanathan (visited                        
 Nepal).                                                                                       
 -124>                                                                                         
                                                                                               
 5 5-member Kathak dance troupe led by Ms Uma Sharma (visited Canada).                         
                                                                                               
 6 7-member Bharatanatyam troupe led by Dr Padma Subrahmanyam (visited                         
 Indonesia).                                                                                   
                                                                                               
 7 8-member Odissi dance troupe led by Ms Sanjukta Panigrahi (visited France                   
 and USA).                                                                                     
                                                                                               
 8 Shri T N Krishnan, Violinist (visited Sri Lanka).                                           
                                                                                               
 9 Pt Hari Prasad Chaurasia, Flutist and Mr M S Gopalakrishnan, Violinist                      
 (visited South Africa, Botswana and Mozambique).                                              
                                                                                               
 10 5-member Penaaz Masani group (visited Mauritius, Seychelles and Kenya).                    
                                                                                               
 11 5-member Kathak dance troupe of Kumkum Dhar (visited Pakistan).                            
                                                                                               
 12 4-member Shovana Narayan troupe (visited Bangladesh).                                      
                                                                                               
 13 11-member Malika Sarabhai troupe (visited Mexico and Peru).                                
                                                                                               
 14 Pt Jasraj with 5 accompanists (visited Pakistan).                                          
                                                                                               
 15 Dagar Brothers with 4 accompanists (visited France and Hungary).                           
                                                                                               
 The Council also sponsored the visit of various scholars, intellectuals,                      
 journalists abroad. The total number of such visits was 74 and some of the                    
 prominent persons were:                                                                       
                                                                                               
 1 Dr Raja Ramanna, former Minister (visited Mauritius).                                       
                                                                                               
 2 Prof Andre Beteille, Professor of Sociology (visited USA).                                  
                                                                                               
 3 Prof Upendra Baxi, Vice-Chancellor, University of Delhi (visited USA).                      
                                                                                               
 4 Shri Basu Bhattacharyya, Film Director (visited Canada).                                    
                                                                                               
 5 Dr Karan Singh, former Minister (visited China, Mongolia and Hong Kong).                    
                                                                                               
 6 Justice C Mohan, Supreme Court of India (visited Israel).                                   
                                                                                               
 7 Shri Mulk Raj Anand, Writer (visited China).                                                
                                                                                               
 8 Shri B R Nanda, former Director, Nehru Memorial Museum (visited                             
 Mauritius).                                                                                   
                                                                                               
 Besides, a 13-member delegation headed by Dr Kapila Vatsyayan was sponsored                   
 to Indonesia to participate in the 9th International Ramayana Conference.                     
 Council also received 36 visitors from various countries of the world.                        
 -125>                                                                                         
                                                                                               
 During this period the Council sent 26 visiting professors of Indian                          
 studies to the following countries:                                                           
                                                                                               
 1 Afghanistan (Sanskrit & Ancient Indian History, Culture and Archaeology).                   
                                                                                               
 2 Bulgaria (Hindi).                                                                           
                                                                                               
 3 Belgium (Hindi).                                                                            
                                                                                               
 4 China (Hindi).                                                                              
                                                                                               
 5 Cuba (Hindi).                                                                               
                                                                                               
 6 Czech and Slovak Federal Republics (Sanskrit/Hindi).                                        
                                                                                               
 7 Finland (Hindi).                                                                            
                                                                                               
 8 Germany (Hindi).                                                                            
                                                                                               
 9 Guyana (History, Hindi).                                                                    
                                                                                               
 10 Hungary (Hindi).                                                                           
                                                                                               
 11 Indonesia (Sanskrit, Tamil, History, Archaeology).                                         
                                                                                               
 12 Iran (Sanskrit).                                                                           
                                                                                               
 13 Korea-South (Hindi).                                                                       
                                                                                               
 14 Laos (Asian Civilization).                                                                 
                                                                                               
 15 Lebanon (Indian Philosophy & Comparative Religion, Management Studies).                    
                                                                                               
 16 Mexico (Hindi, History, Sociology, Sanskrit).                                              
                                                                                               
 17 Poland (Hindi, Tamil).                                                                     
                                                                                               
 18 Romania (Hindi).                                                                           
                                                                                               
 19 Senegal (Dravidian Linguistics).                                                           
                                                                                               
 20 Singapore (Indian Studies).                                                                
                                                                                               
 21 Suriname (Hindi).                                                                          
                                                                                               
 22 Trinidad & Tobago (History, Sociology, Hindi).                                             
                                                                                               
 23 Thailand (Sanskrit, Indian Philosophy).                                                    
                                                                                               
 24 Turkey (Hindi/Sanskrit).                                                                   
                                                                                               
 25 Russia (Hindi).                                                                            
                                                                                               
 26 Yugoslavia (Hindi).                                                                        
 -126>                                                                                         
                                                                                               
 Council is also responsible for the welfare of foreign students studying in                   
 India. Council arranged admission of 550 students including 133 in                            
 engineering, 10 in medical, 6 in Pharmacologic. During the year, Council                      
 has also been entrusted with administering SAARC Scholarship/Fellowship                       
 Scheme. A meeting of the Foreign Students Advisors was also held during the                   
 year in which about 60 Advisors from various Indian Universities including                    
 a few Vice-Chancellors were present. Important policy decisions to                            
 streamline the placement of students, counselling and accommodation were                      
 taken in this meeting.                                                                        
                                                                                               
 Apart from publishing the six quarterly journals in English, Hindi, French,                   
 Spanish and Arabic, the Council also published two volumes on 'Science: A                     
 Supra National Activity' by Andrew Huxley and the 'Maulana Azad and the                       
 Unity of India' by Shri R Venkataraman.                                                       
                                                                                               
 The Council also participated in the 44th Frankfurt Book Fair through                         
 National Book Trust.                                                                          
                                                                                               
 A Joint Meeting of the Indo-US Sub-Commission on Education and Culture was                    
 held in India in February 1992 to review the Sub-Commissions activities                       
 over the last 18 years and to discuss the future programmes in such a way                     
 which would further strengthen the points between the world's two largest                     
 democracies. Under the auspices of the Indo-US Sub- Commission, two                           
 workshops were organized, namely Indo-US Music Workshop and Indo-US                           
 Writers' Workshop. The Music Workshop was held in Delhi, Madras and Bombay.                   
 The Writers' Workshop was held in Delhi and Bombay.                                           
                                                                                               
 So far as the Library of the Council is concerned valuable material of                        
 Maulana Azad collection is being documented. The first phase of the                           
 bibliography is nearing completion in which publications in English, Hindi                    
 and Urdu are being covered. In the second phase of documentation, books and                   
 manuscripts in Arabic and Persian will be undertaken. Besides this, 150                       
 books have been purchased during the year.                                                    
                                                                                               
 Presently the Council maintains 8 cultural centres in different parts of                      
 the world, namely, Cairo (Egypt), Berlin (Germany), Georgetown (Guyana),                      
 Jakarta (Indonesia), London (UK), Moscow (Russia), Port Louis (Mauritius),                    
 Paramaribo (Suriname). The Council has 8 regional offices located at                          
 Bangalore, Bombay, Calcutta, Chandigarh, Hyderabad, Lucknow, Madras and                       
 Trivandrum.                                                                                   
 -127>                                                                                         
                                                                                               
 1992                                                                                          
 APPENDIX - I Division-wise List of Countries                                                  
                                                                         Top                   
 Ministry of External Affairs-Division-wise List of Countries and                              
 Regions.                                                                                      
                                                                                               
 AFRICA DIVISION                                                                               
                                                                                               
 1     Angola                   16 Gambia           30 Nigeria                                 
 2     Benin                    17 Ghana            31 Rwanda                                  
 3     Botswana                 18 Guinea           32 Sao Tome &                              
                                                    Principe                                   
 4     Burkina Faso             19 Guinea Bissau                                               
 5     Burundi                  20 Kenya            33 Senegal                                 
 6     Cameroon                 21 Lesotho          34 Seychelles                              
 7     Cape Verde Islands       22 Liberia          35 Sierra Leone                            
 8     Central African Republic 23 Madagascar       36 South Africa                            
 9     Chad                     24 Malawi           37 Swaziland                               
 10    Comoros                  25 Mali             38 Tanzania                                
 11    Congo                    26 Mauritius        39 Togo                                    
 12    Cote d'Ivoire            27 Mozambique       40 Uganda                                  
 13    Equatorial Guinea        28 Namibia          41 Zaire                                   
 14    Ethiopia                 29 Niger            42 Zambia                                  
 15    Gabon                                        43 Zimbabwe                                
       AMS DIVISION                                                                            
 1     Canada                   2 United States of  3 The Bahamas                              
                                America                                                        
       ASEAN DIVISION                                                                          
 1     Brunei                   3 Malaysia          5 Singapore                                
 2     Indonesia                4 Philippines       6 Thailand                                 
 -131>                                                                                         
       ASIA PACIFIC DIVISION                                                                   
 1     Australia                7 Marshall Islands  14 Society Islands                         
 2     Cook Islands             8 Nauru             15 Tonga                                   
 3     Democratic People's      9 New Zealand       16 Tuvalu                                  
       Republic of Korea        10 New Caledonia    17 UN Trust Territories                    
                                                    in                                         
 4     Fiji                     11 Papua New Guinea South Pacific                              
 5     Japan                    12 Republic of      18 Vanuatu                                 
                                Korea                                                          
 6     Kiribati                 13 Solomon Islands  19 Western Samoa                           
       BSM DIVISION                                                                            
 1     Bangladesh               3 Maldives          5 Sri Lanka                                
 2     Indian Ocean             4 Myanmar                                                      
       CENTRAL ASIA DIVISION                                                                   
 1     Azerbaijan               4 Tajikistan        6 Turkmenistan                             
 2     Kazakhstan               5 Turkey            7 Uzbekistan                               
 3     Kyrghyzstan                                                                             
       EE DIVISION                                                                             
 1     Albania                  8 Estonia           15 Romania                                 
 2     Armenia                  9 Georgia           16 Russia                                  
 3     Belarus                  10 Hungary          17 Slovak Republic                         
 4     Bosnia-Herzegovina       11 Latvia           18 Slovenia                                
 5     Bulgaria                 12 Lithuania        19 Ukraine                                 
 6     Croatia                  13 Moldova          20 Yugos1avia (FRY-                        
 7     Czech Republic           14 Poland           Serbia and Montenegro)                     
       EW DIVISION                                                                             
 1     Austria                  2 Belgium           3 Cyprus                                   
 -132>                                                                                         
 4     Denmark                  12 Ireland          20 Portugal                                
 5     Finland                  13 Italy            21 San Marino                              
 6     France                   14 Liechtenstein    22 Spain                                   
 7     Germany, Federal         15 Luxembourg       23 Sweden                                  
       Republic of                                                                             
 8     Gibraltar                16 Malta            24 Switzerland                             
 9     Greece                   17 Monaco           25 United Kingdom of                       
 10    Holy See, The            18 Netherlands      Great Britain and                          
 11    Iceland                  19 Norway           Northern Ireland                           
       GULF DIVISION                                                                           
 1     Bahrain                  4 Oman              7 Saudi Arabia                             
 2     Iraq                     5 Qatar             8 United Arab Emirates                     
 3     Kuwait                   6 Republic of Yemen                                            
       IPA DIVISION                                                                            
 1     Afghanistan              2 Iran              3 Pakistan                                 
       LAC DIVISION                                                                            
 1     Antigua & Barbuda        12 Dominican        23 Panama                                  
                                Rebublic                                                       
 2     Argentina                13 Ecuador          24 Paraguay                                
 3     Barbados                 14 El Salvador      25 Peru                                    
 4     Belize                   15 Grenada          26 St Christopher                          
                                                    and Nevis                                  
 5     Bolivia                  16 Guatemala        27 St Lucia                                
 6     Brazil                   17 Guyana           28 St Vincent and                          
                                                    the Grenadines                             
 7     Chile                    18 Haiti                                                       
 8     Colombia                 19 Honduras         29 Suriname                                
 9     Costa Rica               20 Jamaica          30 Trinidad &                              
                                                    Tobago                                     
 10    Cuba                     21 Mexico           31 Uruguay                                 
 11    Commonwealth of          22 Nicaragua        32 Venezuela                               
       Dominica                                                                                
 -133>                                                                                         
       NORTH EAST DIVISION                                                                     
 1     Bhutan                   3 Hong Kong         5 Nepal                                    
 2     China                    4 Mongolia          6 Taiwan                                   
       SOUTH EAST ASIA DIVISION                                                                
 1     Cambodia                 2 Laos              3 Vietnam                                  
       WANA DIVISION                                                                           
 1     Algeria                  8 Libya             14 Sudan                                   
 2     Djibouti                 9 Mauritania        15 Syria                                   
 3     Egypt                    10 Morocco          16 Tunisia                                 
 4     Israel                   11 Palestine                                                   
 5     Jordan                   12 SADR (Sahrawi                                               
                                Arab                                                           
                                Democratic                                                     
                                Republic)                                                      
 6     League of Arab States                                                                   
 7     Lebanon                  13 Somalia                                                     
 -134>                                                                                         
                                                                                               
 1992                                                                                          
                                                                                               
 APPENDIX - II Treaties/Conventions/Agreements                                                 
                                                                                               
 Treaties/Conventions/Agreements concluded or renewed by India with other                      
 countries in 1992,                                                                            
 S NO TITLE OF CONVENTIONS/       DATE OF    DATE OF       DATE ON WHICH                       
      TREATIES/AGREEMENTS ETC     SIGNATURE/ RATIFICATION  ENTERED INTO                        
      MULTILATERAL                ADOPTION   ACCESSION OR  FORCE                               
                                             ACCEPTANCE                                        
                                                                                               
                                                                                               
                                                                                               
 1    Protocol relating to an     25.10.1990  10.6.1992                                        
      amendment to Article 50                                                                  
      (a)of the Convention on                                                                  
      International Civil                                                                      
      Aviation                                                                                 
                                                                                               
 2    Protocol relating to an     6.10.1989  11.8.1992                                         
      amendment to Article 56                                                                  
      of the Convention on                                                                     
      International Civil                                                                      
      Aviation                                                                                 
                                                                                               
 3    Montreal Protocol on        16.9.1987  4.6.1992     1.1.1989                             
      Substances that                                                                          
      Deplete the Ozone Layer                                                                  
                                                                                               
 4    Extension of the            27.9.1991  17.8.1992    1.10.1992                            
      International Coffee                                                                     
      Agreement, 1983, till 30                                                                 
      September 1993                                                                           
                                                                                               
 5    Convention concerning       25.6.1985  20.2.1992    1.4.1993                             
      Labour Statistics                                                                        
      (Convention 160)                                                                         
                                                                                               
 6    Agreement on the Network    8.11.1988  9.4.1992                                          
      of Aquaculture Centres in                                                                
      Asia and the      Pacific                                                                
      (NACA)                                                                                   
                                                                                               
 7    Basel Convention on the     15.3.1990  11.6.1992                                         
      Control of Trans-boundary                                                                
      Movement of Hazardous                                                                    
      Wastes and their Disposal                                                                
                                                                                               
 8    Convention on the Rights    20.11.1989 2.12.1992    2.9.1990                             
      of Child                                                                                 
                                                                                               
      BILATERAL                                                                                
                                                                                               
      Australia                                                                                
                                                                                               
 9    Agreement between the       31.7.1992               31.7.1992                            
      Government of the Republic                                                               
      of India and Export                                                                      
      Finance and Insurance                                                                    
      Corporation, Australia for                                                               
      Aeromagnetic Survey as                                                                   
 -135>                                                                                         
                                                                                               
      part of an Integrated                                                                    
      Study for the Exploration                                                                
      and Management of                                                                        
      Groundwater Resources in                                                                 
      Orissa                                                                                   
                                                                                               
 Bangladesh                                                                                    
                                                                                               
 10   Convention between         27.8.1991  25.5.1992                                          
      Government of the Rep-                                                                   
      ublic of India and the                                                                   
      Government of People's                                                                   
      Republic of Bangladesh                                                                   
      For the Avoidance of Do-                                                                 
      uble Taxation and Preve-                                                                 
      ntion of Fiscal Evasion                                                                  
      with respect to Taxes                                                                    
      and Income                                                                               
                                                                                               
 11   Cultural and Academic      27.5.1992                                                     
      Exchange Programme (CAEP)                                                                
      between the Republic of                                                                  
      India and the People's                                                                   
       Republic of Bangladesh for                                                              
      the years      1993, 1994 and                                                            
      1995                                                                                     
                                                                                               
      China                                                                                    
                                                                                               
 12   Consular Convention        13.12.1991 15.1.1992    30.10.1992                            
      between the Governments of                                                               
      the Republic of India and                                                                
      the People's Republic of                                                                 
      China                                                                                    
                                                                                               
      Great Britain                                                                            
                                                                                               
 13   Extradition Treaty between 22.9.1992                                                     
      the Government of the                                                                    
      Republic of India and the                                                                
      Government of the United                                                                 
      Kingdom of Great Britain                                                                 
      and Northern Ireland                                                                     
                                                                                               
 14   Agreement between the      22.9.1992                                                     
      Government of the Republic                                                               
      of India and the                                                                         
      Government of the United                                                                 
      Kingdom of Great Britain                                                                 
      and Northern Ireland                                                                     
      concerning the                                                                           
      Investigation and                                                                        
      Prosecution of Crimes and                                                                
      Tracing, Restraint Ind                                                                   
      Confiscation of the                                                                      
      Proceeds an Instruments of                                                               
      Crimes (including crimes                                                                 
      involving currency                                                                       
      transfers) and Terrorist                                                                 
      Funds                                                                                    
                                                                                               
      Jamaica                                                                                  
                                                                                               
 15   Cultural Agreement         5.10.1992                                                     
      between the Government of                                                                
      Jamaica and the Government                                                               
      of the Republic of India                                                                 
 -136>                                                                                         
                                                                                               
      Japan                                                                                    
                                                                                               
 16   Exchange of Notes between  22.6.1992                22.6.1992                            
      the Government of the                                                                    
      Republic of India and the                                                                
      Government of Japan for                                                                  
      extension of the following                                                               
      Japanese assistance to                                                                   
      India                                                                                    
                                                                                               
      (i) Grant Aid of 992                                                                     
      million Yen for import of                                                                
      Simulators for Nautical                                                                  
      and Marine Engineering                                                                   
      Education in the Lal                                                                     
      Bahadur Shastri Nautical                                                                 
      and Engineering College                                                                  
                                                                                               
      (ii) Debt Relief Grant Aid                                                               
      of 315,567 million Yen for                                                               
      the period (1.4.92 to                                                                    
      30.9.92)                                                                                 
                                                                                               
      (iii) Grant Aid of 600                                                                   
      million Yen for Increasing                                                               
      Food Production (for                                                                     
      import of fertilisers)                                                                   
                                                                                               
 17   Loan Agreement for         9.1.1992                 9.1.1992                             
      Afforestation Project in                                                                 
      Aravalli Hills between the                                                               
      Overseas Economic                                                                        
      Cooperation Fund, Japan                                                                  
      and the President of India                                                               
                                                                                               
 18   Loan Agreement for Gandhar 9.1.1992                 9.1.1992                             
      Gas Based Combined Cycle                                                                 
      Power Project (II) between                                                               
      the Overseas Economic                                                                    
      Cooperation Fund, Japan                                                                  
      and the President of India                                                               
                                                                                               
 19   Loan Agreement for         9.1.1992                 9.1.1992                             
      National Highway-2                                                                       
      Improvement Project                                                                      
      between the Overseas                                                                     
      Economic Cooperation Fund,                                                               
      Japan and the President of                                                               
      India                                                                                    
                                                                                               
 20   Loan Agreement for Urban   9.1.1992                 9.1.1992                             
      City Water Supply Project                                                                
      between the Overseas                                                                     
      Economic Cooperation Fund,                                                               
      Japan and the President of                                                               
      India                                                                                    
                                                                                               
 21   Loan Agreement for         9.1.1992                 9.1.1992                             
      Ajanta-Ellora Conservation                                                               
      and Tourism Development                                                                  
      Project between the                                                                      
      Overseas Economic                                                                        
      Cooperation Fund, Japan                                                                  
      and the President of India                                                               
                                                                                               
 22   Exchange of Notes between  27.10.1992               27.10.1992                           
      the Government of the                                                                    
      Republic of India                                                                        
 -137>                                                                                         
                                                                                               
      and the Government of                                                                    
      Japan for the following                                                                  
      OECF assisted projects:                                                                  
                                                                                               
      (i) Loan of 17,173 million                                                               
      Yen for Yamuna Action Plan                                                               
                                                                                               
      (ii) Loan of 3,806 million                                                               
      Yen for Srisailam Power                                                                  
      Transmission System                                                                      
      Project                                                                                  
                                                                                               
      (iii) Loan of 13,224                                                                     
      million Yen for Anpara B                                                                 
      Thermal Power Station                                                                    
      Construction Project (IV)                                                                
                                                                                               
      (iv) Loan of 19,538                                                                      
      million Yen for Gandhar                                                                  
      Gas Based Combined Cycle                                                                 
      Power Project (III)                                                                      
                                                                                               
      (v) Loan of 24,428 million                                                               
      Yen for Udyogmandal                                                                      
      Ammonia Plant Replacement                                                                
      Project                                                                                  
                                                                                               
 23   Exchange of Notes between  3.12.1992                3.12.1992                            
      the Government of the                                                                    
      Republic of India and                                                                    
      the Government of Japan                                                                  
      for extension of the                                                                     
      following Japanese                                                                       
      assistance to India:                                                                     
                                                                                               
      (i) Grant of 1.005 million                                                               
      Yen for exploitation of                                                                  
      Ground Water Stage-II                                                                    
                                                                                               
      (ii) Grant of 947 million                                                                
      Yen for supply of fishing                                                                
      vessels for deep sea and                                                                 
      offshore fisheries                                                                       
                                                                                               
      (iii) Debt Relief Grant                                                                  
      Aid of 289.015 million                                                                   
      Yen                                                                                      
                                                                                               
       Kazakhstan                                                                              
                                                                                               
 24   Protocol between the       3.4.1992                                                      
      Government of the Republic                                                               
      of India and the                                                                         
      Government of the Republic                                                               
      of Kazakhstan on Trade                                                                   
      Turnover and payments in                                                                 
      1992                                                                                     
                                                                                               
      Kuwait                                                                                   
                                                                                               
 25   Cooperation Agreement      15.2.1992                                                     
      between the Government of                                                                
      the Republic of India and                                                                
      the Government of the                                                                    
      State of Kuwait                                                                          
 -138>                                                                                         
                                                                                               
 26   Memorandum of              19.2.1992                                                     
      Understanding between the                                                                
      Government of the Republic                                                               
      of India and the                                                                         
      Government of State of                                                                   
      Kuwait on Cooperation in                                                                 
      the field of                                                                             
      Telecommunication                                                                        
                                                                                               
       Malaysia                                                                                
                                                                                               
 27   Agreement between the      2.11.1992                2.11.1992                            
      Governments of the                                                                       
      Republic of India and the                                                                
      Republic of Malaysia on                                                                  
      the Establishment of Joint                                                               
      Commission for Bilateral                                                                 
      Cooperation                                                                              
                                                                                               
      Malta                                                                                    
                                                                                               
 28   Agreement between the      14.1.1992                                                     
      Government of the Republic                                                               
      of India and the                                                                         
      Government of Malta on                                                                   
      Economic, Industrial,                                                                    
      Scientific and                                                                           
      Technological Cooperation                                                                
                                                                                               
 29   Cultural Agreement between 14.1.1992  27.7.1992                                          
      the Government of the                                                                    
      Republic of India and the                                                                
      Government of Malta                                                                      
                                                                                               
      Namibia                                                                                  
                                                                                               
 30   Memorandum of Understanding   17.8.1992                                                  
      between the Government                                                                   
      of the Republic of India                                                                 
      and the Government of the                                                                
      Republic of Namibia on                                                                   
      Technical Cooperation                                                                    
      between the Postal and                                                                   
      Telecommunication Agencies                                                               
                                                                                               
      Oman                                                                                     
                                                                                               
 31   Cultural and Educational   3.8.1991   20.2.1992    28.4.1992                             
      Cooperation between the                                                                  
      Government of the Republic                                                               
      of India and the                                                                         
      Government of Sultanate of                                                               
      Oman                                                                                     
                                                                                               
      Pakistan                                                                                 
                                                                                               
 32   Agreement between India    6.4.1991   9.8.1991     19.8.1992                             
      and Pakistan on Prevention                                                               
      of Air Space Violations                                                                  
      and for permitting                                                                       
      overflights and landings                                                                 
      by Military Aircraft                                                                     
                                                                                               
 33   Agreement between India    6.4.1991   9.8.1991     19.8.1992                             
      and Pakistan on Advance No-                                                              
      tice of Military Exercises,                                                              
      Manoeuvres and Troop                                                                     
      Movements                                                                                
 -139>                                                                                         
                                                                                               
 34   Joint Declaration by the   19.8.1992               19.8.1992                             
      Republic of India and the                                                                
      Islamic Republic of                                                                      
      Pakistan on Complete                                                                     
      Prohibition of Chemical                                                                  
      Weapons                                                                                  
                                                                                               
 35   Code of Conduct for        19.8.1992               19.8.1992                             
      Treatment of                                                                             
      Diplomatic/Consular                                                                      
      Personnel in India and                                                                   
      Pakistan                                                                                 
                                                                                               
      Peru                                                                                     
                                                                                               
 36   Accord on Cooperation in   2.2.1992                2.2.1992                              
      the field of Peaceful Uses                                                               
      of Nuclear Energy between                                                                
      the Atomic Energy                                                                        
      Commission of India and                                                                  
      the Peruvian Institute of                                                                
      Nuclear Energy.                                                                          
                                                                                               
      Philippines                                                                              
                                                                                               
 37   Agreement between the      29.4.1991  18.6.1992                                          
      Government of the Republic                                                               
      of India and the                                                                         
      Government of the Republic                                                               
      of Philippines for                                                                       
      Cooperation for the                                                                      
      Utilisation of Atomic                                                                    
      Energy for Peaceful                                                                      
      Purposes                                                                                 
                                                                                               
      Poland                                                                                   
                                                                                               
 38   Agreed minutes between     10.4.1992                                                     
      the Government of the Rep-                                                               
      ublic of India and the Re-                                                               
      public of Poland on the                                                                  
      Liquidation of the                                                                       
      Non-Convertible Rupee                                                                    
      Balance                                                                                  
                                                                                               
      Russian Federation                                                                       
                                                                                               
 39   Protocol between the       22.2.1992                                                     
      Government of the Republic                                                               
      of India and the Government                                                              
      of Russian Federation on                                                                 
      the Trade Turnover and                                                                   
      Payments in 1992                                                                         
                                                                                               
 40   Agreement between the      4.5.1992                4.5.1992                              
      Government of the Republic                                                               
      of India and Government of                                                               
      Russian Federation on the                                                                
      Inter-Governmental                                                                       
      Commission on Trade,                                                                     
      Economic, Scientific and                                                                 
      Technological Cooperation                                                                
                                                                                               
      Suriname                                                                                 
                                                                                               
 41   Cultural Agreement between 22.9.1992                                                     
      the Government of the                                                                    
      Republic of India and the                                                                
      Government of the Republic                                                               
      of Suriname                                                                              
 -140>                                                                                         
                                                                                               
      Syria                                                                                    
                                                                                               
 42   Agreement between the      29.7.1992               1.5.1992                              
      Government of the Republic                                                               
      of India and Government of                                                               
      Syrian Arab Republic for                                                                 
      Cooperation for Utilisation                                                              
      of Atomic Energy for                                                                     
      Peaceful Purposes                                                                        
                                                                                               
      Turkey                                                                                   
                                                                                               
 43   Agreement on Mutual        18.7.1988  12.11,1992                                         
      Judicial Assistance in                                                                   
      Civil and Commercial                                                                     
      Matters between the                                                                      
      Government of the Republic                                                               
      of India and the Government                                                              
      of the Republic of Turkey                                                                
                                                                                               
 44   Agreement on Mutual        18.7.1988  12.11.1992                                         
      Assistance in Criminal                                                                   
      Matters between the                                                                      
      Government of the Republic                                                               
      of India and the Government                                                              
      of the Republic of Turkey                                                                
                                                                                               
      Turkmenistan                                                                             
                                                                                               
 45   Agreement between the      20.4.1992                                                     
      Government of the Republic                                                               
      of India and the                                                                         
      Governments of Turkmenistan                                                              
      on Trade and Economic                                                                    
      Cooperation                                                                              
                                                                                               
      Ukraine                                                                                  
                                                                                               
 46   Treaty on Friendship and   27.3.1992  28.9.1992                                          
      Cooperation between the                                                                  
      Governments of the Republic                                                              
      of India and Ukraine                                                                     
                                                                                               
 47   Protocol on the            17.1.1992               17.1.1992                             
      Establishment of Consular                                                                
      Relations between the                                                                    
      Government of the Republic                                                               
      of India and the Government                                                              
      of Ukraine                                                                               
                                                                                               
      UNITED NATIONS DEVELOPMENT                                                               
      PROGRAMME                                                                                
                                                                                               
 48   Agreement between the      14.1.1992               14.1.1992                             
      Government of the Republic                                                               
      of India and the United                                                                  
      Nations Development                                                                      
      Programme regarding Project                                                              
      No. IND/91/029/A/01/99 on                                                                
      Application of Automative                                                                
      Techniques in Remote Sensing                                                             
      for Land Resource                                                                        
      Management                                                                               
                                                                                               
 49   Agreement between the      17.1.1992               17.1.1992                             
      Government of the Republic                                                               
      of India and the United                                                                  
 -141>                                                                                         
                                                                                               
      Nations Development                                                                      
      Programme regarding Project                                                              
      No. IND/91/103 on                                                                        
      Establishment of Technology                                                              
      Base for Powerline                                                                       
      Aggregates                                                                               
                                                                                               
 50   Agreement between the      17.1.1992               17.1.1992                             
      Government of the Republic                                                               
      of India and the United                                                                  
      Nations Development                                                                      
      Programme regarding Project                                                              
      No. IND/91/093/A/01/87 on                                                                
      Establishment of an                                                                      
      Experimental/Demonstration                                                               
      unit for Manufacturing                                                                   
      Super Purity Aluminium and                                                               
      Condenser Foil from                                                                      
      it-Feasibility Study                                                                     
                                                                                               
 51   Agreement between the      13.2.1992               13.2.1992                             
      Government of the Republic                                                               
      of India and the United                                                                  
      Nations Development                                                                      
      Programme regarding Project                                                              
      No. IND/91/011 on                                                                        
      Engineering of Structures                                                                
      for Mitigating Damage due                                                                
      to Cyclones                                                                              
                                                                                               
 52   Agreement between the      10.6.1992               10.6.1992                             
      Government of the Republic                                                               
      of India and the United                                                                  
      Nations Development                                                                      
      Programme regarding Project                                                              
      No. IND/92/033/A/01/89 on                                                                
      jute Sector Programme                                                                    
                                                                                               
 53   Agreement between the      28.5.1992               28.5.1992                             
      Government of the Republic                                                               
      of India and the United                                                                  
      Nations Development                                                                      
      Programme regarding Project                                                              
      No. IND/92/007/A/01/99:                                                                  
      Strengthening Wildlife                                                                   
      Management and                                                                           
      Eco-development Planning                                                                 
      Capabilities                                                                             
                                                                                               
 54   Agreement between India    4.9.1992                4.9.1992                              
      and UNDP regarding Project                                                               
      No. IND/92/038: Strengthe-                                                               
      ning and Developing the                                                                  
      Indian Council of Forestry                                                               
      Research and Education                                                                   
      (ICFRE)                                                                                  
                                                                                               
 55   Agreement between the      27.10.1992              16.11.1992                            
      Government of the Republic                                                               
      of India and United Nations                                                              
      Development Programme                                                                    
      regarding Project No.                                                                    
      IND/91/015/A/91/99 on                                                                    
      Meteorological                                                                           
      Applications in                                                                          
      Agriculture                                                                              
                                                                                               
 56   Agreement between the      9.1.1992                9.1.1992                              
      Government of the Republic                                                               
      of India and United Nations                                                              
      Development Programme                                                                    
      regarding Project No.                                                                    
      IND/91/100 on Monitoring                                                                 
      and Analyses of Human                                                                    
      Development Judicators                                                                   
 -142>                                                                                         
                                                                                               
 APPENDIX-II A                                                                                 
                                                                                               
 Full Powers issued during 1992.                                                               
                                                                                               
 S NO      CONVENTION/TREATY                         DATE OF FULL POWER                        
                                                                                               
 1    Full Powers in favour of Shri Kamaluddin                                                 
      Ahmed, Minister for State for Civil Supplies,                                            
      Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution for                                             
      signing:                                                                                 
                                                                                               
      (i) The Protocol on the Establishment of             24.2.1992                           
      Diplomatic Relations. between the Governments                                            
      of the Republic of India and the Republic of                                             
      Azerbaijan; and                                                                          
                                                                                               
      (ii) The Protocol on the Establishment of                                                
      Consular Relations between the Governments of                                            
      the Republic of India and Azerbaijan                                                     
                                                                                               
 2    Full Powers in favour of Shri Abid Hussain,         28.4.1992                            
      Ambassador of India to the United States of                                              
      America to sign the Protocol on Environmental                                            
      Protection to the Antarctic Treaty                                                       
                                                                                               
 3    Full Powers in favour of Dr Manmohan Singh to       28.4.1992                            
      sign the Agreement between the Government of                                             
      the Republic of India and the Government of                                              
      United Arab Emirates for the Avoidance of                                                
      Double Taxation and the prevention of Fiscal                                             
      Evasion with respect to Taxes and Income and                                             
      on Capital                                                                               
                                                                                               
 4    Full Powers in favour of Shri Kamal Nath,           28.5.1992                            
      Minister of State for Environment and Forests,                                           
      to sign the convention on Biological                                                     
      Diversity                                                                                
                                                                                               
 5    Full Powers in favour of Shri Kamal Nath,           28.5.1992                            
      Minister of State for Environment and                                                    
      Forests, to sign Framework Convention on                                                 
      Climate Change                                                                           
                                                                                               
 6    Full Powers in favour of Shri Ravinder Gupta,       11.6.1992                            
      Joint Secretary, Department of Civil Aviation                                            
      to sign the Agreement between the Government                                             
      of the Republic of India and the Government                                              
      of the People's Republic of Bulgaria relating                                            
      to Air Services                                                                          
                                                                                               
 7    Full Powers in favour of Shri B K Goswami,          8.9.1992                             
      Secretary, Department of Tourism to sign the                                             
      Agreement on Cooperation in the field of                                                 
      Tourism between the      Government of the Republic                                      
      of India and the Government of the Republic of                                           
      Hungary                                                                                  
                                                                                               
 8    Full Powers in favour of Shri Montek Singh          27.9.1992                            
      Ahluwalia, Secretary, Ministry of Finance,                                               
      Department of Economic Affairs to sign the                                               
      Convention between the Government of the                                                 
      Republic of India and the Government of                                                  
      French Republic for the avoidance of Double                                              
      Taxation and the Prevention of Fiscal Evasion                                            
      with respect to Taxes on      Income and on                                              
      Capital                                                                                  
 -143>                                                                                         
                                                                                               
 9    Full Powers in favour of Shri P K Banerji,          29.9.1992                            
      Joint Secretary, Department of Civil Aviation                                            
      to sign the Agreement regarding amending of                                              
      the Air Services Agreement between      the                                              
      Government of the Republic of India and the                                              
       Government of Saudi Arabia                                                              
 -144>                                                                                         
 1992                                                                                          
                                                                                               
 APPENDIX-III Major International Conferences/Meetings/Seminars                                
                                                                                               
                                                                                               
 Major International Conferences/Meetings/Seminars etc organized by                            
 Inter-Governmental Organizations at which Government of India was                             
 represented in 1992.                                                                          
 S NO  TITLE OF CONFERENCE          VENUE         DATE                                         
                                                                                               
 1  4th Prepcom of the United Nations  New York 2 March to 3 April 1992                        
       Conference on Environment and                                                           
       Development                                                                             
                                                                                               
 2  Informal Consultations of Bureau Paris 15 to 17 April 1992                                 
       Member of Inter-Governmental                                                            
       Negotiating Committee for Framework                                                     
       Convention on Climate Change                                                            
       (INC/FCCC)                                                                              
                                                                                               
 3     4th ILTP Joint Council Meeting Moscow 15 to 21 April 1992                               
                                                                                               
                                                                                               
 4     Bureau Meeting and the 5th Revised New York 29 April to 9 May 1992                      
       Session of the     Inter-Governmental                                                   
       Negotiating Committee for a Framework                                                   
       Convention on Climate Change                                                            
                                                                                               
 5     Conference on "Shelter, Women and       Michigan 7 to 9 may 1992                        
       Child Development"                                                                      
                                                                                               
 6     NAM Coordinating Bureau Meeting at      Bali 12 to 15 May 1992                          
       Ministerial Level                                                                       
                                                                                               
 7     Nordic UN Project Meeting: UN Reform  Helsinki 18 to 20 May 1992                        
       Issues in the Economic and Social                                                       
       Fields                                                                                  
                                                                                               
 8     ADB Regional Seminar on Project    Mani1a 18 to 29 May 1992                             
       Implementation Management                                                               
                                                                                               
 9     United Nations Conference on  Rio de Janerio 1 to 14 June 1992                          
       Environment & Development                                                               
                                                                                               
 10    Conference on Solar Energy        Florida 13 to 18 June 1992                            
                                                                                               
                                                                                               
 11    World Congress on Solar Cooking   California  19 to 20 June 1992                        
                                                                                               
                                                                                               
 12    11th Meeting of the SAARC Technical Colombo 19 to 20 June 1992                          
       Committee on Transport                                                                  
 -145>                                                                                         
                                                                                               
 13    Workshop on the State of Urbanisation Chiang Mai 6 to 11 July 1992                      
       in the Asia, Pacific Region                                                             
                                                                                               
 14    6th Meeting of UN Committee on   Geneva     6 to 17 July 1992                           
       Transport of Dangerous Goods                                                            
                                                                                               
 15    First Asian Regional Human Resource Azul Cavite 12 to 17 July 1992                      
       Development meeting of the                                                              
       UNDP/World Bank                                                                         
                                                                                               
 16    International Seminar on Rural  Tehran 28 July to 4 August 1992                         
       Centre and Settlements Planning-ESCAP                                                   
                                                                                               
 17    Negotiations for ADBTA No. 1402 Manila   10 to 14 August 1992                           
       regarding Pavement Management Study                                                     
       and National Highways                                                                   
                                                                                               
 18    Tenth Conference of Heads of State or Jakarta 1 to 6 September                          
       Government of Non-Aligned Countries              1992                                   
                                                                                               
 19    Legal issues in Water Supply    Rome  14 to 16 September 1992                           
       Management-WHO/FAO                                                                      
                                                                                               
 20    World Renewable  University of Readin19 to 23 September 1992                            
              Energy Congress                                                                  
                                                                                               
                                                                                               
 21    Urban Environmental Workshop  Bangkok  21 to 24 September 1992                          
       on the Role of the City in Environmental                                                
       Management                                                                              
                                                                                               
 22    Inter Regional Workshop on  Bangkok 21 to 25 September 1992                             
        Testing of Training Modules on Water Supply and                                        
       Sanitation-UNDESD                                                                       
                                                                                               
 23    SAARC Course on Highway  New Delhi 21 September to                                      
        and Bridge Engineering             7 October 1992                                      
                                                                                               
 24    Meeting of Experts of G-15  New Delhi 23 to 25 September                                
       Project on Solar Energy Applications            1992                                    
                                                                                               
 25    Meeting of the Working Group of   London 28 and 29 September                            
       Senior Officials of the Commonwealth            1992                                    
       High Level Appraisal Group                                                              
                                                                                               
 26    Symposium on Development of Real Beijing 18 to 28 October                               
       Estate Industry                                     1992                                
                                                                                               
 27    Meeting on Cooperation between  The Hague  2 to 6 November                              
       Governments and Non-Governmental                   1992                                 
       Organizations (UNCHS and Government of                                                  
       Netherlands)                                                                            
                                                                                               
  -146>                                                                                        
                                                                                               
 28    Technical Advisory Group Meeting  Paris  2 to 6 November 1992                           
                                                                                               
                                                                                               
 29    Fifth International Conference on New Delhi 2 to 6 November 1992                        
                                                                                               
                                                                                               
 30    Expert Group Meeting on Bio-Energy Bangalore 2 to 6 November 1992                       
       Technologies                                                                            
                                                                                               
 31    Senior Level Policy Seminar   Colombo  10 to 14 November 1992                           
       organized by UNCHS                                                                      
                                                                                               
 32Commonwealth Senior Officials Meeting Kampala 16 to 18 November 1992                        
                                                                                               
                                                                                               
 33    Third Summit Meeting of G-15            Dakar 21 to 23 November 1992                    
                                                                                               
                                                                                               
 34    Technical Advisory Group Meeting Kuala Lumpur 23 to 27 November 1992                    
       and Workshop on Small/Mini                                                              
       Hydro-power Policy                                                                      
                                                                                               
 35    International Workshop on               Kandy 2 to 7 December 1992                      
       Commercialisation of Woodstoves                                                         
                                                                                               
 36    Meeting of the Global Environment  Abidjan   3 to 5 December 1992                       
       Facility                                                                                
                                                                                               
 37    6th Session of the Inter-Governmental Geneva  7 to 10 December 1992                     
       Negotiating Committee for a Framework                                                   
       Convention on Climate Change                                                            
                                                                                               
 38    Meeting of the Expert Panel to  Nairobi  10 to 14 December 1992                         
       follow up the Convention on                                                             
       Biological Diversity                                                                    
 -147>                                                                                         
 1992                                                                                          
                                                                                               
 APPENDIX-IV Major International Conferences/Meetings/                                         
 Seminars                                                                                      
                                                                                               
                                                                                               
 Major International Conferences/Meetings/Seminars organized by Non-                           
 Governmental Organizations in which Indian Experts participated in their                      
 personal capacity with Government assistance in 1992.                                         
 S NO  TITLE OF CONFERENCE ETC     VENUE            DATE                                       
                                                                                               
 1    14th Congress of International New Delhi     1 to 6 March 1992                           
      Association for Bridge and                                                               
      Structural Engineering                                                                   
                                                                                               
 2    WEDC Conference on Water Environment Kathmandu 30 August to                              
      and Management                                 3 September 1992                          
                                                                                               
 3    6th Indian Road Federation   Phoenix,Arizona   8 to 20 November 1992                     
            Conference                                                                         
 -148>                                                                                         
                                                                                               
 1992                                                                                          
                                                                                               
 APPENDIX-V Miscellaneous Major International Conferences                                      
                                                                                               
 Miscellaneous Major International Conferences, etc in 1992 at which                           
 Government of India was represented or in which Indian Experts                                
 participated with Government of India's assistance in their personal                          
 capacity.                                                                                     
 S NO TITLE OF CONFERENCE ETC  VENUE             DATE                                          
                                                                                               
 1  4th International Symposium on    Stockholm   8 to 12 June 1992                            
    Protection against Chemical Warfare                                                        
    Agents                                                                                     
                                                                                               
 2  7th World Conference on Titanium  San Diego,  29 June to 2 July 1992                       
                             California                                                        
                                                                                               
 3  13th International Conference on  Rome     6 to 10 July 1992                               
    Numerical Methods in Fluid Dynamics                                                        
                                                                                               
 4  International Symposium on Tritium,  Surrey   19 to 21 July 1992                           
    Synthesis, NMR and Applications                                                            
                                                                                               
 5  Workshop on BDO and BOT Projects  Washington  20 to 31 July 1992                           
                                                                                               
                                                                                               
 6  International Seminar on Flame    Novosibirsk    18 to 22 August 1992                      
    Structure                                                                                  
                                                                                               
 7  The IMACS/SICE International   Kobe     16 to 20 September 1992                            
    Symposium on Robotics, Mechatronics                                                        
       and Manufacturing Systems                                                               
                                                                                               
 8  3rd International Conference on   Calcutta    2 to 4 December 1992                         
    Electromagnetic Interference and                                                           
       Compatibility (INCEMIC)                                                                 
                                                                                               
 9  International Convention of Surface  Bangalore   9 to 11 December 1992                     
    Engineering                                                                                
                                                                                               
 10 17th International Conference on    Los Angeles  14 to 18 December 1992                    
    Infrared and Millimeter Wave                                                               
                                                                                               
 11 IEE Conference         Tucson,    16 to 18 December 1992                                   
                        Arizona                                                                
 -149>                                                                                         
 1992                                                                                          
                                                                                               
 APPENDIX-VI International Conferences/Meetings and Functions arranged                         
                                                                                               
 International Conferences/Meetings and Functions arranged during the                          
 year 1992 with the assistance of the Conference Division, Ministry of                         
 External Affairs.                                                                             
                                                                                               
 1  Press Conference by His Excellency Mr      21 January 1992                                 
    Yasser Arafat, President of the State                                                      
    of Palestine                                                                               
                                                                                               
 2  NAM Meeting of Experts on Standardisation,    20 to 23 January 1992                        
    Measurement and Quality Control                                                            
                                                                                               
 3  21st FAO Regional Conference on Asia and the  10 to 14 February 1992                       
    Pacific                                                                                    
                                                                                               
 4  VI International Photovoltaic Science and     10 to 14 February 1992                       
    Engineering Conference                                                                     
                                                                                               
 5  VIII Third World Insurance Congress     17 to 21 February 1992                             
                                                                                               
                                                                                               
 6  Indo-EC Troika Meeting               4 and 5 March 1992                                    
                                                                                               
                                                                                               
 7  Indira Gandhi Memorial Lecture       14 March 1992                                         
                                                                                               
 8  Conference of HOMs                30 March to 10 April 1992                                
                                                                                               
                                                                                               
 9  SAARC Ministers Meeting on Environment     8 to 10 April 1992                              
                                                                                               
                                                                                               
 10 Meeting of the Inter-Governmental  4 and 5 May 1992                                        
    Group on Trade Liberalisation (SAARC Countries)                                            
                                                                                               
 11 2nd Meeting of Independent South 27 to 29 May 1992                                         
    Asian Commission on Poverty Alleviation                                                    
                                                                                               
 12 Meeting of Scientific Advisory Committee  24 to 26 June 1992                               
    & Regional Co-ordination of G-15 Countrie                                                  
    on Gene Banks for                                                                          
           Medicinal and Aromatic Plants                                                       
                                                                                               
 13 Workshop on Tenth NAM Summit            11 and 12 July 1992                                
                                                                                               
 -150>                                                                                         
                                                                                               
 14 Inter-country Consultations on Trade    11 and 12 August 1992                              
                                                                                               
                                                                                               
 15 SAARC Meeting of Experts on "Joint Promotion of  18 to 20 August 1992                      
    SAARC Countries as a Tourist Destination"                                                  
                                                                                               
 16 Meeting of Experts of G-15 Countries on Solar    2 to 5 September 1992                     
    Energy Projects (Department of Non-Conventional                                            
    Energy Sources)                                                                            
                                                                                               
 17 Indo-German Consultative Group Meeting of India     8 September 1992                       
       Chapter                                                                                 
                                                                                               
 18 Visit of SAARC Cultural Ministers to attend the  9 to 11 October 1992                      
    inaugural function of SAARC Cultural Festival                                              
                                                                                               
 19 Seminar on 'India and ASEAN'               20 October 1992                                 
                                                                                               
 20 3rd Meeting of SAARC Committee on Economic Co-   2 and 3 November 1992                     
    operation                                                                                  
                                                                                               
 21 ESCAP Meeting on Regional Economic Cooperation   24 to 27 November 1992                    
                                                                                               
                                                                                               
 22 HOMs Conference                         7 and 8 December 1992                              
                                                                                               
 -151>                                                                                         
 1992                                                                                          
 APPENDIX-VII Statement showing the number of Fresh and Miscellaneous                          
 applications                                                                                  
 Statement showing the number of Fresh and Miscellaneous applications                          
 received and services granted in each Passport Office during the year 1992.                   
                                                                                               
                    FRESH                MISCELLANEOUS SERVICES                                
                    APPLICATIONS                                                               
 S NO  STATION      RECEIVED     GRANTED RECEIVED                   GRANTED                    
 1     AHMEDABAD    133283       125321  60928                      61149                      
 2     BANGALORE    104871       123150  45363                      43738                      
 3     BAREILLY     75484        71685   21900                      23740                      
 4     BHOPAL       27713        27426   10786                      10796                      
 5     BHUBANESHWAR 12808        9894    2411                       2419                       
 6     BOMBAY       259374       280822  181697                     182764                     
 7     CALCUTTA     60319        47119   31971                      31972                      
 8     CHANDIGARH   100565       76463   35027                      35653                      
 9     COCHIN       179871       260359  59522                      62808                      
 10    DELHI        143812       113409  69348                      68252                      
 11    GOA          20137        20821   18104                      18062                      
 12    GUWAHATI     8175         6511    2065                       2021                       
 13    HYDERABAD    212635       264131  91357                      91766                      
 14    JAIPUR       109886       119876  31344                      31680                      
 15    JALANDHAR    112179       73891   28712                      30295                      
 16    KOZHIKODE    235223       168151  69699                      70849                      
 17    LUCKNOW      130861       111719  20260                      21165                      
 18    MADRAS       141194       118872  54586                      53551                      
 19    NAGPUR       13893        13731   2839                       2824                       
 20    PATNA        51614        36400   8372                       8026                       
 21    TRICHY       181215       127168  97127                      96753                      
 22    TRIVANDRUM   157316       71506   50662                      50326                      
       GRAND TOTAL  2472428      2268425 994080                     1000609                    
 -152>                                                                                         
                                                                                               
 1992                                                                                          
                                                                                               
 APPENDIX-VIII Statement showing the Revenue earned and the Expenditure                        
 incurred by                                                                                   
                                                                                               
 Statement showing the Revenue earned and the Expenditure incurred by                          
 each Passport Office during the year 1992.                                                    
 S NO       STATION                REVENUE              EXPENDITURE                            
 1          AHMEDABAD              11669654.85          4644795.00                             
 2          BANGALORE              11951571.00          4725664.00                             
 3          BAREILLY               8670598.00           3426146.00                             
 4          BHOPAL                 2931560.00           1154947.00                             
 5          BHUBANESHWAR           1034772.00           623239.00                              
 6          BOMBAY                 26551815.00          10702296.00                            
 7          CALCUTTA               6806556.00           2471174.00                             
 8          CHANDIGARH             7163056.00           3998675.00                             
 9          COCHIN                 14536587.00          6998950.00                             
 10         DELHI                  13094345.00          6059219.00                             
 11         GOA                    1601091.00           929827.00                              
 12         GUWAHATI               846738.00            778150.00                              
 13         HYDERABAD              19151541.00          5482217.00                             
 14         JAIPUR                 5832088.50           2643780.00                             
 15         JALANDHAR              9440637.00           3242183.00                             
 16         KOZHIKODE              17753705.00          3409790.00                             
 17         LUCKNOW                10720507.00          5128734.00                             
 18         MADRAS                 13600839.00          5119507.00                             
 19         NAGPUR                 1241978.00           858439.00                              
 20         PATNA                  4663707.00           2218619.00                             
 21         TRICHY                 17347714.00          3014492.00                             
 22         TRIVANDRUM             12173785.00          3270720.00                             
            TOTAL                  218784845.35         80901563.00                            
 -153>                                                                                         
 1992                                                                                          
                                                                                               
 APPENDIX-IX Consular Data For 1992                                                            
                                                                                               
       Consular Data For 1992.                                                                 
 1     Number of Attestations                                      1,60,401                    
 2     Number of Indians repatriated at Government cost            198                         
 3     Number of Indians arrested abroad                           3,576                       
 4     Number of Indians died abroad                               305                         
 5     Number of foreigners arrested in India                      1,065                       
 6     Number of foreigners died in India                          179                         
 7     (a) Extradition requests from Indian Government to                                      
       foreign Governments                                         9                           
       (b) Extradition requests to Indian Government from                                      
       foreign Governments                                         10                          
 8     Number of lost and damaged passport cases received          10,100*                     
       (*) Figures provisional                                                                 
 -154>                                                                                         
                                                                                               
 1992                                                                                          
                                                                                               
 APPENDIX-X Cadre Strength at Headquarters and 144 Missions/Posts abroad                       
                                                                                               
 Cadre Strength at Headquarters and 144 Missions/Posts abroad during                           
 1992-93 (including posts budgeted by Ministry of Commerce and excluding                       
 posts held in abeyance/ex-cadred).                                                            
 S NO  CADRE/POST                               POSTS AT     POSTS AT TOTAL                    
       IFS                                      HEADQUARTERS MISSIONS                          
                                                             ABROAD                            
 1     Grade I                                  4            17       21                       
 2     Grade II                                 3            25       28                       
 3     Grade III                                24           92       116                      
 4     Grade IV                                 25           82       107                      
 5     junior Administrative                                                                   
       Cadre/Senior Scale                       52           182      234                      
 6     junior Scale                             3            30       33                       
 7     Training Reserve                                                                        
       (Prob) junior Scale                      27                    27                       
 8     Training Reserve for                                                                    
       all Grades                               10                    10                       
 9     Leave Reserve                            19                    19                       
 10    Deputation Reserve                       20                    20                       
       IFS (B)                                                                                 
 1     Grade I                                  25           100      125                      
 2     Grade II/III                             171          153      324                      
 3     Grade IV                                 367          355      722                      
 4     Grade V/VI                               459          134      593                      
 5     Grade II of Cypher Sub                                                                  
       Cadre                                    81           123      204                      
 6     Principal Private                                                                       
       Secretary Grade of                                                                      
       Stenographer Cadre                       3            18       21                       
 7     Grade I of Stenographer                                                                 
       Cadre (including the                                                                    
       erstwhile Selection                                                                     
       Grade)                                   32           176      208                      
 8     Grade II of                                                                             
       Stenographers Cadre                      212          177      389                      
 9     Grade III of                                                                            
       Stenographers Cadre                      42           77       119                      
       Combined Research Cadre                  22           2        24                       
       Interpretes Cadre                        14           21       35                       
       L & T Cadre                              16           1        17                       
       TOTAL                                    1631         1765     3396                     
 -155>                                                                                         
                                                                                               
 1992                                                                                          
                                                                                               
 APPENDIX-XI Names of Ambassadors/High Commissioners of India abroad                           
                                                                                               
 Names of Ambassadors/High Commissioners of India abroad who have taken                        
 charge from 1.1.92 to 31.12.92.                                                               
                                                                                               
 1: EMBASSIES/HIGH COMMISSIONS                                                                 
 S NO  COUNTRY                  CAPITAL       AMBASSADOR/      DATE OF                         
                                              HIGH             APPOINTMENT                     
                                              COMMISSIONER                                     
 1     Lebanon                  Beirut        S Sivaswami      10.1.1992                       
 2     Pakistan                 lslamabad     S K Lambah       13.1.1992                       
 3     Seychelles               Mahe          C R Balachandra  9.2.1992                        
 4     Iraq                     Baghdad       R S Kalha        4.3.1992                        
 5     Ghana                    Accra         D S Pannun       5.3.1992                        
 6     Bhutan                   Thimphu       P Johari         6.3.1992                        
 7     Denmark                  Copenhagen    K M Lal          21.3.1992                       
 8     Uganda                   Kampala       K H Patel        2.4.1992                        
 9     Norway                   Oslo          S R Chaudhury    13.4.1992                       
 10    Bangladesh               Dhaka         K Raghunath      19.4.1992                       
 11    Kenya                    Nairobi       K Doshi          4.5.1992                        
 12    Malta                    Valetta       P K Gupta (AHC)  13.5.1992                       
       (High Commissioner                                                                      
       resident in Tripoli)                                                                    
 13    Indonesia                Jakarta       Vinay Verma      22.5.1992                       
 14    Germany                  Bonn          K K S Rana       25.5.1992                       
 15    Syria                    Damascus      R M Abbyankar    25.5.1992                       
 16    Netherlands              The Hague     I P Khosla       8.6.1992                        
 17    Thailand                 Bangkok       A N Ram          26.6.1992                       
 18    Czech and                                                                               
       Slovak                                                                                  
       Republics                Prague        D C Manners      4.7.1992                        
 19    Korea                                                                                   
       (South)                  Seoul         B M Oza          16.7.1992                       
 20    Jordan                   Amman         A K Budhiraja    17.7.1992                       
 21    Turkey                   Ankara        K Gajendra Singh 2.8.1992                        
 22    Hungary                  Budapest      L T Pudaite      5.8.1992                        
 -156>                                                                                         
 23    Argentina                Buenos Aires  M K Khisha       7.8.1992                        
 24    Ukrain                   Kiev          S T Devare       12.8.1992                       
 25    Vietnam                  Hanoi         S L Malik        19.8.1992                       
 26    Egypt                    Cairo         Kum A Ghosh      23.8.1992                       
 27    Sweden                   Stockholm     P S Sahai        6.9.1992                        
 28    Kazhakhstan              Alma Ata      Kamalesh Sharma  10.9.1992                       
 29    Tunisia                  Tunis         Nigam Prakash    28.9.1992                       
 30    Mexico                   Mexico City   P A Nazareth     30.9.1992                       
 31    Israel                   Tel Aviv      P K Singh        1.10.1992                       
 32    Greece                   Athens        Aftab Seth       5.10.1992                       
 33    Russia                   Moscow        R Sen            7.10.1992                       
 34    Japan                    Tokyo         Prakash Shah     28.10.1992                      
 35    United                                                                                  
       States of                                                                               
       America                  Washington    S S Ray          29.10.1992                      
 36    Ireland                  Dublin        S N Puri         2.11.1992                       
 37    Canada                   Ottawa        P K Budhwar      4.11.1992                       
 38    Sudan                    Khartoum      R K Rai          5.11.1992                       
 39    Laos                     Vientiane     Dr G S Rajhans   10.11.1992                      
 40    Philippines              Manila        Smt S B Cowsik   12.11.1992                      
 41    Myanmar                  Yangon        G Parthasarthy   12.11.1992                      
 42    Qatar                    Doha          K P Fabian       18.11.1992                      
 43    Venezuela                Caracas       P L Santoshi     24.11.1992                      
 44    Yemen                    Sana'a        M Venkataraman   28.11.1992                      
 45    Guyana                   Georgetown    P L Goyal        29.11.1992                      
 46    Finland                  Helsinki      P R Sood         30.11.1992                      
 47    Panama                   Panama        P Rath           3.12.1992                       
 48    Ethiopia                 Addis Ababa   Gurcharan Singh  8.12.1992                       
 49    Mauritius                Port Louis    Shyam Saran      9.12.1992                       
 50    Brazil                   Brasilia      G S Bedi         10.12.1992                      
 51    Uzbekistan               Tashkent      Dalip Mehta      22.12.1992                      
 52    Afghanistan              Kabul         Arif Qamarain    26.12.1992                      
 -157>                                                                                         
 II:   SPECIAL MISSIONS                                                                        
 PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVES OF INDIA TO THE UNITED NATIONS OFFICES                              
 53    France                   Paris         Smt Nina Sibal   9.10.1992                       
                                (UNESCO)                                                       
 54    Switzerland              Geneva        Satish Chandra   17.10.1992                      
 -158>                                                                                         
                                                                                               
 1992                                                                                          
                                                                                               
 APPENDIX-XII Foreign Language Chart.                                                          
                                                                                               
 Foreign Language Chart.                                                                       
 S NO  COMPULSORY FOREIGN LANGUAGE                           NO OF OFFICERS                    
 1     Arabic                                                82                                
 2     Bahasa Indonesia                                      9                                 
 3     Bulgarian                                             1                                 
 4     Burmese                                               1                                 
 5     Chinese                                               45                                
 6     Dutch                                                 1                                 
 7     French                                                83                                
 8     German                                                42                                
 9     Gorkhali/Nepali                                       5                                 
 10    Hungarian                                             1                                 
 11    Italian                                               5                                 
 12    Japanese                                              27                                
 13    Kishwahili                                            10                                
 14    Laotian                                               -                                 
 15    Malay                                                 1                                 
 16    Persian                                               18                                
 17    Polish                                                1                                 
 18    Portuguese                                            14                                
 19    Russian                                               68                                
 20    Serbo-Croatian                                        3                                 
 21    Sinhalese                                             3                                 
 22    Spanish                                               49                                
 23    Swedish                                               1                                 
 24    Thai                                                  2                                 
 25    Tibetan                                               3                                 
 26    Turkish                                               2                                 
 27    Vietnamese                                            2                                 
       TOTAL                                                 479                               
 -159>                                                                                         
                                                                                               
 1992                                                                                          
 APPENDIX-XIII Statement showing the number of app. (both by direct                            
 recruitment and promotion)                                                                    
 Statement showing the number of appointments (both by direct recruitm-                        
 ent and promotion) made in various groups in the Ministry of External                         
 Affairs and reserved vacancies filled by scheduled caste/scheduled tr-                        
 ibes during the year 1992.                                                                    
 TOTAL NO                           NUMBER OF VACANCIES                                        
 OF VACANCIES                                       DE-RESERVED DUE TO                         
                     NUMBER OF      NUMBER OF       NON-AVAILABILITY OF                        
 GROUP  FILLED       VACANCIES      RESERVED                                                   
                     RESERVED FOR   CANDIDATES      RESERVED CANDIDATES                        
                                    APPOINTED                                                  
                     SC        ST     SC      ST         SC        ST                          
                                                                                               
 Group 'A'  37        6        3      6       1                                                
                                                                                               
 Group 'B'  152       42       32     43      17         1         3                           
                                                                                               
 Group 'C'  121       38       23     33      16                                               
                                                                                               
 Group 'D'  39        8        5      14      5                                                
 (excluding                                                                                    
 Sweepers)                                                                                     
 -160                                                                                          
 1992                                                                                          
                                                                                               
 APPENDIX-XIV Revenue Expenditure of the MEA                                                   
                                                                                               
 Revenue Expenditure of the Ministry of External Affairs during the                            
 Financial Year 1992-93.                                                                       
                                                                                               
                                              REVISED ESTIMATES 1992-93                        
                                                  (IN CRORES OF RUPEES)                        
                                                                                               
 Headquarters                                                     62.04                        
                                                                                               
 Missions/Posts abroad                                           262.51                        
                                                                                               
 OTHER ITEMS                                                                                   
                                                                                               
 Contribution to International Organizations (Including UN)       16.24                        
                                                                                               
 Central Passport Organization                                    29.13                        
                                                                                               
 Special Diplomatic Expenditure                                  108.30                        
                                                                                               
 Grants-in-Aid to ICCR                                            14.55                        
                                                                                               
 Other miscellaneous items                                        16.24                        
                                                                                               
 Payment to Indian Airlines for charter operations                 1.36                        
 between Madras-Port Blair                                                                     
                                                                                               
 AID TO OTHER COUNTRIES                                                                        
                                                                                               
 Aid to Bangladesh                                                 6.55                        
                                                                                               
 Aid to Bhutan                                                    65.00                        
                                                                                               
 Aid to Nepal                                                     16.68                        
                                                                                               
 Aid to Sri Lanka                                                  4.50                        
                                                                                               
 Aid to Maldives                                                  10.24                        
                                                                                               
 Aid to Cambodia                                                   2.80                        
                                                                                               
 Aid to other developing countries                                33.63                        
                                                                                               
 Aid under AFRICA Fund                                             6.86                        
                                                                                               
 TOTAL REVENUE EXPENDITURE:                                      656.63                        
 -161>                                                                                         
                                                                                               
 1992                                                                                          
 APPENDIX-XV Expenditure on Indian Missions/Posts abroad and Headquarters                      
 Expenditure on Indian Missions/Posts abroad and Headquarters of the                           
 Ministry of External Affairs in 1992-93.                                                      
                                                                                               
 The estimated expenditure on the Headquarters Organization of the Ministry                    
 during the Current Financial Year (1992-93) is expected to be Rs 62.04                        
 crores which is 9.45% of the total estimated revenue expenditure of this                      
 Ministry. Out of this, Rs 10.78 crores will be on Salaries and Wages, Rs                      
 6.00 crores on Travel Expenses, Rs 36.93 crores on Office Expenses, Rs 4.00                   
 crores on Publicity and Rs 3.52 crores on Rent and Maintenance.                               
                                                                                               
 The total estimated expenditure on Indian Missions/Posts abroad is expected                   
 to be Rs 262.51 crores during the Current Financial year which works out to                   
 39.98% of the total estimated Revenue Expenditure of this Ministry. Out of                    
 this, an amount of Rs 114.16 crores is for Salaries (including Foreign                        
 Allowance), OTA and Wages, Rs 30.98 crores for Travel Expenses (Transfer                      
 Passages/Home Leave Passages and Local Tours), Rs 53.25 crores for Office                     
 Expenses and Rs 64.12 crores for Rent, Rates and Taxes as well as for                         
 Repairs and Maintenance of Government owned/rented accommodation in                           
 Missions abroad. Average expenditure per Mission abroad (including                            
 Publicity) works out to Rs 1.82 crores.                                                       
                                                                                               
 The remaining 50.57% of the Estimated Revenue Expenditure of the Ministry                     
 is being incurred on various Aid Programmes for neighbouring and other                        
 developing countries including ITEC Programmes, Aid under AFRICA Fund,                        
 SAARC and SCAAP Programmes, contribution to United Nations Organization and                   
 other international bodies, Passport Organization, Hospitality,                               
 Grants-in-Aid to Indian Council for Cultural Relations and other                              
 miscellaneous items.                                                                          
 -162>                                                                                         
 1992                                                                                          
                                                                                               
 APPENDIX-XVI VVIPs Visits to India                                                            
 VVIPs Visits to India during 1992.                                                            
                                                                                               
 S NO     NAME OF VISITOR                      DATE                                            
       HEADS OF STATE, VICE PRESIDENTS,                                                        
          HEADS OF GOVERNMENT                                                                  
                                                                                               
 1 His Royal Highness Maha Vajiralongkorn  to 21 April 1992                                    
   Crown Prince of Thailand                                                                    
                                                                                               
 2 His Excellency Mr S A Niyazov President of  18 to 20 April 1992                             
   Turkmenistan                                                                                
                                                                                               
 3    His Highness Sheikh Zayed Bin Sultan  28 to 30 April 1992                                
      Al-Nahayan-President of United Arab Emirates                                             
                                                                                               
 4    Her Excellency Begum Khaleda Zia   26 to 28 May 1992                                     
      Prime Minister of the People's Republic                                                  
      of Bangladesh                                                                            
                                                                                               
 5    His Excellency Sir Veerasamy 27 May to 5 June 1992                                       
      Ringadoo President                                                                       
                                                                                               
      of the Republic of Mauritius and Lady Ringadoo                                           
                                                                                               
 6    Her Majesty Queen Aishwarya Rajya    22 to 26 June 1992                                  
      Laxmi Devi Shah of Nepal [Private Visit]                                                 
                                                                                               
 7    Her Majesty Queen Aishwarya Rajya     13 to 22 July 1992                                 
      Laxmi Devi Shah of Nepal [Private Visit]                                                 
                                                                                               
 8    His Majesty King Birendra Bir Bikram Shah    17 to 22 July 1992                          
      of Nepal [Private Visit]                                                                 
                                                                                               
 9    Transit Visit of Dr Burhanuddin Rabbani   30 August 1992                                 
      President of the Islamic State of Afghanistan                                            
                                                                                               
 10   Transit visit of the Vice President of Syria  31 August 1992                             
                                                                                               
 11   Transit visit of the Vice President of Syria   September 1992                            
                                                                                               
 12   Transit visit of Dr Burhanuddin Rabbani  5 September 1992                                
      President of the Islamic State of Afghanistan                                            
                                                                                               
 13   His Majesty Haji Hassanaj Bolkian Sultan  15 to 18 September 1992                        
      and Yang Di-Pertuan of Brunei Darussalam                                                 
      and Her Royal Highness Penigran Isteri                                                   
      Hajah Mariam Binti Haji Abdul Aziz                                                       
                                                                                               
 14   His Excellency Mr Ranasinghe Premadasa President 1 to 3 October 1992                     
      Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka and                                           
      Madam Premadasa                                                                          
 -163>                                                                                         
                                                                                               
 15   His Excellency Mr Yoweri K Museveni  12 to 14 October 1992                               
      President of the Republic of Uganda and                                                  
      Mrs Janet Museveni                                                                       
                                                                                               
 16   His Highness The Aga Khan       9 to 24 November 1992                                    
                                                                                               
                                                                                               
 17   Their Imperial Highnesses Prince   12 to 20 November 1992                                
      and Princess Akishino of Japan                                                           
                                                                                               
 18   His Majesty King Birendra Bir Bikram 30 November to 7 December 1992                      
      Shah of Nepal [Private Visit]                                                            
                                                                                               
                                                                                               
       DEPUTY PRIME MINISTERS, FOREIGN MINISTERS AND OTHERS                                    
                                                                                               
 1    His Excellency Mr Boutros Boutros Ghali    21 to 24 April 1992                           
      Secretary General of the UN and                                                          
      Mrs Boutros Ghali                                                                        
                                                                                               
 2    His Excellency Dr G E Burboulis Secretary   3 to 6 May 1992                              
      of State of the Russian Federation                                                       
                                                                                               
 3    His Excellency Dr Dimitrij Rupel  18 to 20 May 1992                                      
      Foreign Minister of Republic of Slovania                                                 
                                                                                               
 4    His Excellency Dr Ali Akbar Velayati Foreign  18 & 19 May 1992                           
      Minister of the Islamic Republic of Iran                                                 
                                                                                               
 5    Rt Hon Don McKinnon Deputy Prime Minister 5 to 9 June 1992                               
      and Minister for Foreign Relations and Trade of                                          
      New Zealand                                                                              
                                                                                               
 6    His Excellency Mr Ali Alatas Foreign   5 to 7 July 1992                                  
      Minister of Republic of Indonesia                                                        
                                                                                               
 7    The Hon'ble Paul Raymond Berenger    5 to 12 August 1992                                 
      Minister of External Affairs of Mauritius                                                
      and Mrs Arline Berenger                                                                  
                                                                                               
 8    Mr Shaharyar M Khan Foreign Secretary    16 to 21 August 1992                            
      of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan and Mrs Khan                                         
                                                                                               
 9    His Excellency Mr Habib Ben Yahia Minister of  25 to 28 August 1992                      
      Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Tunisia                                               
                                                                                               
 10   His Excellency Dr Pascoal M Mocumbi    25 to 27 August 1992                              
      Minister of Foreign Affairs of Mozambique                                                
                                                                                               
 11   His Excellency Mr Do Muoi General Secretary   8 to 13 September 1992                     
      of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of                                       
      Vietnam                                                                                  
 -164>                                                                                         
                                                                                               
 12   His Excellency Dr Ali Akbar Velayati     9 to 11 November 1992                           
      Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Islamic                                               
      Republic of Iran                                                                         
                                                                                               
 13   His Excellency Mr Seyoum Mesfin Minister   14 to 17 December 1992                        
      of Foreign Affairs of Ethiopia                                                           
 -165>                                                                                         
 1992                                                                                          
                                                                                               
 APPENDIX-XVII Visits abroad of the President, VP and PM                                       
 Visits abroad of the President, Vice President and Prime Minister of                          
 India during 1992.                                                                            
                                                                                               
 1    Visit of the Vice President to the Democratic  13 to 21 April 1992                       
      People's Republic of Korea and Mongolia                                                  
                                                                                               
 2    Visit of the President to People's Republic  17 to 23 May 1992                           
             of China                                                                          
                                                                                               
 3    Visit of the Prime Minister to Spain,      10 to 16 June 1992                            
      Brazil and Portugal                                                                      
                                                                                               
 4    Visit of the Prime Minister to Japan   22 to 26 June 1992                                
                                                                                               
                                                                                               
 5    Visit of the Prime Minister to Indonesia to  31 August to 6                              
      attend NAM Summit                               September 1992                           
                                                                                               
 6    Visit of the Prime Minister to France    28 September to                                 
                                                1 October 1992                                 
                                                                                               
 7    Visit of the Prime Minister to Nepal  19 to 21 October 1992                              
                                                                                               
                                                                                               
 8    Visit of the Prime Minister to Tunisia  20 to 22 November 1992                           
      [Transit Visit] and to Senegal to attend G-15                                            
      Summit                                                                                   
 -166>                                                                                         
                                                                                               
 1992                                                                                          
                                                                                               
 APPENDIX-XVIII List of Divisions                                                              
 Ministry of External Affairs-List of Divisions.                                               
                                                                                               
 SPECIALIZED & SUPPORT DIVISIONS                                                               
                                                                                               
 1 Administration Division                                                                     
                                                                                               
 2 Establishment Division                                                                      
                                                                                               
 3 Bureau of Security                                                                          
                                                                                               
 4 Coordination Division                                                                       
                                                                                               
 5 Economic Division                                                                           
                                                                                               
 6 External Publicity Division                                                                 
                                                                                               
 7 Foreign Service Institute                                                                   
                                                                                               
 8 Policy Planning and Research Division                                                       
                                                                                               
 9 Legal & Treaties Division                                                                   
                                                                                               
 10 CPV & OI Division                                                                          
                                                                                               
 11 Special Kuwait Cell                                                                        
                                                                                               
 12 Protocol (including Conference Division)                                                   
                                                                                               
 13 International Organization Division                                                        
                                                                                               
 14 Disarmament and International Security Affairs Division                                    
                                                                                               
 15 Economic Coordination Unit                                                                 
                                                                                               
 TERRITORIAL DIVISION                                                                          
                                                                                               
 1 Africa Division                                                                             
                                                                                               
 2 AMS Division                                                                                
                                                                                               
 3 Asia Pacific Division                                                                       
                                                                                               
 4 ASEAN Division                                                                              
                                                                                               
 5 BSM Division                                                                                
                                                                                               
 6 Central Asia Division                                                                       
                                                                                               
 7 Europe East Division                                                                        
                                                                                               
 8 Europe West Division                                                                        
                                                                                               
 9 Gulf Division                                                                               
                                                                                               
 10 IPA Division                                                                               
                                                                                               
 11 LAC Division                                                                               
 -167>                                                                                         
                                                                                               
 12 North East Division                                                                        
                                                                                               
 13 South East Asia Division                                                                   
                                                                                               
 14 WANA Division                                                                              
 -168>                                                                                         
                                                                                               
External website that      External website External website External website External website 
opens in a new window      that opens in a  that opens in a  that opens in a  that opens in a  
                           new window       new window       new window       new window       

    Address : Patiala House, Annexe - BNew Delhi                              
   -110001                                           Page last updated on: 09 
    Telephone: 23389073, 23382694, 23073685;                  December, 2013  
   Fax: 23386340, 23387700;Feedback :            Site designed and maintained 
   dirlibmea.gov.in                                  by: National Informatics 
    Officer In-charge:-                                         Centre (NIC), 
    (c)Content Owned by MEA Library Ministry of   DeitY, MoCIT, Government of 
   External Affairs, Government of India                               India. 
   Terms & Conditions | Privacy Policy |         Visitors:                    
   Copyright Policy | Hyperlinking Policy |      
   Accessibility Statement | Help                

   java script is required for this page
   MEAs App twitter Facebook Google plus YouTube flickr
   loading
