1974-75

Contents
Jan 01, 1974
REPORT
1974-75
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS
NEW DELHI
CHAPTER
I.
II.
III.
IV.
V.
VI.
VII.
VIII.
IX.
X.
XI.
XII.
XIII.
XIV.
XV.

CONTENTS

Introduction
India's Neighbours
Sikkim
South East Asia
East Asia
West Asia and North Africa
Africa (South of the Sahara)
Europe
The Americas
United Nations and International Conferences
Technical and Economic Co-operation
External Publicity
Cultural Relations
Protocol Matters
Passport, Visa and Consular Services
Administration and Organisation

PAGE
1
11
27
30
37
44
49
55
69
73
88
106
110
114
115
118

APPENDICES
NUMBER

PAGE

I.

International Conferences, Congresses, Seminars in which
India participated in 1974-75

124

II.

International Organisations of which India became a member/
ceased to be a member

149

III.

Treaties/Conventions/Agreements concluded or renewed
by India with other countries in 1974

150

IV.

ITEC Programme

167

V.

Distribution of reserved medical and Engineering Seats during
1974-75

169

VI.

Expenditure on Headquarters and Missions/Posts abroad
during 1974-75

172

VII.

List of Indian Missions/Posts opened in 1974-75

174

INDIA

Jan 01, 1974

Introduction
Jan 01, 1974
INTRODUCTION
The year under report saw the consolidation of the process of
detente between the super powers, continued normalisation between West Germany and East European countries, progressive
defusing of the atmosphere of crisis in Cyprus and West Asia
and a general trend in favour of peace elsewhere. At the same
time there are no signs of the arms race either among the major
powers or among the lesser powers of the world being reduced
either in its scope or in its intensity. The crisis in Cyprus has
also borne out the growing understanding between the super
powers to avoid any chance collision between themselves as well
as the evolving common approach among the NATO powers.
The progress of peace efforts in West Asia indicate a desire on
the part of the two super powers to reduce areas of possible misunderstanding between themselves. Renewed tension in Vietnam is
a warning that the basic problem in this area remains unresolved.
It is significant that notwithstanding the highly sensitive and
portentous atmosphere prevailing within the United States over
the Watergate affair and President Nixon's role in that context,
the Soviet Union has not deviated from its policy in the search
for detente with USA which has been underway since the first summit between the two leaders in 1973. The visit of President
Nixon to Moscow towards the end of June 1974, for the third
summit meeting with Soviet leaders, served to confirm the interest of the two super powers in keeping an atmosphere of stability, co-operation and understanding. Though there was only
limited agreement over the limitation of the arms race or final
agreement to facilitate increase of US-Soviet trade, the NixonBrezhnev Summit did have the effect of continuing the process of
detente.

The momentum towards detente was continued in the Summit
talks held at Vladivostok in November between President Ford
and General Secretary Brezhnev. Both expressed their conviction that a long term agreement on further limitation of strategic
offensive arms "would be a significant contribution to improving
relations between the USSR, and the US, to reducing the danger
of war and to enhancing world peace". The talks however
showed continued defensive vigilance vis a vis their armed capabilities. Further the refusal of ratification by the Soviet Union
<pg1>
of the trade agreement with the USA (trade between the two
countries which has registered significant increases by end of
1974 was expected to double the level in 1972) will be a setback to their developing relations. Notwithstanding these, the
series of economic and technological agreements between the
Soviet Union, and the Western powers in general and the speedy
defusion of the Cyprus crisis and the progress of peace efforts in
West Asia have however sustained the process of detente.
Within the process of detente the US achieved a significant
come back, in its position and role on West Asia. While
President Nixon's tour of the West Asian countries served to
introduce a limited understanding between Israel on the one hand
and her Arab antagonists on the other, the change-over in US
Presidency has not significantly affected the US approach towards attempts at defusion of the crisis atmosphere in West Asia.
The recent indications of an approach of confrontation by the
Western powers led by the US towards the oil policy of the
Arab States and the lack of progress in the settlement of the
West Asian problems have, however introduced an element of
uncertainty if not anxiety in the region.
In the regional context, the decision of the Rabat Summit
meeting of Arab leaders that the Palestine Liberation Organisation is the sole representative of the Palestinian people highlighted the fact that no solution of the West Asian crisis would be
possible without the Palestinian people being a party to that solution. Israel did not react favourably to this development and
the prospect of stage by stage settlement between her and the
Arabs States receded. India believes that no enduring solution
of the West Asian problem can be realised without the restoration of the legitimate political rights of the Palestinian people
and vacation by Israel of all Arab territories under her illegal
occupation. It is India's hope that the prevailing pragmatic
approach of the Arab States and their willingness to make concessions, would be reciprocated by Israel and also by her supporters in the West to facilitate an enduring settlement
An event of deep concern to India during the last year was
the rude disturbance to the constitutional processes in Cyprus

and the ouster of President Makarios. India along with other
non-aligned nations at the United Nations expressed her solidarity
with the people of Cyprus immediately after the crisis and
steadily supported moves towards the restoration of constitutional
<pg2>
order in Cyprus and the maintenance of sovereignty, independence, and territorial integrity of non-aligned Cyprus and withdrawal of all foreign military personnel. In this context, India
welcomed the restoration of civilian rule in Greece, which facilitated the search for restoration of normalcy in Cyprus. India has
also welcomed the return of President Makarios to Cyprus and
the holding of talks between the leaders of the two communities
in Cyprus. She hopes that the internal situation in Cyprus
would further improve and help in consolidating the independence and territorial integrity of the island republic.
Relations between India and the West European Countries
were marked by increasingly friendly co-operation in the economic,
technical and cultural fields. India has gratefully acknowledged
the decision of the EEC to extend 300,000 tons of wheat as
grant and 700,000 tons on commercial terms to help tide her
over the difficult food situation. She has also welcomed the
community's decision to contribute $ 250 million as its contribution to the Most Seriously Affected Countries in the context of
the recommendations of the sixth special session of the UN General Assembly, in addition to the bilateral assistance offered by the
members.
Politically, the Brezhnev-Giscard d'Estaing talks in France as
also the dialogue between the FRG and the GDR resulting in
the exchange of diplomatic relations between them has contributed significantly to the continuing process of detente. There has
also been noteworthy progress in the second stage of the conference on European Security and Co-operation, which justifies
hopes of a successful conclusion of the third and final stage of
the conference. India has welcomed this general improvement
in cast-west relations as they are in accord with her own policies
of peaceful co-existence and international co-operation. In the
same manner, the European countries have accepted the Simla
Agreement and the post-Simla processes as an enduring basis for
normalisation and reconciliation in the Indian sub-continent.
India watched with interest the developments in Portugal after
the fall of the dictatorial regime in April last and the steps taken
by the military government towards restoring democracy and
liberty not only in Portugal, but also in the overseas territories.
India welcomed the progress of negotiations between the Government of Portugal on the one hand and the liberation movements
in Guinea-Bissau, Mozambique and Angola on the other. India
<pg3>
acclaimed the recognition of the independence of Guinea-Bissau

by Portugal and the establishment of an African government in
Mozambique which is to take over the government after full
independence by June 1975 as also the agreement between
Portugal and the liberation movement in Angola on the question
of independence to the latter in the coming yew. The democratic
approach displayed by the new government of Portugal encouraged India to take steps towards normalisation of relations with
that country, which had been disrupted by the intransigent attitude of the former dictatorial government over Goa. Preliminary understanding was reached with the new government during
the meeting between the Indian and Portuguese Foreign Ministers in September last at the United Nations. With the acceptance by the Portuguese government of the integration of the
former Portuguese territories of (Goa, Daman, Diu and Nagar
Haveli) with the Indian Union, the way was prepared for restoration of normal relations between the two countries. The visit
of the Portuguese Foreign Minister to India in December resulted
in the signing of a formal treaty, acknowledging the integration
of the former Portuguese enclaves with the Indian Union and
restoring diplomatic relations between the two countries.
The friendship and all-round co-operation between India and
the Soviet Union resting on the solid foundation of mutual respect, mutual advantage and non-interference in each others'
internal affairs, was further consolidated during the year. India's
efforts to achieve permanent peace in the sub-continent, of which
the tripartite agreement of April 1974 was a concrete result,
received commendable support from the Soviet Union. India's
spectacular breakthrough in peaceful nuclear technology was
seen by the Soviet Union in the proper perspective, as a milestone on independent India's path to economic and technological
self-reliance. Besides the increase in the turnover of Indo-Soviet
trade from Rs. 412 crores in 1973 to Rs. 550 crores in 1974,
the Soviet willingness to help in the key sectors of the Indian
economy, was a further manifestation of friendship. India welcomed (Soviet initiatives in promoting detente and relaxation of
tension between States and, in this context, particularly hoped for
the success of the conference on European Security and Co-operation. The visit of Marshal Grechko highlighted the steadfast
friendship and growing co-operation between India and the Soviet
Union and the importance attached by them to the preservation
of peace and stability in Asia. It opened up new prospects of
<pg4>
further growth of mutually beneficial co-operation between the
two countries in various fields.
India's friendship and co-operation with the East European
countries received further fillip with the visit of the Prime Ministers of Bulgaria. Hungary, the GDR and Czechoslovakia to India
(luring 1974. Discussions with them revealed that the views of
India and these countries on important international issues were
close. The East European leaders expressed appreciation of and

extended full support to India's quest for durable peace in the
sub-continent. The visiting leaders accepted, without reservations,
the peaceful nature of Indian's nuclear programme. Many important agreements were concluded between India and the East
European countries in the fields of trade, economic, scientific and
technical collaboration.
A new beginning was made towards a more mature relationshin with the visit of Dr. Henry Kissinger to India in October
1974. The visit helped remove some past misunderstandings
and contributed to a mature and constructive understanding between the two countries on the basis of equality, mutual respect
and mutual benefit. Dr. Kissinger reaffirmed US support for
the Simla Agreement and India's initiatives for normalisation and
reconciliation in the sub-continent without outside interference.
He also affirmed that the US did not intend to encourage an
arms race in the sub-continent nor did she equate Pakistan with
India. India's role as a major factor for peace, progress and
stability in Asia was recognised. The US also accepted India's
intentions of using nuclear technology only for peaceful purposes.
She also recognised the positive role of the non-aligned countries
in the world and accepted India's view that Indo-Soviet friendship is not an impediment to the further development of IndoAmerican relations. At the same time, the improvement of
India's relations with the US, is not to be at the expense of
either country's relations with other countries. The agreement
to set up a Joint Commission following the visit was a significant
step towards providing a framework for economic, commercial,
scientific, technological, educational and cultural co-operation
between the two countries. In the light of this trend towards an
improved climate of Indo-US relations there was all the greater
disappointment and regret at the recent United States decision
to lift the arms embargo to Pakistan, India could not but make
clear that the decision could have serious consequences for the
peace, stability and the process of normalisation in the sub-conti<pg5>
nent as also create a set-back in the evolution of more mature
relations between the two countries.
India's growing relations with the developing States of Africa
were further consolidated by the exchange of high level visits
with several African countries. During the year under review,
India played host to the Presidents of Senegal, Sudan, Zambia
and Gabon and to the Prime Ministers of Mauritius and Tanzania. The Vice-President of India visited Zambia- at the invitation
of the Zambian Government to participate in the I" anniversary celebrations of the country's independence. He also visited
Tanzania. Technical and economic co-operation agreements as
well as trade agreements were signed with several African countries during the year.
During the year under review, considerable importance was

given to development of close ties with the West Asian States and
the Gulf, particularly Iran, Iraq and the United Arab Emirates.
A large number of high-level visits were exchanged resulting in
the affirmation of the traditional friendship between them and
India. These exchanges also revealed a close identity of views
on major international and bilateral issues, thus creating a sound
framework for greater co-operation in various fields of endeavour.
Along with many other developing countries India has also
been severely hit by the energy crisis brought about by unprecedented increases in oil prices. At the same time India has
supported the right of oil producing countries to have sovereignty
over their natural resources and to secure fair prices for their
raw material. In solidarity with other non-aligned and developing countries, India has played a constructive role at the Special
Session of the UN General Assembly and elsewhere with a
view to providing compensating mechanisms such as special funds
to help developing nations meet their increased energy costs and
balance of payment difficulties. India has also taken steps for
strengthening bilateral relations with oil producing countries like
Iran and Iraq, by working out schemes of mutual economic cooperation providing on the one hand for uninterrupted oil supplies
to India and on the other hand assistance and co-operation in
industrialisation of the concerned oil producing countries.
The crisis resulting from increasing cost of oil, foodstuffs,
fertilisers and raw materials has served to high-light the need for
the developing countries to concentrate on their economic deve<pg6>
lopment and to make the best use of the resources available with
them. The world is going through the process of a second industrial revolution, this time based not so much on an international division of labour, as on the progressive. use of the continuously developing technology. It is imperative that the countries
of the non-industrialized developing world should not once
again miss the chance in this second industrial revolution. It is
also imperative that they should make the best use of their
technological advancement, however limited it may be. It is in
this context that the underground explosion of a nuclear device
for peaceful purposes in last May by India has to be seen and
assessed. India attaches the, utmost importance to the harnessing of the boundless uses of nuclear technology for economic and
social development purposes.
As regards problems nearer home, the process of normalisation of the relationships in the sub-continent continued apace,
despite some set backs in June-July 1974, arising from Pakistan's
baseless suspicion of India's peaceful nuclear explosion. The
India-Pakistan-Bangladesh tripartite agreement of April 1974,
had consolidated the progress already made since the Simla
Agreement of July 1972. India's persistent efforts to hasten the
process of normalisation of relations with Pakistan happily led

to agreement in September over resumption of postal and telecommunication links and exchange of visits by, nationals of either
country. This was followed by the conclusion of a trade agreement in December 1974 and a shipping agreement in January
1975. India was, however, apprehensive that the decision of
the United States to resume arms supply to Pakistan would be a
set-back to the process of normalisation of relations between India
and Pakistan.
India has continued her policy of friendship and co-operation
with her immediate neighbours and several steps have been taken
in her relations with Bangladesh and Sri Lanka, with a view
to stabilising harmony and co-operation in this part of the region.
The bonds of traditional friendship which have marked IndiaBangladesh relations were further cemented by high-level exchange of visits and collaboration in the political, technological
and economic fields. Prime Minister Mujibur Rahman visited
India in May and President Giri paid a visit to Bangladesh in
June last. India extended credits to Bangladesh for various projects to further economic co-operation with that country. In the
political sphere India concluded a land boundary agreement with
<pg7>
Bangladesh. This agreement settled the boundary question,
which had defied solution for a long time, and was a step towards
friendship and good neighbourliness. Talks are also continuing
with Bangladesh for the demarcation of the maritime boundary
between the two countries. Similarly, the recent agreement with
Shri Lanka on the division of the historic waters in Palk Bay, which
also has settled the issue of Kachchativu amicably, is an indication of India's earnestness in evolving a policy of friendship and
mutual co-operation with her neighbours. The policy of actively
promoting the economic deveolpment and progress of Bhutan
continued during the year. Relations were further strengthened by
the visit of President Giri to Bhutan in June and the Bhutan
king of India in December 1974. During several exchanges of
high-level visits between India and Nepal frank and friendly
talks were held to solve some of the questions of bilateral
interest between them, in accordance with the principle of
reciprocity and mutual benefit. Joint Boundary Demarcation
work progressed smoothly with Burma. Relations with Afghanistan were marked by friendly co-operation in economic, technical
and cultural fields and were further cemented by the visit, in
March 1975, of President Mohammed Daud to India.
As regards South East Asia, India welcomes the trend
towards regional co-operation among the countries of the area
under the auspices of ASEAN and supports their desire to
develop South East Asia as a zone of peace, freedom and
neutrality. It is India's hope that such co-operation would
eventually lead towards a system of security rooted on economic
strength and voluntary co-existence and respect for the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of all the

countries in the area. A spirit of understanding and goodwill
specially marked India's bilateral relations with Malaysia, Singapore, Thailand, Indonesia and Philippines. A mutually satisfactory maritime boundary agreement was also concluded with Indonesia.
The situation in Indo-China is still far from peaceful. There
has been recurrence of fighting in Vietnam and the conflict still
continues in Cambodia. India has emphasised the importance of
the observance of the Paris Agreement for peace and stability in
vietnam and has urged the settlement of the conflict in Cambodia
in accordance with the wishes of the people and without outside
interference. India hopes that understanding reached in Laos
would endure and be consolidated. India's relations with Aus<pg8>
tralia, New Zealand, Fiji and Mauritius were further strengthened
by the exchange of visits and fruitful collaboration in various
fields.
In East Asia, India's relations with Japan, North and South
Korea and Mongolia continued to be friendly and cordial and
strengthened by exchange of visits. Towards China, India
continued to follow a policy of seeking normalisation of relations.
China's attitude, however, remained unresponsive and unfriendly.
As a result, there was no significant change for the better in
India's relations with China.
India remains concerned over the developments in the Indian
Ocean which, alongwith other littoral countries, she wants to
maintain as a zone of peace free from big power rivalry. The
US decision involving further expansion of military facilities
in the Indian Ocean island of Diego Garcia has caused deep
concern to the States in the region. In this context, India
watched with interest the report of the UN Study Team. Being
totally opposed to the establishment of bases for military
purposes in the Indian Ocean area, India has sought to co-ordinate
her policies with littoral States who agree on the need to keep
the Indian Ocean free from big power rivalry.
India continued to take sustained interest in international
forums and seeks solutions to international problems in accordance with her general principles bearing on arms control,
regulation of international trade and development and the various
human problems pertaining to colonialism and aparthied and
fundamental human rights.
In sum, the year under report witnessed an expansion, in
depth as well as in breadth, of India's friendly relations with
several countries in the world. While India's traditional and
time-tested friendship with the Soviet Union was further consolidated, relations with the USA were placed on a more mature
understanding of each other's points of view. India's relations

with the other European countries both east and west were
further strengthened. The year also witnessed normalisation of
relations with Portugal and a new beginning in the long historic
connection between India and Portugal. While harmonious and
co-operative relations with India's neighbours were further
strengthened by exchange of high-level visits, a new dimension
was given to her co-operation with the developing African
<pg9>
countries by the conclusion of various technical and trade agreements. In the relaxation of world tension and the adherence
of more and more countries to the principle of co-existence and
of co-operation rather than confrontation, India finds a vindication of the policy of non-alignment which continues to serve her
national interest and the larger cause of world peace.
<pg10>
MALI
GERMANY CYPRUS USA VIETNAM RUSSIA ISRAEL MOROCCO INDIA GREECE CENTRAL
AFRICAN REPUBLIC FRANCE PORTUGAL ANGOLA GUINEA GUINEA!!GUINEA-BISSAU
MOZAMBIQUE BULGARIA HUNGARY NORWAY SLOVAKIA PAKISTAN PERU SENEGAL SUDAN
ZAMBIA GABON MAURITIUS TANZANIA IRAN IRAQ UNITED ARAB EMIRATES BANGLADESH
SRI LANKA BHUTAN NEPAL BURMA MALAYSIA INDONESIA PHILIPPINES THAILAND CHINA
CAMBODIA LAOS FIJI NEW ZEALAND JAPAN KOREA MONGOLIA
Jan 01, 1974

India's Neighbours
CHAPTER I
INDIA'S NEIGHBOURS
Afghanistan
Relations between Afghanistan and India were marked by
increasingly friendly co-operation in the economic, technical and
cultural fields. The Afghan Minister of Information and Culture,
Mr. A. R. Navin, visited India in February/March 1974 and
held discussion for expansion of Indo-Afghan co-operation in
cultural field with India's Minister of Education and the Minister
of Information and Broadcasting. The Third Ministerial level
meeting of the Joint Indo-Afghan Economic Commission took
place in New Delhi from Jun 20, 1974 to 24 June 1974. The Afghan
delegation was headed by H.E. Dr. Abdul Kayoum, Minister of
Mines and Industries. H.E. Mr. Waheed Abdullah, Deputy
Foreign Minister of Afghanistan, visited India from 27 to 29

June 1974 and exchanged views on bilateral and international
issues. Sardar Mohammed Naim, Personal Emissary of President
Daoud, passed through Delhi in December 1974. His transit
visit afforded an opportunity for review of bilteral relations.
H.E. Mr. Mohammed Daoud, Head of States and Prime
Minister of Afghanistan, accompanied by Ministers of Commerce, Planning, Deputy Foreign Minister and senior officials
paid a State visit to India from 10 to 14 March 1975. During
his stay in Delhi, President Mohammed Daoud and his delegation
held extensive talks with the Prime Minister, the Minister of External Affairs and other leaders. They visited places of educational, industrial agricultural and scientific interest in and around
Delhi. The Punjab University conferred an Honorary Degree of
Doctor of Law on President Daoud during his visit to, Chandigarh. There was a close similarity of views on all subjects discussed and, among other things, both the Afghan and Indian
leaders reaffirmed their resolve to create an atmosphere of peace
and cooperation in South Asia and to continue to seek resolution
of existing disputes by peaceful methods. In keeping with close
relations between India and Afghanistan, the two sides agreed
to keep in close contact on political, economic and other deve<pg11>
lopments in the region. Regret was voiced at the recent action
of the United States in lifting the arms embargo to Pakistan.
It was felt that this would stimulate an arms race in South Asia
and encourage the forces of confrontation and tension and thus
retard the process of normalisation in South Asia.
Bangladesh
Indo-Bangladesh relations continued to be further strengthened and consolidated in all spheres in the spirit of close
friendship, mutual confidence and co-operation. The tradition of
frequent meetings, formal and informal, between the leaders of
the two countries was maintained.
The Foreign Minister of Bangladesh Dr. Kamal Hussain,
visited India in April 1974. The historic Tripartite Agreement
of 9 April was signed between India, Pakistan and Bangladesh.
The major question resolved through this Agreement was that
of the 195 Pakistani prisoners of war detained for war crimes.
The Bangladesh Government decided not to proceed with the
war crimes trial as an act of clemency and in acknowledgement
of the Government of Pakistan's apology for the crimes committed by the Pakistan Army which it "condemned and deeply
regretted". The 195 POWs were duly repatriated to Pakistan,
but the expectation that this would induce Pakistan to respond
by settling the question of division of assets and agree to the
return of the remaining Pakistani nationals in Bangladesh unfortunately remained unfulfilled. The Government of India
were convinced that the process of normalisation on the sub-

continent would not be completed until these and other
outstanding questions of vital importance to Bangladesh were
resolved and relations between Pakistan and Bangladesh
normalised.
The Prime Minister of Bangladesh, (now President) Sheikh
Mujibur, Rahman, paid an official visit to India from 12 to 16
May 1974. The visit constituted an important landmark in relations between the two countries. The settlement of the land
boundary question which had defied a solution for a generation
affords a unique example of creative statesmanship, political
wisdom and courage displayed by the leaders of India and Bangladesh for the cause of peace, welfare and advancement of the
people of the two countries. Under the Agreement, Berubari
would remain with India and the enclaves of Dahagram and
<pg12>
Angarpota with Bangladesh, while other enclaves would be exchanged.
The Joint Declaration issued by the two Prime Ministers
expressed deep satisfaction at the growing ties of co-operation
between their two countries based on mutual respect, sovereignty,
equality and non-interference in each other's internal affairs" and
reaffirmed their resolve to further consolidate and expand this
co-operation, thus fulfilling the deeply-felt aspirations of the
peoples of the two countries.
On Farakka, the two leaders agreed that the problem should
be approached with understanding so that the interests of both
countries may be reconciled and difficulties removed in a spirit of
friendship and co-operation. The question of delimiting the maritime boundary between India and Bangladesh is engaging the
earnest attention of the two Governments. Four rounds of extensive negotiations have been held; one at the technical level and
three at the level of Foreign Secretaries. Both sides are agreed
that this matter should be settled through negotiations in an equitable manner, safeguarding the interests of both countries. The
Government of India are however, clear in their mind that, pending a settlement, neither side should act in a manner which might
prejudice the position of the other.
The Joint Rivers Commisison, set up in July 1972, was charged with the additional task of studying the possibilities of augmentmg the lean season flow of the Ganga at Farakka. The Commission last met in Delhi in early 1975, but was unable to make any
joint recommendations to the two governments.
President V. V. Giri visited Bangladesh in June 1974.
Shortly after assuming office the Minister of External Affairs,
Shri Y. B, Chavan, paid an official visit to Bangladesh from 7
to 10 December 1974. The visit emphasised the high importance India attached to relations with her friendly neighbours

with whom she shared many common values and goals.
In response to a request from the Bangladesh Government,
a three-man team of Indian nuclear scientists from the Bhabha
Atomic Energy Centre, led by Dr. Raja Ramanna, visited Bangladesh in April 1974 and agreed upon a programme of collaboration between the two countries.
Other notable developments in Indo-Bangladesh relations
included the signing of a (Civil Aviation Agreement on 4 July
2--883M of EA/74
<pg13>
the gift of a Mobile Science Laboratory for use In educational
institutions in Bangladesh, and conclusion of a Cultural and
Academic Exchange Programme for two years from 10 October
1974 under the Cultural Agreement of September 1972. The
programme provided for a wide and varied exchange in the
cultural and educational fields between the two countries. An
Indian Film Festival was held in Dacca and a Bangladesh Film
Festival in Delhi in April 1974.
The Bangladesh Government appreciated the peaceful nature
of India's nuclear test explosion and supported its resolution
in the United Nations on the question of nuclear weapons free
zone in South Asia.
On several other important international issues, too, such
as the establishment of the Indian Ocean as a Zone of peace,
measures of relief and long-term assistance to developing countries severely affected by the world economic crisis, de-colonization, ending of racial discrimination and the like, India and
Bangladesh shared a basic unity of approach and action.
Pursuant to an understanding reached between the Prime
Minister of India and the Prime Minister of Bangladesh during
the latter's visit to New Delhi in May 1974, technical-level talks
were held between the officials of the two countries to study
and make recommendations regarding the delimitation of the
maritime boundary between India and Bangladesh. An Indian
team visited Dacca for these talks from 29 November to 4
December 1974. The talks were resumed in New Delhi about
the middle of January 1975.
Bhutan
The bonds of traditional friendship and warmth which have
consistently been the hallmark of Indo-Bhutan relations, were
renewed and strengthened through high-level exchanges of
visits. In June 1974 the President of India and Shrimati V. V.
Giri accompanied by Shri T. K. Gujral, Minister for Information
and Broadcasting, visited Bhutan to participate in the ceremonies

marking the coronation of His Majesty King Jigme Singhye
Wangchuck. In his coronation speech His Majesty the King
of Bhutan paid handsome tribute to the relationship of co-operation and friendship which existed between India and Bhutan.
His Majesty King Jigme Singhye Wangchuck, accompanied
by H.R.H. Ashi D.W. Wangchuck and His Excellency Lyonpo
<pg14>
Dawa Tsering, the Foreign Minister of Bhutan, paid a State
visit to India from 18 to 28 December 1974. The visit served
to reaffirm, the warmth and friendship which has traditionally
characterised Indo-Bhutan relations. The discussions between
the leaders of Bhutan and India, covered a wide-range of bilateral and international issues.
His Majesty the King of Bhutan and the Prime Minister of
India expressed their satisfaction at the identity of approach
which existed between Bhutan and India on major international
issues. They reiterated their resolve that regular consultation
and close co-ordination was essential in the fulfilment of the
mutual interests of the two countries. Measures were agreed for
the further intensification of contacts and exchanges of visits
at various levels between the two countries which would contribute to deepening the friendship and understanding between
the governments and people of Bhutan and India.
His Majesty the King of Bhutan and the Prime Minister of
India expressed their satisfaction with the existing arrangements
between the two countries on matters of defence and security.
They reaffirmed that the two governments shared a joint approach
towards all matters affecting the security of India and Bhutan.
The two countries also agreed to maintain close co-ordination
in their foreign policies in the spirit of the Indo-Bhutanese
Treaty of 1949.
The two countries also affirmed their mutual Interest in the
consolidation and further progress of Bhutan's economic
development and it was agreed that India would provide whatever assistance that Bhutan needed in terms of development aid
and expertise from India in fulfilling the objectives of Bhutan's
Five Year Plans. It was also agreed that further steps would
he taken to identify projects on which the two countries could
co-operate, in addition to the Chukha Hydro-electric Project
and the Pagli Cement Project on which agreements had been
signed earlier.
During the year under review the Government of India
continued to bear special responsibility for providing assistance
for Bhutan's socioeconomic development. The expenditure
on Bhutan's Third Five Year Plan (1971-76) was originally
envisaged at Rs. 35.5 crores. Following modification and expansion and on the basis of the expenditure incurred in the first 4

years of the plan, it was likely to exceed Rs. 40 crores. India
<pg15>
has already provided Rs. 34 crores by way of developmental
assistance during this period, and a further contribution is to be
made, in 1975-76, the last year of the Third Plan.
The formal agreement on the Chukha Hydro-electric Project, estimated to cost Rs. 83 crores, and designed to produce
250, MW of power, was signed on 23 March 1974 by H.R.H
Ashi D.W. Wangchuck, His Majesty the King's Representative
in the Bhutanese Ministry of Development, and Shri K. C. Pant,
Minister for Irrigation and Power. This project, expected to
be completed in 7 years, will make a major contribution to
accelerating economic development in Bhutan.
India has already undertaken to finance the construction of
a cement plant, with an annual capacity of 100,000 tons, at
Pagli in Bhutan at a cost of Rs. 7 crores. An agreement was
signed in Thimphu on 26 July 1974 between the Pagli Project
Authority and the Cement Corporation of India, appointing the
latter as (Consultants for setting up the cement plant on a turnkey
basis
Co-operation between the two countries in various developmental fields continued to be implemented in accordance with
the programmes approved by the two governments. Planning
experts from India and Bhutan met in February-March 1974.
Visits and surveys by expert delegations and specialists were
carried out in a variety of fields in Bhutan, including forestry
resources, minerals, telecommunications and power generation.
Burma
India's relations with Burma continued to be cordial and
friendly. At the invitation of the President of India, President
U Ne Win of Burma paid a goodwill visit to India from 23 to
26 April 1974. Ho was, accompanied by two members of the
Burmese Council of State, U Hla Phone, the Burmese Minister
of Foreign Affairs. and other official-, of the Government of
Burma- President U Ne Win had a friendly exchange of views
with the President of India and had meetings with the Prime
Minister, the Minister of External Affairs. the Minister of Industrial Development, Science and Technology, the Minister of
Commerce and the Minister of Irrigation and Power. The
talks covered a wide-range of subjects dealing with international
and bilateral issues<pg16>
The Joint Boundary Demarcation work between India and
Burma progressed smoothly. A 10-member Indian delegation
visited Burma from I to 10 October 1974, to attend the 16th
and 17th Meetings of the Joint Boundary Commission.

Maldives
Relations between India and the Republic of Maldives were
strengthened by growing co-operation between the two countriesin economic, educational and technological fields.
At the invitation of the Prime Minister of India, the Prime
Minister of the Republic of Maldives, Mr. Ahmed Zaki, accompanied by Mrs. Zaki visited India from 8 to 14 March 1974.
He called on the President of India and had meetings with the
Prime Minister, the Minister of External Affairs, the Minister
of Agriculture and discussed subjects of common interest.
In February 1974 a branch of the State Bank of India was,
opened in Male. A telecommunication link between Bombay
A Male was established in March 1974 with Indian assistance.
At the invitation of the Maldivian Prime Minister, the Indian
Prime Minister paid a return visit to the Republic of Maldives
from 12 to 14 January 1975. During her two days stay, Mrs.
Gandhi called on the President Mr. Ibrahim Nasir and the
Prime Minister Mr. Ahmed Zaki. Talks with the Maldivian
leaders covered both international issues and bilateral matters.
The visit contributed significantly to the consolidation of close
and friendly relations between the two countries on the basis of
mutual respect and understanding. It also laid the foundation
for more meaningful co-operation between the two countries in
the political and economic fields.
Nepal
India's relations with Nepal have traditionally been characterised by warmth and friendship. During the earlier part of
1974, there were some high level visits from Nepal, including the
visit of a Planning Delegation led by Dr. Harka Gurung, ViceChairman of the Nepalese Planning Commission, in February
1974 and the visits by Major General P. B. Khatri, the Nepalese
Foreign Secretary, in February and April 1974, during which
various issues of interests to the two countries were discussed
<pg17>
with a view to strengthening Indo-Nepalese relations in various
fields.
Relations between India and Nepal came under some strain
in August/September 1974 when anti-Indian statements were
made and anti-Indian opinions were expressed in Nepali Press
regarding certain matters which were entirely and solely under
the competence of India's internal affairs. There was also hostile
Press campaign for some time. The Government of India reacted to these events with a feeling of considerable surprise.
Indo-Nepalese relations were the subject of free and frank ex-

change of views during the informal visit of the Prime Minister
of Nepal, Shri Nagendra Prasad Rijal, to New Delhi in December 1974. Various matters of concern to the two countries were
discussed in several high-level meetings between the Prime
Ministers of India and Nepal. India expressed the view that the
two countries, whose people live by close traditional, historical,
cultural and other ties, should continue to work for the strengthening of their bilateral relations in all fields on the basis of sovereign
equality, reciprocity and mutual benefit.
The year 1974-75 was marked by further intensification in
Indo-Nepalese economic co-operation, symbolising the traditional
and close relations between the two countries. A sum of Rs. 8.86
crores was provided in the 1974-75 budget as India's contribution towards meeting the development requirements of Nepal.
The eastern sector of the Mahendra Raj Marg (the East-West
Highway), which was recently completed, is to be formally handed
over to Nepal shortly. The construction of the Central Sector
of the Mahendra Raj Marg, estimated to cost Rs. 25 crores, is
currently in progress. Survey work is already being carried out
for the Kathmandu-Dhankuta Road. An agreement regarding
the Devighat Hydro-electric Project is expected to be signed
between the two governments shortly. This project, which is to
produce 14,000 KW of power, is designed to meet Nepal's growing requirements for electric power. The Chatra Canal Project
as well as the Trishuli Hydro-electric Project, which have already
been completed, are soon to be handed over to Nepal. Discussions have been underway between the two countries regarding
the giant Karnali Hydro-electric Project. Power from this project,
surplus to Nepal's needs, will be purchased by India. A longterm soil conservation schemes in the catchment area of the river
Kosi is also under examination. This scheme would also check
the silting of the river in its lower reaches in India.
<pg18>
Indian teaching staff continued to be provided for manning
certain posts in the Tribhuvan University. Other Indian technicians and field operators are helping Nepal in there veterinary and
horticulture programmes, as, well as in the small scale and cottage industry schemes.
Pakistan
On 9 April 1974, a historic agreement was signed between
Bangladesh, India and Pakistan, which brought about immediate
prospects for the resolution, through bilateral and peaceful means
of various humanitarian issues which had arisen out of the conflict
of 1971. This agreement was the culmination of India's efforts,
in consultation with the People's Republic of Bangladesh, to
overcome the various difficulties in the way of the solution of these
problems, in the larger interests of peace and reconciliation in
the sub-continent. The Tripartite Meeting, at the level of
Foreign Ministers of the three countries, was made possible after

Pakistan announced its recognition of the People's Republic of
Bangladesh in February 1974.
In accordance with the terms of the Agreement, India on its
part, completed the repatriation of the remaining 6,500 Pakistani
PWOs and civilian internees out of the total of about 90,000 by
30 April 1974. This included the 195 PWOs earlier required
for trial in Bangladesh. In the context of the earnest desire of
the governments for reconciliation, peace and friendship in the
sub-continent, the Tripartite Agreement resulted in the emergence
of a mutually acceptable formula which brought about the release
and repatriation of the 195 PWOs to Pakistan. By I July 1974,
about 1,18,030 Bengalees had been repatriated from Pakistan to
Bangladesh and about 1,08,287 non-Bengalees had been repatriated from Bangladesh to Pakistan. Repatriation of these nationals
to their respective countries was carried out through the airlift organised by the UNHCR with the assistance provided by several
countries. In respect of non-Bengalees in Bangladesh, the Pakistan side reiterated in the Tripartite Agreement that all those who
fell under the first three categories (categories of eligible persons
in accordance with the Delhi Agreement) would be received by
Pakistan without any limit as to numbers. The agreement also
provided for the review of rejected cases.
The presence of the Pakistan Delegation, led by their Minister of State for Defence and Foreign Affairs, also afforded the
<pg19>
opportunity for bilateral discussions to review the progress on
implementation of the Simla Agreement. A bilateral agreement
was signed with Pakistan for bringing about the release and repatriation of all nationals of either country, detained in the other,
prior to the conflict of 1971 irrespective of the charges on which
they were detained. Under this agreement, repatriation was completed by 9 December 1974 of all pre-war detainees in the two
countries, whose presence could be verified with the help of the
Swiss Missions. In all, 297 Indian pre-war detainees were released and repatriated by Pakistan. Similarly, 607 Pakistani prewar detainees were released and repatriated by India.
In pursuance of the Joint Communique of 9 April India took
the initiative to suggest to Pakistan the exchange of delegations
to discuss implementation of normalisation measures envisaged
in paragraph 3 of the Simla Agreement. After exchange of correspondence, it was agreed that an Indian Delegation led by the
Foreign Secretary would visit Pakistan on 10 June to discuss
resumption of postal and telecommunication links and travel.
On I June Pakistan sent a message postponing the talks indefinitely on the ground that India's peaceful nuclear experiment
conducted on 18 May had corn-. as a shock to the people in
Pakistan and that the talks should, therefore, be deferred till the
atmosphere was more favourable. However, this was hardly a
tenable argument, particularly in view of the Prime Minister's

message of 22 May addressed to the Prime Minister of Pakistan,
in which she had, while referring to apprehensions in Pakistan,
categorically assured that India remained fully committed to her
traditional policy of developing nuclear energy resources entirely
for peaceful purposes and that the underground test conducted in
carefully controlled conditions was designed to develop technology for various economic uses of nuclear energy. It was further
stated in the Prime Minister's letter that there were no political
or foreign policy implications of this test and India remained
committed to settling all differences with Pakistan peacefully
through bilateral negotiations in accordance with the Simla
Agreement.
However, despite the assurances contained in the Prime
Minister's letter, the Pakistan Government decided to dramatise
its reaction to India's peaceful nuclear explosion. A negative twist
was given to the event by Pakistan while projecting it internationally. The two facets of Pakistan's line were : firstly, that
Pakistan should be provided a collective or individual, security
<pg20>
guarantee by the nuclear weapons powers against the alleged
nuclear threat from India; secondly, that the United States Government should resume supply of military hardware to Pakistan
in order to remove the so-called `imbalance' created by India's
acquisition of "nuclear capability". Internally in Pakistan,
India's peaceful nuclear experiment was projected as a threat to
Pakistan's security. Some totally unwarranted and baseless allegations were levelled against India to the effect that India had
massed its troops against Pakistan. Some of these statements,
which were tantamount to hostile propaganda against India in
violation of the Simla Agreement, were brought to the notice of
the Pakistan Government formally. However, while doing so,
India continued to reiterate that there was no reason whatsoever
to give up the healthy trend of developing normal relations between the two countries which was in accordance with the aspirations of the people in the two countries. It was also pointed out
that Pakistan's action in unilaterally postponing the talks scheduled for 10 June was singularly unfortunate as discussions on
normalisation measures envisaged in the Simla Agreement had
nothing to do with India's peaceful nuclear experiment, whatever
Pakistan Government's reservations on the subject. It was emphasised that the implementation of the normalisation measures
was for the mutual benefit of the people in the two countries and,
therefore, this matter should not be made subject to political
considerations and fulfilment of conditions not envisaged in the
Simla Agreement.
As a result of the correspondence exchanged on this subject
between India's Minister of External Affairs and Pakistan's
Minister of State for Defence and Foreign Affairs (15 June to
20 August), the way was cleared for rescheduling of India-Paksitan talks on implementing normalisation measures without any

pre-condition.
Accordingly, an Indian Delegation, led by the Foreign Secretary, visited Islamabad from 11 September to 14 September 1974
to discuss the implementation of the various normalisation
measures envisaged in paragraph 3 of the Simla Agreement. As
a, result of these talks. the following agreements were reached
with Pakistan :
(a) Agreement on the Exchange of Postal Articles:
(b) Tele-communication Agreement;
<pg21>
(c) Visa Agreement; and
(d) Protocol on visits to Religious Shrines.
In addition, a Joint Communique was issued on the occasion
which mentioned that the Civil Aviation Delegations of the two
countries should meet to discuss the 1971 case regarding overfights and the question of resumption of overflights and air links
between the two countries. Further, that the representatives of
India and Pakistan would exchange visits to explore possibilities
of trade between the two countries on a mutually profitable basis
The two sides also agreed in this Communique to examine the
steps to promote exchanges in the field of science and culture.
In accordance with the objectives agreed to at Simla, the new
agreements provided for simplified procedures to facilitate their
implementation. and avoided the pitfalls of the defunct agreements in these fields.
In pursuance of the Joint Communique of 14 September
1974, an Indian Civil Aviation Delegation visited Pakistan from
18 to 22 November to discuss the bilateral settlement of the
1971 ICAO case and the resumption of overflights and air links.
The discussions were useful in bringing about a better appreciation of each other's view points on these issues. However, it was
found necessary to continue the talks at another meeting to be
held at New Delhi.
A Protocol on Trade was concluded after the visit of a Pakistan Delegation to Delhi on November 1974. In pursuance of the
Protocol, trade embargo was lifted on 7 December 1974 after a
gap of nearly ten years. A comprehensive Trade Agreement was
signed at Islamabad on 23 January 1975. The Agreement is valid
for one year and is extendable for a further period of two years.
The Agreement reiterates the essential features of the Protocol,
namely that to begin with and unless otherwise agreed trade will
be conducted on Government to Government basis or through
Government controlled trade corporations of the two countries.
Trade will be conducted on the basis of free convertible currency.
Also signed on 23 January 1975 was a Memorandum of Under-

standing incorporating inter alia banking arrangements for remittances pertaining to trade. Earlier on, 15 January 1975 India
and Pakistan signed in New Delhi a Protocol on resumption of
direct, shipping services between the two countries. The shipping
services which provide for the shipment of cargo in Indian and
<pg22>
Pakistani ports by the merchant ships of the two countries are to
commence operation from 15 February 1975.
While progress towards normalisation has been somewhat
slow, this is compensated by the fact that mutually satisfactory
agreements have been worked out for the resumption of postal
services, telecommunication links and travel facilities which
have resulted in renewed contact between millions of people in
the two countries. Added to this, the resumption of trade after
a lapse of nearly 10 years holds the promise, of mutual economic
benefit for the people in the two countries.
It would be a signal contribution to the peace and well-being
of this entire region if the healthy trend set in motion by the
Simla Agreement for settling of differences bilaterally and through
peaceful means continues to gather momentum. India, on its
part, would pursue the initiatives, which it had already taken, to
achieve this objective. However, it was unfortunate that Pakistan
took certain actions in Pakistan-occupied Kashmir, which constituted a material and unilateral alteration in the situation regarding the territories of Jammu and Kashmir under its illegal occupation. These steps included the following :
(i)

Under the interim constitution for the so-called
"Azad Kashmir", adopted in August 1974, Pakistan
proposed to set up a Council under the Chairmanship of Prime Minister of Pakistan with nominated
members from Pakistan Cabinet and National
Assembly, to rule the area and virtually control all
affairs of its government.

(ii) In September 1974, Pakistan abolished the separate
entity of the principality of Hunza--one of the territories of northern areas of Jammu and Kashmir under
illegal occupation of Pakistan. and merged its administration with Gilgit.
(iii) Pakistan promised to consider the so-called demand
of the people of northern areas of Jammu and Kashmir
for representation in the Pakistan National Assembly.
These actions of Pakistan were violation of the Simla Agreement
which provided under paragraph 1 (ii) that "pending the final
settlement of any of the problems between the two countries,
<pg23>

neither side should unilaterally alter the situation". This matter
was taken up with the Government of Pakistan accordingly.
Sri Lanka
India's friendly relations with Sri Lanka were further
strengthened by exchange of visits and collaboration in the political, technological and economic fields.
The long outstanding problem of Kachchativu was amicably
settled on 28 June 1974, with the conclusion of the agreement
between India and Sri Lanka on the boundary in the historic
waters between the two countries and related matters. The
Agreement sets out the geographical co-ordinates of the
points constituting the boundary in the historic waters between
the two countries and sets at rest a longstanding controversy with
the neighbouring country regarding the island of Kachchativu.
Although the island of Kachchativu falls on the side of the
boundary of Sri Lanka and will belong to Sri Lanka, the Agreemeat safeguards the rights of Indian pilgrims and fishermen who
would be entitled to visit the island in the same manner as they
were doing before this Agreement came into force. No travel
documents or visas will be required by them to visit this island.
The Agreement also provides that the vessels of both countries
will enjoy in each other's waters such rights as they have traditionally enjoyed therein.
At the invitation of Shri I. K. Gujral, the Minister of Information and Broadcasting, Mr. R. S. Perera, the Sri Lanka
Minister of Information and Broadcasting, visited India from 24
June to 10 July 1974. During his visit the Minister discussed
various proposals for strengthening co-operation in the fields of
culture and mass media.
At the invitation of the Government of India, Mr. and Mrs.
Rupasinghe, son-in-law and daughter of the Sri Lanka Prime
Minister, visited India from 29 June to 4 July 1974. During
their stay in India they called on the Prime Minister, the Minister of External Affairs and the Chairman of the Atomic Energy
Commission.
At the invitation of the Commander of the Sri Lanka Navy,
Admiral S. N. Kohli, the Chief of Naval Staff, paid a visit to
Sri Lanka from 31 July to 3 August 1974.
<pg24>
The, Sri Lanka Prime Minister, Mrs. Bandaranaike, baked
briefly in India from 31 October to 1 November 1974. During
her stay Mrs. Bandaranaike and the Indian Prime Minister discussed various international issues and reviewed a number of,
bilateral matters.
At the invitation of the Indian Labour Minister, the Sri Lanka

Labour Minister, Mr. Michael Pal de Zoysa Siriwardene, visited
India from 31 October to 9 November 1974.
At the invitation of the Prime Minister of Sri Lanka, Shri
Y. B. Chavan, the Minister of External Affairs, paid an official
visit to Sri Lanka from 18 November to 20 November 1974. The
talks which Shri Chavan had with the Sri Lanka Prime Minister
and other leaders of the Republic of Sri Lanka were held in a
cordial and friendly atmosphere and disclosed a close identity of
views on major international questions and bilateral matters.
Among the subjects discussed were the satisfactory progress in
the implementation of the Sirimavo-Shastri Pact, the Indian Ocean
Peace Zone proposal, the forthcoming Non-aligned Summit Conference to be held in Colombo, expansion of trade and the further intensification of economic co-operation between India and
Sri Lanka. Both sides agreed to develop scientific and technological co-operation in all fields and to increase cultural exchange
at all levels.
The implementation of the 1964 Indo-Sri Lanka Agreement
on persons of Indian origin in Sri Lanka continue to make satisfactory progress- In 1974, 36,000 persons of Indian Origin exclusive of their natural increase were repatriated against 33,000
in the previous year.
The Chief of the Sri Lanka Navy, Commodore D. B.
Goonesekera, paid a return visit to India from 13 December 1974
to 7 January 1975 at the invitation of Admiral S. N. Kohli, the
Chief of Naval Staff.
At the invitation of the Education Minister of India, the Sri
Lanka Education Minister, Mr. Badiuddin Mahmud, visited India
from 23 January to 3 February 1975. During his stay in India,
Mr. Mahmud visited various places and institutions of educational and cultural interest in Delhi, Bombay, Hyderabad, Trivandrum and Madras.
<pg25>
The President of Sri Lanka, H.E. Mr. William Gopallawa,
baited briefly in India from 19 to 22 February 1975 and again
from 27 February to 1 March 1975 on his way to and on his
return from Nepal, where he attended the coronation of the
King.
At the invitation of the Minister of External Affairs, Mr.
Lakshman Jayakody, Deputy Minister of Defence and Foreign
Affairs of Sri Lanka, visited India from 21 February to 6 March
1975. During his stay in New Delhi, Mr. Jayakody called on the
President, the Minister of External Affairs, the Minister of
Defence, the Minister of Health and Family Planning and the
Deputy Minister of External Affairs. Mr. Jayakody also visited
various institutions of defence and cultural interest in Calcutta,
Bombay, Poona and Madras.

Mr. T. B. Subasinghe, Minister of Industries and Scientific
Affairs, of Sri Lanka arrived in India on 25 February 1975 as
the head of the Sri Lanka Delegation to the ESCAP Conference
held in New Delhi. As the guest of the Government of India from
27 February to 5 March 1975, Mr. Subasinghe visited various
industrial complexes at Faridabad, Karnal and Chandigarh. On
28 February 1975, Mr. Subasinghe signed an Agreement on Cooperation in the field of Science and Technology between Sri Lanka
and India.
<pg26>
INDIA
AFGHANISTAN USA PAKISTAN MALI BANGLADESH BHUTAN UNITED KINGDOM LATVIA
CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC BURMA MALDIVES NEPAL SRI LANKA
Jun 20, 1974

Sikkim
CHAPTER II
SIKKIM
For the first time in the history of Sikkim free and fair
elections, on the basis of the principle of one man-one vote,
were held in April 1974. They were conducted under the supervision of a representative of the Election Commission of India.
The election manifesto of the Sikkim Congress, the party that
gained 31 of the 32 seats, asked for a "strengthening of the
bonds that already exist with the Government and people of
India, to draw them even closer". The manifesto went on to
state : "We also aspire to achieve the same democratic rights
and institutions that the people of India have enjoyed for a
quarter of a century".
On 11 May the elected Assembly passed a resolution requesting the Government of India "to examine the modalities of further strengthening India-Sikkim relationship as already agreed to
in the Agreement of May 08, 1973, signed between the three
parties, and to take immediate steps for Sikkim's participation in
the political and economic institutions of India". The Assembly
met on 20 June 1974 to consider a Bill, which later became the
Government of Sikkim Act 1974, providing a constitutional
framework for Sikkim. The Bill reaffirmed Sikkim's desire for

association with India in order to achieve speedy development in
the social and economic fields. Article 30(c) of the Bill sought
participation and representation for the people of Sikkim in the
political institutions of India. The Bill was unanimously adopted,
after a clause by clause examination, on 28 June 1974. On the
same day the Assembly adopted another resolution that measures
should be taken, inter alia, for seeking representation for the
people of Sikkim in India's parliamentary system. The Chogyal
gave his assent to this Bill on 4 July 1974.
Immediately after the formation of a government, Kazi
Lhendup Dorji, the Chief Minister of Sikkim, forwarded a
formal request to the Government of India, through the Chief
<pg27>
Executive, requesting that steps as may be legally or constitutionally necessary, be taken by the Government of India to give
effect to the Government of Sikkim Act 1974 and the resolutions passed by the Assembly. Accordingly a Bill amending the
Constitution was brought before Parliament on 30 August 1974,
with a view to strengthening Indo-Sikkim co-operation and interrelationship. The terms and conditions of Sikkim's association
with the Union were set out in the 10th Schedule proposed to be
added to the Constitution under this Bill. This Schedule bound
together all the complex net work of existing relations and
responsibilities between Sikkim and India brought about as a
result of various agreements and understandings. The Bill, in
enabling Sikkim's representatives to participate in our Parliament,
also gave to the people of Sikkim the opportunity of participation
in India's highest policy-making organ, not only on matters concerning India, but also on issues which given the very nature of
India's responsibilities in Sikkim, also vitally affect the Sikkimese
people.
After an 8-hour debate on 4 September 1974, the Lok Sabha
approved the measure by a majority of 310 to 7 votes. The Bill
was considered by the Rajya 'Sabha on 7 September 1974 and
was approved by that House by 168 to 8 votes. The Bill has
since been ratified by a majority of State Legislatures and received
the assent of the President on 22 February 1975. As per notification issued in the Gazette of India, Extraordinary, on 28 February 1975, the Act has come into force with effect from 1 March
1975.
India is to contribute a total of about Rs. 18.5 crores to the
Rs. 20 crore Fourth Five Year Plan of Sikkim (1971-76), the
entire amount being by way of a grant. In 1974-75, a sum of
Rs. 5.9 crores was budgeted for various development schemes
under this Plan. However, the popular Ministry which took
office in July 1974 found this amount inadequate to meet the
immediate developmental needs of Sikkim. Accordingly the
Sikkim Government drew up fresh schemes for implementation
during the remaining part of the financial year covering fields

such as conservation, rural water supply, animal husbandry,
village industries, horticulture, etc. The Government of India
agreed to provide an additional amount of Rs. 44 lakhs to
enable the Government of Sikkim to implement these programmes, which are specially geared to meet the urgent requirements of the Sikkimese people. The Lower Lagyap Hydel Pro<pg28>
ject, construction of which was started in 1972-73, is making
steady progress and is expected to be completed by March 1978.
The project will generate 6000 KW of electricity on completion,
which will meet the growing requirements for power in Sikkim
and will stimulate the setting up of small-scale industries in the
State.
To provide medical facilities to the people in far-flung
remote areas, two well-equipped mobile dispensaries at a cost
of Rs. 2.5 lakhs were provided. The hospital at Geyzing was provided with an X-Ray machine costing Rs. 45,000. To enable
screening operations in as wide an area as possible, a mobile
X-Ray Unit costing about Rs. 80,000 was provided. To ensure,
recreational facilities for the students, a sum of Rs. 50,000 has
been sanctioned to enable the schools to buy sports equipment,
musical instruments and such other material. Scholarships continued to be provided for Sikkimese students for college studies in
India, the expenditure on this being about Rs. 4.5 lakhs in
1974-75. In addition, admission of Sikkimese students to various
professional courses in Indian institutions of higher learning was
arranged on priority basis. These fields included medicine, agriculture, education and engineering. Budgetary support has been
extended to the Government of Sikkim to meet the additional
burden of revamping and rebuilding the administrative structure,
which had been completely paralysed in the wake of disturbances
in April-May 1973. Arrangements have also been made to ensure
availability of developmental finance to Sikkim from various
financial institutions in India. Similarly, it is proposed to extend
to Sikkim the benefits of transport and investment subsidies
which are available within India.
Technically qualified deputationists from India continued to
play their role in implementing the development projects in
Sikkim. The BRDB, CPWD and the P&T Department also maintained their programmes in Sikkim.
3-883MofEA/74
<pg29>
INDIA
USA

May 08, 1973

South East Asia
CHAPTER III
SOUTH EAST ASIA
Indonesia
The fifth round of bilateral talks at official and Ministerial
level between India and Indonesia was held in Djakarta from Aug 06, 1974
to 8 August 1974. During these talks India's Minister of
External Affairs, Sardar Swaran Singh, and the Indonesian
Foreign Minister Dr. Adam Malik reviewed bilateral relations
and important international developments that had taken place
since their last meeting in New Delhi in April 1973. Their discussions revealed the closeness of views of both Governments on
important international issues. The Foreign Minister of Indonesia
informed the Minister of External Affairs of India of the progress achieved so far by ASEAN to promote the welfare of the
people in the region. The Minister of External Affairs of India
expressed support for the objectives of the ASEAN and agreed
that the establishment of a Zone of Peace in South East Asia
would help in achieving conditions of peace and stability in the
region. He apprised the Foreign Minister of Indonesia of the
steps taken by India towards normalisation of relations and the
establishment of durable peace in the sub-continent. The, Foreign
Minister of Indonesia expressed the hope that the three countries
of the sub-continent would continue their efforts towards settling
their differences peacefully through direct negotiations, in accordance with the Simla and Delhi Agreements.
India entered into its first agreement on the delimitation of
continental shelf boundary during the year under review. This
was between India and Indonesia and the agreement was signed
in Jakarta in August 1974 between the Foreign Ministers of the
two countries. it delimited the boundary of the Indian and the
Indonesian continental shelf in the area between Great Nicobar
(India) and Sumatra (Indonesia). The total length of the
demarcation line is 48 nautical miles which is represented by
straight lines connecting 4 points. These points are equidistant
from the outermost island or islet belonging to the respective
countries. The agreement was ratified in Delhi on 17 December
1974.
<pg30>
Three warships of the Indian naval training squadron visited
Indonesian ports in September for joint exercises with the Indone-

sian Navy.
In the field of economic and technical co-operation between
India and Indonesia, steady progress was maintained. There are
at present 17 joint ventures in an advanced stage of implementation. Some of the fields covered are : textile mills, hand tools,
pipe fitting, automobile parts, caustic soda, vegetable oils, textile
spinning and rayon fibre.
Malaysia
Shri Y. B. Chavan, the Finance Minister, visited Kuala
Lumpur to preside over the Seventh Annual Meeting of the Asian
Development Bank from 25 to 27 April 1974.
A Malaysian delegation, consisting of 15 State Assembly
members headed by Hon'ble Datuk Soon Cheng Leong, visited
important centres in India to study industrial and agricultural
development projects and cottage industries.
A team of Malaysian Army Officers visited India in
November to make a study of the training facilities and methods
of instructions available in India.
India participated in the Quran reading competition held in
Malaysia in October.
In the field of economic and technical co-operation, more
joint venture proposals were finalised and the total number of
joint ventures has now reached 33. The new projects include
manufacture of automobile gears and nylon products and a
biscuit factory.
At the invitation of the President of India and Begum Abida
Ahmed, their Majesties the Yang Di-Pertuan Agong and the
Raja Permaisuri Agong paid a state visit to India from 6 to 9
December 1974. They visited places of historical and cultural
interest in Delhi, Jaipur and Ajmer. The visit afforded an opportunity for the further consolidation of the friendly relations
between India and Malaysia.
Singapore
The Minister of External Affairs, Sardar Swaran Singh, paid
an official visit to Singapore from 4 to 6 August 1974 and
<pg31>
exchanged views on regional and international matters with the
Singapore Prime Minister and Foreign Minister. The visit helped
in furthering bilateral exchanges at the ministerial level. The
Minister extended invitations to the Prime Minister and Foreign
Minister of Singapore to visit India.

The Speaker of the Lok Sabha, Dr. G. S. Dhillon, was in
Singapore from 24 to 27 September. He was received by the
Speaker of the Singapore Parliament.
An Indian Parliamentary delegation visited Singapore from
29 June to 2 July 1974.
A delegation led by the Secretary, Ministry of Heavy
Industry, visited Singapore from 4 to 5 February 1974 to explore
opportunities for supplying equipment or undertaking turnkey
projects.
A 6-Member trade delegation led by the Managing Director,
National Industrial Development Corporation, visited Singapore
in April 1974 to explore joint venture possibilities.
A delegation from Mazagon Docks visited Singapore and
concluded a deal for the sale of two coastal ships.
Two Air Wing cadets from India attended the annual training camp of the NCC(Air) in Singapore from 10 to 17 June
1974.
Four ships of the Singapore Navy paid a goodwill visit to.
Indian ports in March 1974.
India's trade with Singapore showed steady improvement.,
India's exports to Singapore during the - period January-August,
1974 reached S$ 127. 3 million which was higher than India's
total exports for the whole of 1973. Progress has also been made
in the field of joint ventures and three projects are now under
implementation.
Thailand
A team consisting of 21 officers from Thai National Defence
College visited New Delhi from 16 to 18 May 1974. They
called on the President and officials of the Planning Commission
and Ministries of Defence and External Affairs.
<pg32>
Shri V. C. Trivedi, Secretary in the Ministry of External
Affairs, visited Thailand from 10 to 13 August at the invitation
of the Thai Foreign Minister.
A delegation of Thai Naval officers visited India from 15 to
20 September 1974 on a study tour. The naval officers had an
opportunity to acquaint themselves with the training facilities
available in India.
The Commander-in-Chief of the Royal Thai Navy and a
party consisting of 6 other Thai Naval Officers visited India from
27 October to 4 November 1974 at the invitation of the Chief of

Staff of the Indian Navy.
A party of 23 officers from the National Defence College
visited Thailand in September as part of their annual foreign
tour.
Australia
Indo-Australian relations continued to develop satisfactorily.
There were closer exchanges on regional problems and on such
questions as the Indian Ocean as a Zone of Peace.
An Australian expert mission visited India to study the prospects for co-operation in the woollen textile industry. The
Government of Australia offered assistance for the establishment
of two seed-multiplication farms in India. The agreement for two
cattle breeding farms with Australian assistance (at Hissar and
Barapetta) was signed in July 1974. Other fields for co-operation have also been identified.
Shri K. D. Malaviya, Minister of Steel and Mines, visited
Australia in September 1974 to discuss the pricing of ore
exports.
At the invitation of the Australian Parliament, a 10-member
Parliamentary, delegation led by Shri R. Raghuramiah, Minister
of Parliamentary Affairs, visited Australia in June 1974. This
was followed by visits of Shri Vithal Gadgil, M.P., Shri Chandra
Shekhar, M.P. and Smt. Maya Ray, M.P. in September 1974.
Dr. R. J. O'Neill, Chairman of the Institute, of Defence and
Strategic Studies, visited India as a guest of the Government of
India in January 1975. Mr. Frank Crean, the Australian
Minister of Overseas Trade visited India from 26 January to
<pg33>
1 February 1975 and Sir John Kerr, the Governor-General of
Australia, from 27 February to 2 March 1975.
An Indo-Australian Agreement on Co-operation in the field
of Science and Technology was signed on 26 February 1975 by
Shri Y. B. Chavan, Minister of External Affairs, and Senator
Don Willesee, Foreign Minister of Australia. The agreement
provides for exchange of scientific and technical information, etc.
and a joint research programme of mutual interest.
Australian interest in cultural exchanges has increased recently.
Under the Indo-Australian Cultural Agreement the Government of Australia, in collaboration with the Triveni Kala Sangam,
held exhibitions of Australian aboriginal art in Delhi, Calcutta
and Bombay. The Renaissance Players of Sydney visited India
to perform music of the medieval and renaissance period.

New Zealand
India's relations with New Zealand were further strengthened
by the exchange of visits and collaboration in various fields.
New Zealand offered assistance for a number of dairy projects. It continued its assistance to the All-India Institute of
Medical Sciences in New Delhi and also increased its aid contribution to India to NZ $ 1.7 million as against 0.7 million which
had been indicated earlier.
The Foreign Secretary, Shri Kewal Singh, visited New
Zealand as leader of the Indian delegation to conduct the first
bilateral talks with New Zealand in March 1974. The talks
opened avenues for further co-operation and understanding. Some
fields of co-operation were identified during the talks.
Dr. G. S. Dhillon, Speaker of the Lok Sabha, visited New
Zealand in May 1974.
At the invitation of both Houses of the Indian Parliament, a
New Zealand Parliamentary Delegation led by H. E. Mr. S. A.
Whitehead, M.P., Speaker of the House of Representatives of
New Zealand visited India from 23 to 28 November 1974.
Shri A. N. Ray, Chief Justice of India, accompanied by
Smt. Ray, visited New Zealand to attend the Sixth Asian Judicial
Conference held at Wellington from 2 to 10 February at the
invitation of New Zealand Government.
<pg34>
The Philippines
Sardar Swaran Singh, the Minister of External Affairs, made
a transit halt at Manila on 13 August 1974. He met President
Marcos. An informal exchange of views took place on matters
of mutual interest concerning bilateral relations and developments
international fields.
On his way to Tokyo to preside over the Inter-Parliamentary
Conference, Dr. G. S. Dhillon, Speaker of the Lok Sabha, paid
a two-day visit to Manila in September 1974. During his stay in
Manila, he called on the Secretary (Minister) of Justice Honourable Vicente Abad-Santos, and the Mayor of Manila. Mr. M. R.
Krishna, M. P., a delegate to the inter-Parliamentary Conference,
also visited Manila.
Professor Sankho Chaudhuri, Secretary, Lalit Kala Academy,
visited Manila to attend the opening ceremonies of the Folks Art
Theatre at the invitation of the Philippines Government. He was
conferred an Honorary Doctorate by the Centro Escolar
University of Manila.

The Sitar performance of Pandit Ravi Shankar who visited
Manila in March 1974, was widely acclaimed. The first Lady,
Mrs. Imelda Romualdez Marcos, gave a dinner in honour of
Ravi Shankar and his entourage. Shrimati M. S. Subbulakshmi
won the Ramon Magasaysay award for public service for 1974.
She visited Manila in August-September 1974 and was invited
to a luncheon by the first Lady.
Fiji
Relations between India and Fiji continued to be cordial and
friendly and were further strengthened by the exchange of visits
during the year. The Foreign Secretary, Shri Kewal Singh,
visited Fiji in March 1974. He met the Prime Minister and other
Fijian leaders and exchanged views on bilateral and international matters. At the invitation of the Government of Fiji, the
Minister, of Tourism and Civil Aviation, Shri Raj Bahadur and
Smt. Raj Bahadur visited Fiji in October 1974 to represent
India at the celebrations to commemorate the centenary of the
Cession of Fiji to the British Crown and the 4th Anniversary
of Fiji's independence. During the visit, Shri Raj Bahadur held
<pg35>
useful discussions with the leaders of Fiji. Dr. G. S. Dhillon,
Speaker of the Lok Sabha paid a short visit to Fiji after attending
a meeting of the Executive Committee of the Commonwealth
Parliamentary Association in May 1974. The Speaker was
accompanied by Shri S. L. Shakdher, Secretary-General, Lok
Sabha.
A four-member sales-cum-study team from the Federation of
Indian Export Organisations led by Shri V. Kurian, Managing
Director, South Sea Foods Pvt. Ltd., Madras paid a two-day
visit to Suva in April. Meetings were arranged with Fiji's
Minister of Commerce, Industry and Co-operatives, heads of
large business organisations and the Controller of Government
Supplies.
At the invitation of the, Government of India, His Worship
Councillor Isireli M. Vuibau, Mayor of Suva (Fiji), visited India
in August. Senator Ratu Josaia Tavaquia, the Tui Vuda, visited
India from 26 July to 1 August 1974, at the invitation of the
Speaker of the Lok Sabha. Mr. James Shankar Singh, the Health
Minister of Fiji, who was in India in July 1974, held useful discussions with the Minister of Health and Family Planning.
The Roller Flour Mill, a joint venture between India and
Fiji, went into operation and a proposal for, another joint
venture by Messrs. Mohan Meakin Breweries is under consideration. Educational and training facilities for Fijians in India
and services of Indian doctors and experts were made available
to Fiji. Indian hydroelectric experts visited Fiji for a pre-feasibility survey about the possibility of setting up hydroelectric

schemes.
Right Honourable Ratu Sir Kamisese Mara, K.B.E., the
Prime Minister of Fiji, visited India from 7 to 8 March 1975 at
the invitation of the Prime Minister of India. The Fijian Prime
Minister was awarded an honorary degree of LL.D. by the University of Delhi at a special convocation on 7 March 1975.
During his stay in India the Fijian Prime Minister met the President, the Prime Minister and the Minister of External Affairs and
discussed with them matters of mutual interest in the bilateral and
international fields.
<pg36>
INDONESIA
INDIA USA MALI MALAYSIA UNITED KINGDOM RUSSIA REPUBLIC OF SINGAPORE THAILAND
AUSTRALIA NEW ZEALAND PHILIPPINES JAPAN FIJI
Aug 06, 1974

East Asia
CHAPTER IV
EAST ASIA
China
Despite India's consistent efforts to seek normalisation of
relations with China, from the Chinese side there was no
response. Consequently there was no significant change in India's
relations with China.
Besides reiterating in public statements its desire to normalise relations with China, the Government of India came forth
with certain positive gestures towards this end. Thus it allowed
the members of the Dr. Kotnis Memorial Committee to visit
China in May 1974. India also played the host, inter alia, to a
Chinese team at the World Table Tennis Championship held in
Calcutta in February 1975.
Although the Chinese Vice-Premier, Teng Hsiao-ping, went
on record in his expression of Chinese readiness to "develop
good neighbourly relations with the countries of the sub-continent", Chinese actions vis-a-vis India did not match such professions. The Chinese publicity media kept up their anti-Indian
campaign making critical reference to India's internal develop-

ments. China also tried to belittle India's explosion of a nuclear
device in May 1974 and raised a spectre of nuclear blackmail
by India, in order to create suspicion and mistrust between India
and her neighbours.
Despite this continuing unfriendly and even hostile posture
on the part of China, India's policy continued to one of
restraint and desire to normalise relations.
Japan
The year was marked by the growth of all round contacts between India and Japan.
<pg37>
On Mar 30, 1974, notes were exchanges in New Delhi between the Government of India and the Government of Japan
confirming that Japan would provide a project loan of 11 billion
Yen (about Rs. 31.9 crores) for financing the foreign exchange
cost of the Bhatinda Fertilizer Project in the Punjab to be set
up in the public sector. This project aid was a part of the 13th
Yen Credit of the 33 billion Yen for the year 1973-74 and also
the first of the three such Fertilizer Projects offered by the
Government of Japan.
On the cultural front, on 18 November 1974, letters were
exchanged between the Governments of India and Japan for the
cultural exchange programme for the year 1974-75, in pursuance
of the Cultural Agreement between the two countries signed at
Tokyo, on 29 October 1956 in New Delhi.
Among the Indian artists who visited Japan was Mrs. M. S.
Subbulakshmi who gave performance in Japan in September
1974.
The 7th Joint Meeting of the Business Co-operation Committees of India and Japan was held in Jaipur on 18 November
1974. The Indian side was led by Shri K. K. Birla and Dr. S.
Nagano led the Japanese delegation. The two sides expressed
their willingness to work for joint economic collaboration and
projects between the two countries.
The prestigious Indo-Japan Committee for Studies on Economic Development in India and Japan held a joint meeting in
New Delhi on 21 and 22 November 1974. The Indian side was
led by Shri B. R. Bhagat while the Japanese delegation was led
by Dr. Saburo Okita.
The 9th Indo-Japanese bilateral talks were held in New Delhi
on 26 and 27 November 1974. The Indian side was led by Shri
V. C. Trivedi, Secretary in the Ministry of External Affairs, and
the Japanese delegation by Mr. Keisuke Arita, Deputy Minister
of Foreign Affairs of Japan. Frank, friendly and useful discus-

sions were held on matters of mutual interest.
During the year, exchange of a number of important visits
between the two countries took place. Mr. Kenzo, Kono, President of the Japanese House of Councillors, visited India from 2
<pg38>
to 5 September 1974. The visitor called on the Vice-President
of India and the Speaker of the Lok Sabha.
The 61st Inter-Parliamentary Union Conference took place
in Tokyo from 7 to 11 October 1974. Dr. G. S. Dhillon,
Speaker of the Lok Sabha, presided over the, Conference.
The Indian Parliamentary delegation was led by Shri G.
Murahari, Deputy Chairman of the Rajya Sabha.
Shri C. Subramaniam, Minister of Agriculture, led the Indian
team to the 12th FAO Regional Conference for Asia and Far
East at Tokyo from 17 to 27 September 1974.
From the Indian side, a number of Members of Parliament
and others, in a delegation headed by Shri Shashi Bhushan, M.P.,
were invited to Japan to attend the 20th World Conference
against Atomic and Hydrogen Bombs held by Gensuikyo with
the support of the "Japan Buddha Sangha" in July-August
1974.
Dr. V. P. Dutt, Member of Rajya Sabha, was invited by the
Japanese Government to visit Japan from 29 September to 11
October. 1974. Shri N. K. Bhatt, Member, Rajya Sabha, visited
Japan to attend the 12th Convention of Japan Automobile
Workers' Union from 17 to 19 October, 1974.
A goodwill Mission from the Ministry of Commerce, led by
Shri Vishwanath Pratap Singh, Deputy Minister of Commerce,
visited Japan from 26 to 31 October 1974.
Republic of Korea
Friendly relations with the Republic of Korea continued to
grow apace and a number of visits of important dignitaries were
exchanged.
The Minister of External Affairs, Sardar Swaran Singh, went
on a return visit to the Republic of Korea at the invitation of the
Foreign Minister of the ROK, from 9 to 13 August 1974. He
called on the President, the Prime Minister, the Foreign Minister
and some other leaders of the ROK and had wide-ranging discussions with them on bilateral and other matters of mutual
interest. In the course of the visit, the two countries signed a
<pg39>
trade agreement to promote economic co-operation between

le

two countries and also a cultural agreement.
Shri M. S. Sanjeevi Rao, M.P., visited the ROK at the invitation of that Government. A number of Indian delegates to the
Inter-Parliamentary Union Conference in Tokyo, including Shri
Godey Murahari, Deputy Chairman of the Rajya Sabha, visited
the Republic of Korea at the invitation of the ROK Government
in October 1974.
A Judiciary delegation from the Supreme Court of the
Republic of Korea visited India from 12 to 15 September 1974.
This delegation called on the Chief Justice of India.
An ROK Economic Mission, led by Mr. Bang Yong Song,
a member of the ROK Presidential Council of Economic and
Scientific Advisers, visited India from 26 October to 3 November
1974. They, had discussions on economic matters with a number
of Indian leaders and businessmen besides visiting industrial
sites.
The famous `Little Angels' dance troupe from the Republic
of Korea visited India from 12 to 20 November 1974 and gave
performances at New Delhi. These were highly appreciated. The
first Ambassador of India to the ROK, Shri S. M. Aga, presented
credentials on 10 December 1974.
Democratic People's Republic of Korea
India's relations with the DPRK continued to grow. A
number of high-level visits between the two countries were
exchanged during the period.
Dr. G. S. Dhillon, Speaker of the Lok Sabha, led an Indian
Parliamentary delegation, including Shri Godey Murahari,
Deputy Chairman of the Rajya Sabha, to the DPRK from 18 to
23 October 1974, in response to an invitation from the DPRK
Parliamentary Group. He was received by the DPRK President,
Marshal Kim LI Sung, Chairman of the Standing Committee of
the Supreme People's Assembly, Mr. Hwang Jang Yop and
other leaders.
Shri Vishwanath Partap Singh, Deputy Minister of Commerce, led a delegation to the DPRK from 31 October to 5
November 1974, for discussions on commercial matters.
<pg40>
A DPRK Government goodwill delegation led by the Finance
Minister, Mr. Kim Gyong Ryon, visited India from 26 April
to 30 April, 1974. The delegation was received by the President,
Prime Minister, Minister of External Affairs, Minister of Steel
and Mines and the Minister of Commerce. The delegation explained DPRK's position on the Korean question.

A DPRK official level delegation led by Mr. Kim Jae Suk,
Director-General in their Foreign Ministry, visited India from 15
to 18 August 1974 to explain their country's stand at the UN.
During the course of their visit, they called on the Minister of
External Affairs. The first Ambassador of India to the DPRK,
Shri R. K. Jerath, presented credentials on 14 October 1974.
Mongolia
Relations between India and Mongolia continued to be friendly and cordial.
A delegation of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Mongolian People's Republic led by His Excellency Mr. D. Erdembileg,
Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs, visited India from 13 to 20
April 1974 for the third round of bilateral talks between the
Foreign Offices of India and Mongolia which were held on 17
and 18 April 1974. These talks were held "in an atmosphere
of utmost friendship and cordiality", and revealed "complete
identity or close similarity of views on all matters discussed".
An Indian delegation led by the Lok Sabha Speaker, Dr. G. S.
Dhillon, visited Mongolia from 6 to 13 July 1974. For the first
four days, the delegation was treated as an inter-parliamentary
one and then as an Indian Government delegation during the
National Day celebrations.
A Mongolian Film Festival was successfully held in New Delhi
in September 1974.
In respect of trade relations between India and Mongolia, in
spite of the difficulties posed by geographical factors and the
problems of transport, efforts continued by both sides to surmount
these difficulties. A Protocol on the Extension of the validity
of the Trade Agreement between the Government of India and
the Government of the Mongolian People's Republic was signed
on 3 April 1974 in Mongolia (Ulan Bator) extending the validity
<pg41>
of the Agreement for three years with effect from 14 February
1974.
Democratic Republic of Vietnam
Relations between India and the DRVN remained friendly
and continued to grow. In pursuance of the Government of
India's policy to assist the DRVN in her economic reconstruction, India drew up a phased programme of assistance covering
essentially fields like agriculture and animal husbandry. Of the
15 DRVN students who had come to India in August 1973 on
Government of India scholarships for learning the English language, 9 returned to the DRVN in August 1974 after successfully
completing their course and the remaining 6 were given extended

scholarship facilities to enable them to pursue the advanced
English language course. The India-DRVN Trade Agreement
which expired on 21 September 1974 was also renewed. In
September 1974 an Indian Film Festival, the first ever, had a
very successful run in Hanoi, the capital of the DRVN.
The Minister of External Affairs informed Parliament
(1-8-1974) that India was initiating measures for "more direct
relations and formal contacts" with the Provisional Revolutionary
Government of South Vietnam. Negotiations in this regard are
continuing.
Republic of Vietnam
Relations between India and the Republic of Vietnam continued at the consular level. Through bilateral channels the
Government of India sought to explain its Vietnam policy to
the Government of the Republic of Vietnam and there were
reasons to believe that India's policy in this respect was now
being better understood by the Government of the Republic of
Vietnam.
Laos
The prospects for peace in Laos greatly improved with the
formation of the Provisional Government of the National Union
in Laos in April 1974. India welcomed the formation of this
Government. In recognition of India's friendly relations with
Laos, assurances of all possible help and co-operation in that
country's economic reconstruction continued. Apart from India's
<pg42>
active involvement in economic assistance to Laos through the
Mekong Committee in Indo-China, India continued to extend
assistance and co-operation in fields like small scale industry,
forestry, irrigation and power. Early in 1974 special varieties of
vegetable seeds worth Rs. 20,000 were gifted by India to Laos.
India also participated in the Lao Red Cross Fair of 1974 and
the proceeds from the sale of the articles in the Indian pavilion
were donated to the Lao Red Cross Society. At the invitation
of India's Defence Minister, Mr. Chao Sisouk Na Champassak,
Minister of National Defence and War-Veterans of Laos, visited
India from 3 to 8 December 1974. A 6-member Laotian delegation led by Mr. Soth Phet-Rasy, Minister of National Economy
and Planning, visited India from 6 to 10 January 1975. The delegation had a dual character of a goodwill mission and a mission
for seeking emergency economic assistance. The outcome of the
discussions held was that India agreed to provide emergency
assistance to Laos, valuing Rs. 10 lakh in the form of sewing
machines, cotton textiles, drugs etc. India's long-term aid to
Laos is expected to be Rs. 20 lakhs (excluding the emergency
assistance) to be spent on techno-economic surveys, training of
technicians, deputation of Indian experts in Laos, etc. India

continued to be the Chairman of the International Commission
for Supervision and Control in Laos. However, this international
body continued to face a handicap during 1974 on account of
chronic financial shortages and also because of the withdrawal
of the Canadian delegation from Vientiane from the middle of
June 1974.
...

Cambodia

The military and political situation in Cambodia continued
to be very fluid. The war continued taking its toll of lives and
property. India's policy remained one of non-interference in
the internal affairs of Cambodia coupled with the firm belief that
any final settlement would have to be arrived at by the Cambodian
people themselves without any outside interference.
<pg43>
CHINA
INDIA MALI USA JAPAN UNITED KINGDOM KOREA MONGOLIA VIETNAM LAOS LATVIA
CAMBODIA
Mar 30, 1974

West Asia and North Africa
CHAPTER V
West Asia and North Africa
The Government of India continued its support to the
Arab cause on the Arab-Israel problem. The Government believed that a solution of the crisis in West Asia must be based on
the withdrawal of Israel from all the territories occupied by
force. It noted the decision of the Arab Summit Meeting
held in October to recognise the Palestine Liberation Organization as the sole representative of the people of Palestine. It
was of the view that a permanent solution of the West Asia
crisis was not possible without the restoration of the legitimate
rights of the people of Palestine. The Government, therefore,
sponsored/supported resolutions in the General Assembly of
the United Nations which accepted the status of the Palestine
Liberation Organization and accorded her an Observer Status.
In view of the widening relationship and recognition achieved
by the PLO in other parts of the world and in the UNO and
in keeping with India's policy of continued warm support for
the cause of the liberation of all occupied territories, the

Government of India agreed to the request of the PLO to open,
a separate office in New Delhi.
At the bilateral level, relations continued to improve. A
large number of high-level visits were exchanged. The exchange
of visits resulted in reaffirmation of the traditional friendship.
between India and countries in the
Arab world, revealed a
close identity of views on important international issues, thus
creating a sound framework for greater co-operation in all fields
of endeavour.
Iran
The close and friendly relations existing between Iran and
India were further strengthened during the year under report.
The Prime Minister, Smt. Indira Gandhi, accompanied by theMinister of External Affairs, Sardar Swaran Singh, paid an
<pg44>
official visit to Iran from Apr 28, 1974 to 2 May 1974 and held
discussions with the Shahanshah, Prime Minister of
Iran and
other Iranian leaders on political, technical, economic and commercial co-operation between the two countries. The Commerce
Ministers of both the countries also exchanged visits.
His Imperial Majesty the Shahanshah of Iran and Her Imperial Majesty Farah Pahlavi, the Sahbanou of Iran accompanied by the Foreign Minister of Iran; His Excellency Dr. Abbas
Ali Khalatbary, paid a State visit to India from 2 to 4 October
1974. The Shahanshah held detailed discussions with the Prime
Minister on matters of international significance, mutual interest and bilateral co-operation. The Shahanshah and the Prime
Minister reviewed, the progress of economic, technical and commercial cooperation between their countries and noted with
satisfaction that considerable progress had been made in these
fields.
An Iranian Manpower delegation led by the Deputy Minister of Labour and Social Affairs visited India and held useful discussions with the Indian authorities regarding the Iranian requirements of qualified manpower. An Indo-Iranian Joint Shipping Lines Agreement was signed in Tehran in December 1974.
His Imperial Highness Prince Ghulam Raza, younger brother
of the Shahanshah of Iran, represented the Shahanshah at the
coronation of the Nepal King in Kathmandu in February. On
his return from Kathmandu Prince Ghulam Raza and his wife
went on a goodwill tour of Ind; a, which included visits to Hyderabad, Bangalore, Aurangabad, Khajuraho and Agra. They visited
places of cultural interest and also industrial plants. In Delhi
Prince Ghulam Raza called on the President and at social gatherings met Indian leaders. Prince Ghulam Raza and party returned
to Iran on 5 March 1975.

Iraq
The visit of Mr. Saddam Hussain, Vice-Chairman of the
Revolutionary Command Council of Iraq, in March 1974 was
a notable event. India was represented by Shri Surendra Pal
Singh, Minister of State for External Affairs, at the July Revolutionary Festival in Iraq.
The Prime Minister, Smt. Indira Gandhi, accompanied by
Foreign Secretary, paid an official visit to Iraq from 18 to 21 Jan4-883 MofEA/74
<pg45>
uary 1975. She was received by President Al-Bakr. She, had
discussions with Mr. Saddam Hussain, the Vice-Chairman of
the Revolutionary Command Council. There was a close similarity of views on important matters of bilateral and international interest particularly on the, continuing validity of the policy
of non-alignment, the importance of the Indian Ocean being a
zone of peace free from foreign military bases, Big Power rivalry
and tension, on their support to the Palestinian people and
the Arab cause and on the positive results regarding recent
developments in the process of normalisation of relations of
countries of the Indian sub-continent. Both sides expressed
their firm desire to increase collaboration in the development of
of industry, setting up of industrial and transportation projects
in Iraq and in the field of agriculture and water resources. The
Indian side promised to help Iraq by providing technical training
to Iraqi personnel in India and deputing more Indian experts
to Iraq.
Bahrain
The Minister of Planning, Shri D. P. Dhar, visited Bahrain
in May 1974.
H. E. Sheikh Mohmmed bin Mubarak Al Khalifa, Minister
for Foreign Affairs, Government of Bahrain, visited India from
6 to 11 January 1975. A Cultural Agreement between the two
countries was signed. It provided for co-operation in the fields
of education, archaeology and technical education. Bilateral and
international issues were discussed in an atmosphere of cordiality
and mutual understanding and revealed a close identity of views.
Saudi Arabia
The Minister of Planning, Shri D. P. Dhar, visited Saudi
Arabia in May 1974.
A welcome indication of India's growing relations
with
Saudi Arabia was the visit of H. E. Sheikh Ahmed Zaki Yamani.

Minister for Petroleum and Mineral Resources, Government of
Saudi Arabia. He visited India from 5 to 9 February 1975, at
the invitation of Shri K. D. Malaviya, Minister for Petroleum
and Chemicals. During his visit, he called on the Prime Minister.
He visited New Delhi, Hyderabad and Bombay.
<pg46>
United Arab Emirates
The visit of Sheikh Ahmed Khalifa Al Suweidi, Minister of
Foreign Affairs of the United Arab Emirates, in February 1974
was followed by the visit of the Vice-President in June 1974.
H. H. Sheikh Sayed bin Sultan Al-Nayan, President of the
United Arab Emirates and the Ruler of Abu Dhabi, visited India
from I to 5 January 1975. It was his first visit to India. There
was an exchange of views which revealed a close similarity of
outlook on important international issues. Agreement was reached on exploring the many avenues of co-operation between the
two countries in a wide-range of economic fields. A Cultural
Agreement was also signed.
Oman
H. E. Sayed Harried bin Hamoud, Minister for Dewan Affairs,
Government of Oman, visited India in May 1974.
Peoples' Democratic Republic of Yemen
The Foreign Minister of PDRY, H. E. Mr. Mohamed Saleh
Mutie, paid an official visit to India in March 1974. A Cultural
Agreement was signed between the two countries during his visit.
Syria
The Speaker of the Lok Sabha, Dr. G. S. Dhillon, visited
Syria in June 1974; Shri Jagjivan Ram, Minister of Defence, also
visited the country in September 1974.
Sudan
H.E. Gaafar Nimeri, the President of Sudan, accompanied by
the Minister for Foreign Affairs. H. E. Mr. Mansour Khalid,
and the Minister for Finance and National Economy and others
visited India from 26 November to 1 December 1974 and held
wide-ranging talks with the Prime Minister. The visit strengthened the close and friendly ties between the two countries.
Libya
New ground was broken in India's relations with Libya in
the economic and technical fields. A Libyan delegation led by

<pg47>
Mr. Sayed Jamhoor, Chairman, National Oil Corporation of
Libya, visited India from 6 to 13 January 1975. The delegation
signed a protocol with Oil and Natural Gas Commission of India.
Algeria
Sardar Swaran Singh, Minister of External Affairs, held discussions with President Boumediene during his visit to Algeria
to attend the meeting of the Non-aligned Co-ordination Committee in March 1974. H. E. Mr. Bouteflika, the Foreign
Minister of Algeria, visited India in July 1974, and held discussions with the Prime Minister on subjects of mutual interest. Mr.
Mohd. Shaft Qureshi, Minister of State, Railways, visited Algeria
to participate in the celebrations of the 20th Anniversary of the
launching of the Algerian Revolution from 29 October to 2
November 1974. The visit of the Minister of Petroleum and
Chemicals to Algeria in December 1974 afforded another opportunity to exchange views on expanding the scope of bilateral collaboration between Algeria and India.
Morocco
H. E. Mr. Abdul Rahim Bouabid, Special Envoy of the King
of Morocco, came to India in August 1974, to convey the views
of his country on the problems of the Spanish Sahara and discussed other issues of mutual interest.
<pg48>
INDIA
ISRAEL USA IRAN NEPAL IRAQ MALI BAHRAIN SAUDI ARABIA UNITED ARAB EMIRATES
OMAN YEMEN SYRIA SUDAN LIBYA ALGERIA MOROCCO
Apr 28, 1974

Africa(South of the Sahara)
CHAPTER VI
AFRICA
South of the Sahara
India's relations with Africa developed further during the
year. India's support for the liberation movements against colonial regimes and apartheid-based Governments continued in

moral, material and diplomatic terms. The Government of India
welcomed the coming to independence of the sovereign State of
Guinea-Bissau and was one of the earliest States to recognize and
later establish diplomatic relations with the new Republic. To
commemorate the memory of the brave African freedom fighter
of the PAIGC, Dr. Amilcar Cabral, the Government of India
instituted a full scholarship for African freedom fighters. .
The process of the dissolution of the Portuguese colonial
empire in Africa, promising full independence to Sao, Tome,
Principe and Angola in 1975 and the establishment of the Government of Mozambique were welcomed by the Government of
India. The Government watched with close interest the developments in Zimbabwe towards a constitutional conference with the
full participation of all the principal African movements of
Southern Rhodesia. However, the, opposition of the Government
of India to the policies and practices of the Government of
South Africa and its illegal occupation of Namibia found expression in its full support for the resolutions in the UN for the expulsion of the Government of the Union of South Africa from the
UN and asking it to relinquish its illegal occupation of Namibia.
The Government of India continued to observe fully its complete
boycott of the racist regimes of South Africa and Southern
Rhodesia. Its decision not to play the world finals of the
Davis Cup Championship with the South African team was
acclaimed by the Secretary-General of the O.A.U. and the President of the "Decolonization" Committee of the United Nations.
A Special delegation was sent to meet the Frelimo leadership
to convey India's greetings and good wishes and to offer its support and co-operation in the reconstruction of Mozambique.
<pg49>
India responded to increasing demands for Indian expertise
and technical knowhow from independent African countries to
the maximum extent within her resources. Similarly, increasing
numbers of African trainees were received in India to share
her experience in different fields of socioeconomic development.
Delegations from a number of countries visited India for recruiting personnel in various fields. At the present moment, it is
estimated that there are about 2,500 Indian experts in Zambia
and Tanzania.
The question of compensation to Indians expelled summarily
from Uganda has not still made much progress. The work of
assessing the value of the claims submitted by Indian nationals
has been undertaken by a Valuation Committee formed by the
Ugandan Government. India's High Commission in Kampala is
extending all co-operation to the Valuation Committee to complete their work expeditiously. There has been no large-scale
movement of Indians from any of the other African countries.

The British Government are confident that they would be able
to take back most of the British passport holders during the next
four to five years, thus removing a major cause of constant
friction.
The question of properties of Indians expelled from Mozambique by the former Portuguese Government in 1962, was discussed
by the Indian refugees from Mozambique in India with Foreign
Minister Mr. Mario Soares of the new Portuguese Government.
This question would be dealt with later by the Governments of
India, Portugal and of Mozambique.
India's relations with Lesotho further developed in the year.
During his visit to Zambia, the Vice-President of India met the
King of Lesotho who made a request for Indian technical co-operation. India also gifted medicines to help the victims of police
firing on Lesotho workers in South African gold mines. Another
gift of medicines was sent to Malawi to help that Government to
fight cholera epidemic. A gift of 100 sets of spraying equipmew valued at Rs. 50,000 was made to Ethiopia to help them
fight drought conditions there. Another sum of US $50,000 was
donated through the UN Co-ordination Committee for drought
relief in the, Sahelian Region.
<pg50>
India's technical co-operation with Zanzibar in various fields is
increasing. India presented two baby elephants to the island as
a gift which was announced by the Vice-President of India during
his visit in January 1974 to Tanzania to attend the celebrations
of Zanzibar Revolution Day.
India's intimate and historical relations with Mauritius were
further strengthened during 1974. Many leading Mauritian personalities visited India during this period. These included the
Prime Minister Sir Seewoosagur Ramgoolam, Mr. K. Jagatsingh,
Minister of Economic Planning and Development, Mr. D. Basant
Rai, Minister of Youth and Sports and Dr. B. N. Ghurburrun,
Minister of Labour and Industrial Relations.
The Prime Minister Sir Seewoosagur Ramgoolam accompanied by Lady Ramgoolam and Minister of Housing, Lands,
Town and Country Planning, Minister of Commerce and Industry,
Minister of Economic Planning and Development and others,
paid a ten-day State visit to India from Jan 05, 1975 January 1975.
He presided over the Vishwa Hindi Sammelan held at Nagpur
from, 10 to 13 January 1975 and called for the recognition of
Hindi as one of the official languages of the UN. During his
two (lays stay in Delhi, he held discussions with the Prime
Minister of India and other Indian leaders. These talks disclosed
a complete identity of views on various international issues discussed. In pursuance to the Mauritian request for enhancing the
amount of credits and grants which had been extended by India
to Mauritius earlier for her development programmes, India agreed

to extend a fresh line of credit of Rs. 5 crores to substitute the
earlier credit of Rs. 3.21 crores, which had remained unutilised.
In addition, India offered to make available commercial credits of
the order of Rs. 10-12 crores through the banking system to meet
Mauritian requirements for items like transport and power equipment. It was also agreed to increase India's contribution to the
prestigious Mahatma Gandhi Institute from the original commitment of Rs. 4 million to Rs. 7.4 million. To a Mauritian request
for assistance in setting up a shipping line India agreed to make
available the expertise and experience developed by the Shiping Corporation of India and to help obtain finance in the international markets for the purpose. It was also agreed that collaboration between the para-State organisations in both the countries would be effected in shipping, tea, agriculture, livestock
etc.
<pg51>
In response to an urgent appeal for assistance from Mauritius
as a result of the severe cyclone that struck the Islands on 6
February 1975, causing widespread damage, the Government of
India rushed relief supplies and essential equipment to- that
country. A contingent of Defence personnel drawn from Engineering and Signals Wings was also sent to help restore tele-communication and power network. This timely assistance created
considerable goodwill, thus further cementing the very close
relationship already existing between the two countries.
The process of further improvement of relations with Francophone Central and West African countries was also continued
during the year. This was characterised by the visits that President Senghor of Senegal and President Bongo of Gabon, accompanied by high-powered delegations paid to India during May
and September 1974 respectively. Three agreements on (1)
Cultural Co-operation; (2) Economic, Technical and Scientific
Co-operation; and (3) Trade were signed with Senegal.
As a result of President Mobutu's visit to India in January
1973, the promotion of commercial, economic and technical exchanges between the two countries received considerable impetus. President Mobutu transited through Bombay twice in December on his way to and back from China and North Korea.
The Vice-President of India, Shri B. D. Jatti, visited Lusaka
in October 1974 to attend the 10th Independence Day Celebrations of Zambia. During his visit he met President Nyerere of
Tanzania, President Mobutu of Zaire and the King of Lesotho,
and had a separate meeting with Mr. Samora Machel, President
of Mazambique Liberation Front (Frelimo). He also made a
brief halt at Dar-es-Salaam where he was welcomed by Tanzanian
Vice-President.
The Prime Minister and Second Vice-President of Tanzania,
Mr. Rashidi Mfaume Kawawa, paid a State visit to India from

14 to 22 January 1975. He was accompanied by a large delegation which included the Minister for Labour and Social Welfare,
senior party members, officials and others.
During his stay in Delhi, Mr. Kawawa had talks with the
Prime Minister. A similarity of views between India and Tanzania was revealed on most of the international issues such as
keeping the Indian Ocean as a zone of peace, opposition to the
<pg52>
expansion of naval base in Diego Garcia, eradication of colonialism and racism from Southern Africa, economic co-operation
amongst developing nations etc. A Cultural Agreement was
signed during his visit. The Tanzanian Prime Minister and
Second Vice-President also expressed a desire to increase bilateral trade for which negotiations would be conducted through normal diplomatic channels.
It was also. agreed that India would extend assistance to
Tanzania in the field of civil aviation and railways. A delegation of experts from the Rail India Technical and Economic
Service (RITES), a public sector consultancy organisation is
scheduled to leave for Tanzania soon and submit its recommendations after studying Tanzania's requirements for developing
and improving its railway system. India's assistance would be
principally in the form of deputing experts, providing training
facilities for Tanzanian Railway personnel in India, advising on
the maintenance of locomotives and in setting up repair and
workshop facilities in Tanzania. In the field of Civil Aviation,
India has expressed her willingness to train Tanzanian pilots and
to assist in the setting up of maintenance facilities for the Tanzanian Airways. A delegation from the Civil Aviation Department will visit Tanzania soon for detailed discussions on the
Tanzanian proposal.
President Kaunda of Zambia and Mrs. Betty Kaunda paid a
State visit to India from 23 to 27 January 1975. They were
accompanied by a very large delegation consisting of the Ministers of Foreign Affairs, Legal Affairs, Members of the Central
Committee, Health Minister and Senior Foreign Office and
Defence Officials including Chiefs of the Army and Air Staffs.
President Kaunda was the guest of honour at the Republic Day
celebrations and received the Nehru Award for his work to promote human understanding. He: held talks with the Prime Minister and other leaders. The ex-change of views revealed almost
complete identity of views on most international issues including
peaceful uses of nuclear energy, opposition to the expansion of
the naval base at Diego Garcia, need to keep Indian Ocean as
a zone of peace and free from great power rivalry and foreign
military bases, opposition to colonialism and racism and the
agreement of both countries to promote economic co-operation
between the developing countries and between India and Zambia.
Following agreements were concluded during President Kaunda's

visit :
<pg53>
(i) An Agreement on Economic and Technical Co-operation;
(ii) An agreement on Scientific and Technological Cooperation;
(iii) An agreement on Cultural Co-operation; and
(iv) A protocol on Bilateral Co-operation.
All these agreements reflect the desire of both countries to further
strengthen the existing ties in different fields. The Zambian side
also expressed an interest in securing more training facilities in
India's Defence Establishments and in training Zambian Police
personnel in India in the detection and investigation of economic
offences. Detailed discussions were held in this regard between
the Zambian delegation and the Ministries of Defence and Home
Affairs.
The Government of India closely watched developments in
Ethiopia whose Emperor was deposed and where there were a
series of Government changes subsequently, with reports of
violent internal conflicts. India has ancient ties with that great
country as well as close relations in recent times, and the Government of India sincerely hope that the brave and independent
people of Ethiopia, for whom the people and Government of
India have every sympathy and good wishes, will be spared further strife and bloodshed.
<pg54>
INDIA
GUINEA GUINEA!!GUINEA-BISSAU CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC ANGOLA MOZAMBIQUE
ZIMBABWE NAMIBIA SOUTH AFRICA USA ZAMBIA TANZANIA UGANDA PORTUGAL LESOTHO
MALAWI ETHIOPIA MAURITIUS GABON SENEGAL CHINA KOREA NORTH KOREA ZAIRE
Jan 05, 1975

Europe
CHAPTER VII
EUROPE

Western Europe
The Annual Report of this Ministry for 1973 had noted the
evolution of greater foreign policy co-ordination Among EEC
countries. The trend continued during 1974. Particular mention
may be made of the EEC summit in December 1974 in Paris
which arrived at important decisions, including a decision to
have meetings of a Community Council of Heads of Government
thrice a year for increasing intra-EEC co-ordination.
Considerable progress seemed to have been
made of late
in the second stage of the European Conference on Security and
Co-operation in Geneva. The atmosphere for the successful
conclusion of the third stage of the Conference visibly improved
after the Brezhnev-Ford talks in Vladivostok and BrezhnevGiscard d'Estaing talks in France. India reiterated her support
to the efforts in the European Conference on Security and Cooperation towards detente as she found an echo in her own
policies of peaceful co-existence and international co-operation.
The Mutual Forces Reduction Talks in Vienna however made
only small progress over the previous year. Considerable ground
has yet to be covered before results can be seen.
All West European countries accepted the post Simla process as providing a firm basis for normalization on the sub-continent. The progress made since 1971, in the face of complex
and difficult problems, was viewed with genuine appreciation.
New personalities took over positions of leadership in important countries of Western Europe; Mr. Helmut Schmidt took
over as Chancellor in the Federal Republic of Germany and Mr.
Giscand d'Estaing as President in France. Harold Wilson who
had taken over Prime Ministership only in March held fresh
elections in October and obtained a small majority in the House
of Commons. These changes made no difference in India's rela<pg55>
tionship with these countries and India continued to develop cooperation with them in an atmosphere of friendship and understanding.
The energy crisis continued to exercise considerable influence
on the internal policies and external relations of West European
countries since they depend heavily on imported oil. A slack
industrial growth and inflation were both marked features of the
economic scene in most countries. Externally, the West European countries made many efforts jointly as well as individually
to improve their relations with the oil-producing countries.
On the whole, India's relations during 1974-75, both at the
bilateral level with individual countries and with the European
Economic Community made satisfactory progress.

France
With France, the 5th round of bilateral talks were held in
Paris in June 1974. The Indian team was led by Shri V. C.
Trivedi, Secretary, Ministry of External Affairs. The French
delegation was led by Mr. Geoffrey de Courcel, Secretary-General of the French Foreign Office. There was a wide-ranging
and useful exchange of views on international and bilateral issues.
France took India's peaceful Nuclear Explosion experiment
in the right perspective.
France took the initiative of approaching some oil-producing
and oil-consuming States (including some developing countries)
to organise an International Conference with a view to evolving
a co-operative approach and avoiding confrontation. In this connection. the former French Foreign Minister, Mr. Schumann,
visited India as a special emissary of the French President and
discussed the possible participation of India at the Conference
with the Prime Minister and the Minister of External Affairs.
On Nov 16, 1974, India conferred on the renowned
French statesman and intellectual, Mr. Andre Malraux, the
Jawaharlal Nehru Award for International Understanding for
1972.
The United Kingdom
India's relations with the British Government continued to be
satisfactory. Spontaneous exchanges in all fields, including cultu<pg56>
ral and economic, were a familiar aspect of contact between the
two countries. India's Minister of State for External Affairs,
Shri Surendra Pal Singh, and Foreign Secretary, Shri Kewal Singh,
paid visits to London. Among other things they reiterated India's
firm commitment to the peaceful development of nuclear technology. In the circumstances India was surprised at the British
expression of concern over her peaceful nuclear explosion at the
Disarmament Committee at Geneva.
H.R.H. Prince Charles of Great Britain visited India from 20
to 22 February 1975, on his way to the Coronation of the King
of Nepal. This was the first visit to India by a member of the
British Royal Family after 1961. He was accompanied by his
great-uncle, Lord Mountbatten of Burma, Admiral of the Fleet.
During his visit Prince Charles called on the President and the
Prime Minister.
Federal Republic of Germany
India welcomed the exchange of diplomatic missions between

the Federal Republic of Germany and the German Democratic
Republic as yet another step towards the strengthening of EastWest detente. India supported these discussions as leading towards greater understanding and peace in Europe. India's relations with the FRG continued to be based on a healthy understanding in all fields. Bilateral talks were held in New Delhi in
January 1975, when the Indian delegation was led by Shri V. C.
Trivedi, Secretary, Ministry of External Affairs and the FRG
delegation by Dr. Gelhoff, State Secretary in the Foreign Office.
Two Parliamentary Committees--the Committee on Economic Co-operation and the Committee on Finance--visited India.
They met the Speaker and Indian Parliamentarians and called
on the Minister of External Affairs. Suitable briefings were
arranged in the Ministry of Finance to give an in-depth picture of
the Indo-FRG Economic Co-operation in a variety of fields.
Portugal
Historic changes were witnessed in Portugal in April 1974,
when the Government of Dr. Caetano was overthrown and replaced by the Armed Forces Movement. The new Government
of Portugal gave up the earlier Portuguese colonial policies. The,
relations between Portugal and India rapidly improved thereafter..
<pg57>
India's Minister of External Affairs met the Portuguese Foreign
Minister in New York in September 1974. Dr. Mario Soares,
Foreign Minister of Portugal, paid a visit to India from 27 December 1974 to 2 January 1975. During his visit a Treaty was
signed between the two Foreign Ministers whereby Portugal recognised India's sovereignty over Goa, Daman, Diu, Dadra and
Nagar Haveli from the dates these territories became parts of
India and diplomatic relations between Portugal and India were
resumed effective from 31 December 1974.
All questions between India and Portugal, including those of
the property, assets and claims of citizens of either State and of
the two States are to be settled through bilateral negotiations. A
Cultural Agreement between Portugal and India to develop contacts in the cultural field will be concluded in the near future.
During his visit, Dr. Soares and his party also visited Goa
and Bombay and witnessed the exposition of the relics of St.
Francis Xavier in Goa.
Austria
The Austrian Foreign Minister, Dr. R. Kirchschlaeger, (who
is now President of Austria) paid a visit to India in April 1974,
as the guest of the Government of India. During his visit he held
talks with Indian Ministers. A review of international issues and
bilateral relations showed close similarity of views. Austrian

assistance in developing the Gulmarg winter sports project was
an instance of the attention paid by both countries to find areas
of fruitful co-operation.
Cyprus-Greece-Turkey
The South-Eastern Mediterranean witnessed acute tensions;
the Cyprus crisis since mid-July brought violence and upheaval
to the people of Cyprus. The Government of India supported
the independence, territorial integrity, sovereignty and nonalignment of Cyprus, and suggested settlement through the United
Nations in consultation with other non-aligned countries. India
was one of the Five-non-aligned co-sponsors of a resolution on
Cyprus that was unanimously adopted by the General Assembly.
The most fruitful avenue in the present situation was the creation
of an atmosphere free from outside interference, in which the
people of Cyprus could be left to work out their constitutional
<pg58>
future. The President of Cyprus, Archbishop Makarios, returned to the Island and talks are being held among the leaders of
the two communities.
However, on 13 February 1975, the formation of a Federated
Turkish-Cypriot State, in the Turkish region of Cyprus was announced by the Turkish Cypriot Leader, Mr. Rauf Denktash. It
was proposed to set up a 50-member Assembly under Mr.
Denktash, the President, which would continue to operate until
the 1960 Constitution of Cyprus was amended to become the
Constitution of the "Federal Republic of Cyprus". The Greek
reaction was predictably strong and there was vehement protest
against what the Greeks considered as a fait accompli. The
Governments of Greece and Cyprus took the matter to the
Security Council where efforts are still under way to find a solution.
Bilateral relations between India and Greece were satisfactory.
The return of democracy to Greece was welcomed universally.
Greece and Turkey both appreciated the helpful stand taken
by India in the UN and elsewhere on the Cyprus problem.
Scandinavian Countries
India's relations with all Nordic countries continued to grow
especially in the economic field. The meeting of the Indo-Swedish
Joint Economic Commission held in New Delhi in April, identified areas of mutual co-operation in a business like and friendly
atmosphere.
Sweden's critical reaction to India's peaceful Nuclear explosion stemmed from the Swedish Government's ideological commitment to the Non-Proliferation Treaty. At the same time, India's

dedication to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and her principled opposition to the treaty as presently drafted and, in particular, to its discriminatory provisions right from the early days
of discussion are well known.
The Speaker of the Norwegian Parliament, Mr. Guttorm
Hansen, and the Secretary-General of the Norwegian Parliament,
Mr. Gunnar Hoff, paid a visit to India as the guest of the Speaker of the Lok Sabha.
<pg59>
India's Commerce Minister's visit to Finland was useful in
reviewing Indo-Finnish Commercial links. An Indo-Finnish
Joint Commission has been planned in order to systematize the
growth of Indo-Finnish co-operation in fruitful areas.
The Soviet Union and Eastern Europe
The Soviet Union
Indo-Soviet friendship and all round co-operation were further
enriched during 1974-75. Considerable follow-up action in
developing new areas of co-operation and mutual understanding
was taken since the momentous visit of General Secretary Mr.
L. I. Brezhnev to India in November 1973. India welcomed
the initiatives taken by the Soviet Union in promoting detente
and the relaxation of tensions between States with different social
systems. It was hoped that the efforts being made to conclude
a Conference on European Security and Co-operation would be
successful and would have a beneficial impact on other parts of
the world as well.
The excellent state of Indo-Soviet relations was best described by the Foreign Ministers of the two countries.
Speaking in the debate on international situation in the Rajya
Sabha on 30 July 1974, the Minister for External Affairs, Sardar
Swaran Singh, stated :
"The last visit of the General Secretary, Mr. Brezhnev,
to India provided an opportunity for having wide-ranging
discussions over a variety of subjects, international, economic and bilateral and documents of far-reaching significance of mutual benefit were signed as a result of his
visit. This is in continuation of the existence of friendly
and co-operative relations between us and the Soviet Union
and it is a happy thought for me that on all the difficult
moments, the Soviet Union has stood firmly with us. And,
therefore, our continued friendship with the Soviet Union
is a key matter in our foreign policy. . ."
The Soviet Foreign Minister, Mr. A. A. Gromyko, in a keynote address at a meeting held on the eve of the 57th Anniversary

of the Great October Socialist Revolution in Kremlin, on 6 November 1974, referred to Indo-Soviet friendship in glowing terms.
Mr. Gromyko stated:
<pg60>
"Close friendly relations with India, a great Asian Power,
have become an important factor of peace in Asia and
elsewhere. The range of Soviet-Indian co-operation is
very wide. The Soviet side will continue to do everything in its power to make this co-operation grow strong
er and expand."
The Soviet Union continued to support India's policy of nonalignment and her contribution to the strengthening of world peace
and to the struggle for the removal of all vestiges of colonialism,
neocolonialism and racialism. The USSR expressed full understanding of India's initiatives at achieving a durable peace and
good neighbourliness on the Indian subcontinent. As regards the
evaluation of Indo-Sikkimese relations, the Soviet Press also showed a correct appreciation of the Sikkim developments. During
the course of the year, the Soviet spokesman and media gave a
positive assessment of the peaceful nuclear explosion carried out
by India on 18 May 1974.
The visit of the Indian Minister for External Affairs, Sardar
Swaran Singh, to the Soviet Union from 8 to 10 September 1974,
further consolidated mutual understanding between the two countries. Sardar Swaran Singh was received by General Secretary,
Mr. L. I. Brezhnev and had detailed discussions with the Soviet
Foreign Minister, Mr. A. A. Gromyko. The Soviet Union reiterated its support for India's consistent efforts at promoting a
normalisation of relations on the Indian sub-continent and reaffirmed that the remaining unsolved issues between India and
Pakistan should be settled peaceful, through bilateral negotiatons, in accordance with the provisions of the Simla Agreement.
A distinctive feature of Indo-Soviet co-operation was the
Soviet Union's willingness to assist in key areas of the economy
such as in steel production and heavy industry, thus contributing
to India's efforts in achieving economic self-reliance,
From the Indian side, the visit of the Finance Minister,
Shri Y. B. Chavan, to Moscow, in June 1974, and the Minister for
Industrial Development, Shri T. A. Pai, in July/August 1974,
greatly contributed to closer co-operation in the economic and
trade fields. Further momentum was given to Indo-Soviet economic co-operation as a result of the Second Meeting of the IndoSoviet Joint Commission for Economic, Scientific and Technical
Co-operation, which was held in Moscow from 17 to 19 September 1974.
5-883M of EA/74

<pg61>
The Indo-Soviet trade turnover increased from-Rs. 412 crores,
in 1973 to Rs. 550 crores in 1974. Under the 1974 Trade
Protocol the Soviet Union supplied increased quantities of such
essential items as kerosene, diesel oil, mineral fertilizers, copper,
newsprint, machinery and components to India. India's exports
of traditional and non-traditional items also increased correspondingly. There are favourable prospects for continued dynamic
and long term growth in Indo-Soviet trade based on the mutual
exchange of commodities needed by one economy from the other.
The trade Protocol for 1975 concluded in December 1974 kept
up the welcome trends towards growth and diversification.
Bulgaria
The relations of mutually advantageous co-operation between
India and Bulgaria were further strengthened during the visit of
the Bulgarian Prime Minister, Mr. Stanko Todorov, to India
from 4 to 10 March 1974. The talks held between India's
Prime Minister and Mr. Todorov confirmed the closeness of the
positions of the two countries on the various international issues
which were discussed. During the visit the following bilateral
agreements were concluded
(i) Protocol on Economic, Technical and Scientific Cooperation,
(ii) An Indo-Bulgarian Trade and Payments Agreement,
(iii) An exchange of letters for the mutual abolition of
visas, and
(iv) A Protocol on the Third Session of the Indo-Bulgarian Joint Commission for Scientific and Economic
Co-operation.
Another high level exchange of views between the two countries took place during the visit of the Minister of External
Affairs, Sarder Swaran Singh, to Sofia from 27 June to 1 July,
1974. Sardar Swaran Singh, who was accorded a warm welcome, was received by the President of the State Council, Mr.
Todor Zhivkov and by the Bulgarian Prime Minister, Mr. Stanko,
Todorov. Sardar Swaran Singh held wide-ranging discussions
with the Bulgarian Foreign Minister, Mr. Peter Mladenov.
Czechoslovakia
The ties of mutual sympathy and friendship between India
and Czechoslovakia, which date back many decades before India
<pg62>
attained her independence, were further strengthened during the
visit of the Czechoslovak Prime Minister, Dr. Lubomir Strougal,
to India from 2 to 8 December 1974. Earlier the General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Czechoslovak Communist

Party, Dr. Gustav Husak, had paid a highly successful visit to
India in December 1973. The talks between the Prime Minister
of India and the visiting Czechoslovak Prime Minister once again
confirmed the identity of similarity Czechoslovak positions on important international issues. The Czechoslovak side expressed
its full support and appreciation of the various initiatives taken
by India to expedite the building of a structure of durable peace
in the Indian sub-continent. The Czechoslovak side also, while
considering the question of peaceful uses of nuclear energy, noted
with satisfaction the statement of the Government of India that
India will use her nuclear technology only for peaceful purposes.
During Dr. Strougal's visit the following agreements were concluded between the two countries :
(i)

A Trade and Payments Agreement for the years
1975-79,

(ii) An Agreement on Co-operation between Planning
Bodies of India and Czechoslovakia,
(iii) An Indo-Czechoslovak Consular Convention, and
(iv) Agreements on Co-operation in the Fields of Radio
and Television.
In the economic field, Czechoslovakia has emerged as one
of India's most significant industrial collaborators, especially in
the field of heavy engineering. During the course of the year,
concrete steps were taken by both sides to implement the
important economic agreements concluded during the visit of
Dr. Gustav Husak to India in December 1973.
During the course of the year, there were a number of highlevel exchange of visits between India and Czechoslovakia which
were symbolic of the traditional friendship between the two
countries. From the Indian side, the Minister of Finance, Shri
Y. B. Chavan, paid a successful visit to Czechoslovakia in
June/July 1974. The Defence Minister, Shri Jagjivan Ram
visited Prague in July 1974, and the Minister of Education,
Professor Nurul Hasan also visited Czechoslovakia in May/June
1974. The exchange of views on matters of mutal interest during
these visits contributed to growing mutual understanding and
<pg63>
co-operation between the two countries. From the Czechoslovak
side, the Chairman of the Czechoslovak Federal Assembly, Mr.
Alois Indra, visited India in March 1974 at the invitation of the
Speaker' of the Lok Sabha, Dr. G. S. Dhillon. Mr. Indra, who
was accompanied by seven Czechoslovak Members of Parliament, was received by the President, the Prime Minister and the
Minister of External Affairs.
German Democratic Republic

The visit of the GDR Prime Minister to India from 29
November to 3 December 1974, was the first official visit by a
GDR leader since the establishment of full diplomatic relations
between India and the GDR in October 1972. The visit made a
significant contribution to the growing relations of friendship and
mutual understanding between the two countries. The talks
between the Indian Prime Minister, Smt. Indira Gandhi, and
Mr. Sindermann reflected the earnest desire of both countries to
expand and widen further their bilateral co-operation in all
fields. Mr. Sindermann paid tributes to the constructive foreign
policy of India based on the principles of peaceful coexistence
and non-alignment and hailed India's various initiatives for expediting the process of normalisation of relations in the Indian
sub-continent. While discussing the question of peaceful uses of
nuclear energy, the GDR side welcomed India's assurance that
she will use her nuclear technology for peaceful purposes only.
During the year, there were other high-level exchanges of
views between the two countries. The Planning Minister, Shri
D. P. Dhar, concluded an agreement in the field of planning
during his visit to Berlin in September 1974. The Education
Minister, Professor Nurul Hasan, visited Berlin in October 1974,
at the invitation of the GDR Minister for Education. The
Speaker of the Lok Sabha, Dr. G. S. Dhillon, also visited the
GDR in June 1974, at the invitation of the President of the
GDR People's Chamber.
Hungary
Fresh momentum was given to the development of IndoHungarian Friendship and all-round co-operation by the visit of
the Hungarian Prime Minister, Mr. Jeno Fock, to India from
21 to 26 November 1974. The exchange of views between the
Indian Prime Minister, Smt. Indira Gandhi, and Mr. Fock
<pg64>
revealed a closeness or identity of views on the international
issues discussed. The Hungarian Prime Minister expressed his
appreciation for India's efforts at normalising the situation on the
Indian sub-continent. Both Prime Ministers emphasised the need
for further expanding and diversifying mutually beneficial cooperation in the trade, economic and scientific fields.
Earlier, bilateral talks were held between the Foreign
Offices of India and Hungary in New Delhi in June 1974. The
Hungarian delegation to the talks was led by the Hungarian
Deputy Foreign Minister. Mr. Pal Racz, and the Indian delegation was led by Shri V. C. Trivedi, Secretary in the Ministry of
External Affairs. These talks confirmed the closeness or identity
of views between the two countries on various important international topics.

There were a number of high-level exchange of visits between India and Hungary during the course of the year which
further consolidated Indo-Hungarian Co-operation. The Minister
for Industrial Development, Shri T.A. Pai, visited Hungary in
July 1974. During the visit of the Minister for Planning, Shri
D. P. Dhar, to Budapest in September 1974, a memorandum was
concluded for enlarging economic and trade relations between
the two countries. An agreement was also signed regarding cooperation in the field of planning.
The Chairman of the National Council of the Patriotic
Peoples' Front of Hungary, Mr. Gyula Kallai, visited India, from
28 September to 5 October 1974, at the invitation of the
President of the All India Congress Committee.
The Indo-Hungarian Agreement on Scientific and Technological Co-operation was concluded in February 1974 under
which the Department of Science and Technology, Government
of India and the Institute for Cultural Relations of Hungary drew
up a working programme which will further strengthen scientific co-operation specially in the fields of building sciences, chemical industry and the tropical treatment of equipment.
Poland
Indo-Polish friendship and mutual understanding were fur-ther strengthened by the visit of the Polish Foreign Minister,
Mi. Stephan Olszowaki, to India from 11 to 15 March 1974 at
<pg65>
the invitation of the Minister of External Affairs. During his
visit the Polish Foreign Minister was also received by President
Giri and the Indian Prime Minister, Smt. Indira Gandhi. IndoPolish agreement on co-operation in the fields of science and
technology was concluded during the visit.
In the talks between the two Foreign Ministers, which were
held in an atmosphere of complete understanding characteristic
of the relations between the two countries, the Indian side expressed its appreciation of Poland's foreign policy aimed at
ensuring lasting peace and co-operation on the European Continent. The Polish side endorsed India's initiatives and actions
towards the establishment of good neighbourly relations and the
building of a durable peace on the Indian sub-continent. The two
Foreign Ministers also reaffirmed the determination of their
respective Governments to expand and further deepen IndoPolish co-operation in all fields.
The Defence Minister, Shri Jagjivan Ram, visited Poland In
July 1974 at the invitation of the Polish Defence Minister,
General Jaruzelski. During his visit, Shri Jagjivan Ram held talks
with the First Secretary of the PUWP, Mr. Edward Gierek, the
Polish Prime Minister Mr. Jaroszawicz and with the Polish

Foreign Minister.
Indo-Polish trade and economic co-operation made satisfactory progress. Polish collaboration in the coal mining industry at
the Jharia, Sudamdih, Monidihe and the Silewara projects was of
special significance during the current energy crisis. Other IndoPolish collaboration projects were in the fields of thermal power
stations, tractor manufacture, fertilizers and the chemical
industries. There are bright prospects for Indo-Polish collaboration in the field of shipbuilding and in the nonferrous metals
industry. The second meeting of the Indo-Polish Joint Commission for Economic, Commercial and Scientific Co-operation was
held in New Delhi in January 1975.
A Polish Parliamentary delegation, led by the Speaker of the
Polish Parliament Mr. Stainalaw Gucwa, visited India from 5 to
13 December 1974, at the invitation of the Speaker of the Lok
Sabha, Dr. G. S. Dhillon. During their stay in New Delhi, the
Delegation called on the President, Vice-President, the Prime
Minister and the Minister of External Affairs. Contacts bet<pg66>
ween the Indian and Polish Parliaments helped in broadening
the base of Indo-Polish mutual understanding.
Romania
Indo-Romanian co-operation continued to be strengthened
during 1974-75. The Speaker of the Lok Sabha, Dr. G. S.
Dhillon, attended the meeting of the Inter-Parliamentary Union
held in Bucharest from 5 April 1974, in his capacity as the
President of the Inter-Parliamentary Council. Dr. G. S. Dhillon
was received by President Ceausescu.
During the 30th Anniversary Celebrations of the Liberation
of Romania in Bucharest, India was represented by the Minister
of Health and Family Planning, Dr. Karan Singh.
A Romanian Parlimentary delegation, led by the Speaker of
the Romanian Parliament. Professor (Dr.) Nicolas Giosan and
including six Romanian Members of Parliament visited India
from 12 to 15 November 1974. The Delegation called on the
President, the Vice President, the Prime Minister, the Minister
of External Affairs and the Minister for Parliamentary Affairs.
The Cultural Exchange Programme between India and
Romania for the period 1 April 1974 to 31 March 1976, under
the Indo-Rumanian Cultural Agreement of 1957 was concluded
in Bucharest on 16 July 1974. The programme included a provision for the teaching of Hindi at the Bucharest University and
the teaching of Romanian at an Indian University; the reciprocal
organization of film festivals, the exchange of radio and TV programmes and the exhibitions of paintings and photographs.

Yugoslavia
As founder-members of the Non-aligned Movement, India
and Yugoslavia enjoy ties of traditional friendship and close
mutual understanding. These relations were further strengthened
during the past year. There was continued and close co-operalion between India and Yugoslavia in the Non-aligned Movement, at the United Nations and other international forums with
the aim of achieving their common objectives, namely, the consolidation of world peace, building an equitable international
order and the eradication of colonialism, neocolonialism, racism
and apartheid.
<pg67>
Yugoslavia warmly welcomed the progress of the normalisation of relations in the Indian sub-continent and showed full
understanding of the initiatives taken by India in this direction.
The Yugoslav Government and Press took a very positive and
forthright attitude on India's peaceful nuclear explosion on 18
May 1974. In a commentary dated 23 May 1974, the diplomatic
editor of the Yugoslav Official news agency Tanjug
observed : "One should welcome the fact that by virtue of this
experiment, India falls in line with the world's nuclear technology
and that the test confirms, of the assurances given so far by the
Indian Government of developing and applying nuclear energy
for peaceful purposes only. It is emphasised here that the
Indian Government's statement and its decision not to use the
results from its nuclear research for military purposes, are in
line with this attitude towards the ban on development, production, stationing and using of nuclear weapons. Yugoslavia
supports that stand which is consistently in keeping with the
stand taken by the Non-aligned Countries to that effect".
The Speaker of the Lok Sabha, Dr. G. S. Dhillon, led a
Parliamentary delegation to Yugoslavia from 10 to 16 June
1974, at the invitation of the President of the Yugoslav Federal
Assembly. The Indian Members of Parliament were given a
warm reception throughout their stay in Yugoslavia. Dr. G. S.
Dhillon was received by President Tito himself and by the
Yugoslav Prime Minister Mr. Bijedic. The visit helped to further
strengthen Indo-Yugoslav friendship.
During his 4-day official visit to Yugoslavia from 19-23
January 1975, Minister of External Affairs, Shri Y. B. Chavan,
was accorded a very warm welcome and Yugoslav leaders greatly
appreciated the fact that after visiting friendly neighbouring
countries (Bangladesh and Sri Lanka) the Minister had come to
Yugoslavia before going anywhere else. The Minister of External
Affairs had wide-ranging discussions on questions of topical
importance in international affairs both with the Yugoslav
Foreign Minister, Mr. Milos Minic, as well as President Tito. The
joint communique issued on the conclusion of the visit reflected

the ties of friendship and understanding which have become
traditional in the relations between the two leading non-aligned
countries. The visit of the Minister to Yugoslavia also provided
an opportunity to have a useful exchange of views on matters
concerning the non-aligned movement, particularly on the eve
of the forthcoming meetings of the non-aligned countries in
Senegal and Cuba.
<pg68>
FRANCE
SWITZERLAND USA CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC INDIA AUSTRIA MALI GERMANY UNITED
KINGDOM NEPAL BURMA PORTUGAL CYPRUS GREECE TURKEY SWEDEN FINLAND
PAKISTAN RUSSIA BULGARIA NORWAY SLOVAKIA CZECH REPUBLIC HUNGARY POLAND
OMAN ROMANIA YUGOSLAVIA BANGLADESH SRI LANKA CUBA SENEGAL
Nov 16, 1974

The Americas
CHAPTER VIII
THE AMERICAS
The United States of America
The trend towards a mature relationship between India and
the United States of America was further strengthened in 1974.
The Governments of the two countries maintained close contact
and dialogue at various levels on bilateral and international
questions. It was generally recognized in both countries that in
view, of their democratic traditions and absence of any conflict
of national interests there was considerable scope for the development of relations on the basis of equality, mutual respect and
understanding. The two Governments moved forward in the
process of setting up new institutions for co-operation in various
fields.
In September 1974, the Minister of External Affairs met
the President of the United States and held a wide-ranging discussion on questions of mutual interest. Earlier, in April 1974, he
held talks with the U.S. Secretary of State in New York. In
August and again in November, the Foreign Secretary met the
Secretary of State in Washington. The Ministers of Petroleum
and Chemicals, Commerce, and Tourism and Civil Aviation also
visited the United States and exchanged views with their counterparts. The US visitors to India during the year under review

included the Secretary of State, Dr. Kissinger, Senator Charles
Percy, Deputy Secretary of Treasury, Stephen Gardener
and a
group of Congressmen. President Ford has accepted the Prime
Minister's invitation to visit India.
As a part of the effort to strengthen their relations, the two
Governments agreed to establish a joint Indo-United States
Commission on Co-operation in Economic, Commercial, Scientific, Technological, Educational and Cultural matters. The Cornmission, headed by the Minister of External Affairs and the
Secretary of State, will meet at least once a year. Three SubCommissions have also been set up to deal respectively with
economic and commercial matters, science and technology, and
<pg69>
education and culture. The first two Sub-Commissions met in
Washington in January while the last mentioned met in New
Delhi in early February.
An important development in Indo-US relations was the
discussions held in New Delhi with the US Secretary of State
when he visited India from Oct 27, 1974 to 30 October 1974 at the
invitation of the Minister of External Affairs, Dr. Henry Kissinger
called on the President and held talks with the Prime Minister.
He had two rounds of discussions with the Minister of External
Affairs. Dr. Kissinger had also separate meetings with the
Ministers of Defence, Finance and Agriculture.
During these discussions the Secretary of State reaffirmed
the United States support for the Simla Agreement and India's
initiatives for normalisation and reconciliation in the subcontinent without outside interference. The Secretary also
indicated America's acceptance of the positive role of nonalignment in the world, appreciation of India's national interests,
and her role as a major factor for peace, progress and stability
in Asia. He said that there was no question of equating India
and Pakistan and that United States did not intend to encourage
an arms race in the sub-continent. The United States also
welcomed India's policy of using nuclear technology only for
peaceful purposes. During these talks India emphasised that any
supply of arms to Pakistan, directly or indirectly. would impede
the process of normalisation and come in the way of durable
peace in the sub-continent. The Government's views on Diego
Garcia and the Indian Ocean as a zone of peace were also
conveyed.
Speaking at Press conference on 30 October the Secretary
of State said that the United States did not consider Indo-Soviet
Treaty for peace and friendship as an obstacle to improved
relations with the United States. He stated that the United States
was not engaged, directly or indirectly in any attempt to
influence the domestic situation in India. He also said that the
United States was not trying to link up the question of food and

the policy on the energy crisis.
(Please see Addendum on the last page)
Canada
India and Canada have traditionally maintained a relationship of friendship and co-operation at bilateral and international
levels. Canada's critical reaction to India's peaceful nuclear
experiment of 18 May and its subsequent decision to suspend
<pg70>
nuclear co-operation, however, cast a shadow on these relations.
On 22 May the Canadian Government announced the suspension
of shipments of nuclear equipment and materials to India as
well as of co-operation in nuclear reactor projects and technological arrangements between the Atomic Energy Commission of
India and the Atomic Energy of Canada Ltd. Canada also
indicated that it would review the economic relations with India.
Assistance in the field of food and agriculture was not, however,
affected. The Canadian Government also announced its intention
to consult other Governments as well as hold bilateral discussions
with India on nuclear matters.
The Government of India persistently tried to explain the
correct position to the Canadian Government and public opinion.
In a letter to the Prime Minister of Canada, the Prime Minister
of India elucidated the background and rationale of India's
nuclear development programme and assured him that India's
nuclear experiment of 18 May 1974 was entirely for peaceful
purposes and that India had not violated any agreement with
Canada. Following a further exchange between the two Prime
Ministers it was decided to hold official level talks between the
two Governments. An Indian delegation led by the Foreign
Secretary participated in bilateral discussions in Ottawa from
29 to 31 July 1974. The discussions which were held in a
cordial atmosphere clarified several issues. However, since some
of the points were considered to be of a nature which did not
lend themselves to ready solution, it was decided to hold further
discussions to reach mutual understanding. It was also clear
from discussions that both India and Canada were deeply concerned with the dangerous consequences of the proliferation of
nuclear weapons and were determined to contribute actively
to international discussions concerning nuclear non-proliferation.
As part of these exchanges, Mr. Ivan Head, Secretary to the
Canadian Prime Minister, and Mr. Michel, Deputy Assistant
Under Secretary of State, visited New Delhi from 2 to 6 January
1975 and held discussions with Secretary to the Prime Minister
and the Foreign Secretary. These talks which were of an
exploratory nature, underlined the desire of the two Governments to narrow their differences with a view to restoring IndoCanadian relations to their former level.
South America

The 24 independent nations of Latin America and the
Caribbean with their combined population of over 250 million
people have been playing an increasingly important role in world
<pg71>
affairs in recent years. They share with India common objectives
of international peace, rapid economic growth, strengthening of
national independence and non-interference in the domestic
affairs of other countries. India's relations with the Latin
American and the Caribbean nations which have always been
good were further strengthened during the year under review.
Apart from general co-operation at the United Nations and other
international forums, India and many countries of South America
have been closely working together in the non-aligned nations'
movement and in the group of the developing nations. There
was closer co-operation between the two sides on such issues as
ending colonialism and racial discrimination, law of the sea,
sovereignty over natural resources, and terms of trade for the
developing nations. At the bilateral level also there were
increasing contacts between the two sides to promote a better
understanding as well as more trade and cultural exchanges,
In May 1974, the Minister of State in the External Affairs
Ministry, Shri Surendra Pal Singh, visited Argentina, Brazil,
Colombia and Peru. He held discussions with leaders of these
countries and explained India's policies with regard to its
neighbours, non-alignment and the peaceful purpose of her nuclear
development programme. India signed cultural agreements
with Colombia and Argentina,, An agreement on peaceful
nuclear co-operation between India and Argentina was also
concluded during this period.
Among the important South American visitors to India
were : President of the Liberal Party of Colombia, Dr. Julio
Cesar Turbay Ayala; Speaker of the Parliament of Guyana, Mr.
Sase Narain; Parliamentary Affairs Minister of Guyana, Mr.
Cammie Ramasroop; Minister of State for Home Affairs of
Guyana, Mr. C. V. Mingo; Leader of Opposition of Guyana,
Mr. F. Singh; President of the Venezuelan Congress, Senator
Gonsalo Barrios; Minister of International Economic Relations,
Mines and Hydrocarbons of Venezuela, Mr. Perez Gurrero.
In spite of these increasing contacts, trade between Latin
America and India, still remains modest. Absence of shipping
service and insufficient knowledge about each others trade
potential are some of the existing barriers to more trade. Efforts
are being made to solve these problems.
Reaction in Latin American countries to India's peaceful
nuclear explosion was generally favourable. India's resolve to use
nuclear technology for peaceful purposes was well received and
extensively reported.

<pg72>
USA
INDIA MALI PAKISTAN CANADA CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC ARGENTINA BRAZIL
COLOMBIA PERU GUYANA VENEZUELA
Oct 27, 1974

United Nations And International Conferences
CHAPTER IX
UNITED NATIONS AND INTERNATIONAL
CONFERENCES
The year nineteen seventy four was a year full of trials and
economic difficulties for developing countries due to world monetary instability and shortages and high prices of fuel, food, fertilisers, other raw materials and industrial commodities. India was
also severely affected by a massive balance of payments gap.
India joined other non-aligned and developing countries, at the
Sixth Special Session of the UN General Assembly, to strengthen
co-operation among them and to work for a new International
Economic Order based on inter-dependence and co-operation
among developed and developing countries and the necessity of
securing fair treatment for the exports of developing countries.
Prior to the Special Session, the Foreign Ministers of the
Bureau of the Non-aligned countries met in Algiers from 19 to
21 March. The Bureau meeting defended the right of the oilproducing, developing countries to permanent sovereignty over
their natural resources and to secure fair prices for their raw
materials. The Bureau also recognised the paramount need for
co-operation among the non-aligned countries in evolving, in a
spirit of solidarity, all possible measures to assist the oil importing
countries to cope with their problems. A Group of Four (Guyana,
Liberia, Nepal and Sri Lanka) to consult the OPEC countries
for resolving this important question within the family of the
non-aligned countries was also set up. The meeting also adopted
a declaration on West Asia and the question of Palestine and a
comprehensive final document covering political, economic and
other issues.
The Sixth Special Session of the UN General Assembly was
held in New York from Apr 09, 1974 to 1 May 1974. The framework for the Special Session included examination of the econo-

mic relations between developed and developing countries with
<pg73>
particular reference to their inter-dependence and the acute longstanding problems of the developing countries. India was represented by Sardar Swaran Singh, Minister of External Affairs, and
Shri D. K. Barooah, Minister of Petroleum and Chemicals. The
Indian delegation put forward an eight point plan to bring about
a just and equitable international economic order. The essence
of the plan was a re-affirmation and amplification of the development targets set out in the International Development Strategy
for the Second Development Decade.
The Special Session adopted a Declaration and a Programme
of Action for the establishment of a new international economic
order. The Programme of Action included a Special Programme
to give immediate and medium-term relief to the most seriously
affected developing countries, which included the least-developed,
the land-locked and other low-income developing countries, as
well as other developing countries whose economics had been dislocated as a result of the present economic crisis, natural calamities and foreign aggression and occupation. As a first step, the
Special Programme suggested launching an Emergency Operation
for bilateral and multilateral economic co-operation, starting from
15 June 1974, to help the most seriously affected developing countries (MSAC's) to maintain unimpaired their essential imports for
the following 12 months. India was included in the list of the 33
MSAC's identified as such by the UN. India was allocated US
$32.5 million from the Secretary General's Special Account. The
Emergency Operation has been assured so far of contributions up
to US $2.7 billion, including bilateral and multilateral contributions.
In the second phase of the Special Programme, a Special Fund
is to be set up from January 1975 to meet the development assistance requirements till the end of the second development decade.
The other parts of the Declaration and the Programme of Action
which related to bringing about a just and equitable new inter
national economic order, involved a long-term process requiring
close co-operation among the non-aligned and other developing
countries, and also requiring acceptance of the principle of global
inter-dependence and co-operation by all developed and developing countries. The resolutions of the Sixth Special Session were
considered for further follow-up action at the 57th Session of the
UN Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC) and later at the
29th Session of the General Assembly.
<pg74>
Although India's two-year term on the Security Council as a
non-permanent member expired on 31 December 1973, India
continued to take part in some of the important issues which came
up for consideration in the Security Council-the most important
one being the question of Cyprus.

Shortly after the coup in Cyprus on 15 July, the Security Council met to consider the situation in Cyprus. On 20 July 1974, the
Security Council adopted resolution 353 (the first in a series)
urging all States to respect the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of Cyprus, calling for cease-fire and withdrawal
of all foreign military personnel from Cyprus. It also requested
Greece, Turkey and the UK to enter into immediate negotiations
for restoration of peace and constitutional government in Cyprus.
After the breakdown of the Geneva tripartite talks, the Security
Council passed three more resolutions reiterating the earlier resolutions (specially 353 and 355) as well as calling upon the concerned States to cease-fire and to resume negotiations without delay for the restoration of peace and constitutional government in
Cyprus and demanded that all parties concerned fully respect the
UN Peace Keeping Force in Cyprus.
Together with other important countries, India took initiatives
to activate non-aligned opinion at the UN. The Non-Aligned
Group at the UN met on 6 August 1974, in response to an appeal from President Makarios, and adopted a declaration re-affirming their solidarity with the non-aligned Republic of Cyprus, a
founder member of the Group. The Resolution demanded an immediate and full implementation of the objectives of the Security
Council Resolution 353.
Developments in Cyprus engaged considerable attention in
the 29th Session of the General Assembly. A negotiating group
of five nonaligned countries (including India) succeeded, after
intensive labours, in formulating a resolution which could be adopted unanimously by the Assembly. The Resolution called upon
all States to respect the sovereignty, independence, terrritorial integrity and Don-alignment of the Republic of Cyprus; urged the
speedy withdrawal of all foreign armed forces and foreign military
presence and personnel from the Republic of Cyprus; and commended the contacts and negotiations taking place on an equal
footing with the good offices of the UN Secretary General, between
the representatives of the two communities. It also stated that
all refugees should return to their homes in safety and expressed
<pg75>
the hope that, if necessary, further efforts including negotiations
could take place within the framework of the United Nations for
the purpose of implementing the provisions of the Resolution,
thus ensuring the Republic of Cyprus its fundamental right to
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity. The Security
Council unanimously reammed this resolution.
Efforts to bring about lasting peace in the Middle East continued. An Agreement on Disengagement between the Israeli and
Syrian Forces was signed between Israel and Syria in May 1974,
Which called for the creation of a UN Disengagement Observer
Force (UNDOF). Pursuant to the Agreement, the Egyptian

and Israeli Military Working Group of the Geneva Peace Conference, under the aegis of the UN held six meetings in Geneva
from 31 May to 5 June 1974. The Working Group reached an
agreement on a map showing phases of disengagement and a
disengagement plan. The agreement also stipulated that Israel
and Syria should repatriate all prisoners of war not later than 6
June and that both countries should co-operate with International
Council unanimously reaffirmed this resolution.
On 29 November 1974, the Security Council adopted a resolution renewing the mandate of the UNDOF for another period of
6 months at the end of which the Secretary-General was asked to
report on the developments and the measures taken to implement
Security Council Resolution 338 (1973).
During the 29th General Assembly the focus was on the
question of Palestine which was inscribed as a new agenda item.
The decision of the Rabat Arab Summit to recognise the PLO
as sole representative of the Palestinians paved the way for the
effective participation of a PLO delegation, led by Chairman
Arafat, in the deliberations of the Assembly. The widespread
support of the international community was demonstrated by the
two resolutions adopted by the General Assembly. The first reaffirmed the right of Palestinian people "in Palestine" to self-determination, national independence and sovereignty, to return to
their homes and property and to regain their rights by all means
in accordance with UN Charter. The resolution was co-sponsored
by India and 46 other countries. The second resolution gave
PLO the right to participate as an observer in the framework of
the General Assembly.
Following the rejection of the credentials of the delegation of
South Africa the General Assembly decided, by 125 votes in
<pg76>
favour and 9 abstentions and the solitary negative vote of South
Africa, to request the Security Council to review, as a matter of
urgency, the future relations of South Africa with the UN. A
resolution recommending expulsion of South Africa for noncompliance with the Charter could not, however, be adopted by
the Security Council on account of the votes cast by USA, UK
and France. Subsequently, the Assembly upheld by 91 votes in
favour (22 against and 19 abstentions) a ruling by the President
of the Assembly to deny further participation of the South African delegation in the XXIXth Session of the General Assembly.
India co-sponsored the resolution in the Assembly and spoke in
its support both in the Assembly and the Security Council.
Following the overthrow of the Salazar regime, the Assembly
noted with satisfaction the acceptance by the new Government of
Portugal of the principles of self-determination and independence
for the overseas territories still under Portuguese control. It also
noted that following consultations between the Portuguese Gov-

ernment and the national liberation movements concerned,
Mozambique would attain independence by 25 June 1975, Sao
Tome and Principe by 12 July 1975 and that a provisional government would be set up in Angola and Cape Verde to facilitate
attainment of their independence also during the course of
1975.
Bangladesh, Guinea-Bissau and Grenada were admitted as
new members during the Session raising the UN membership to
138. It will be recalled that Bangladesh had applied for membership of the UN in 1972 but because of the Chinese veto
was not admitted. After the recognition of Bangladesh by
Pakistan in February 1974, Bangladesh asked for renewed consideration of its application for membership. In June 1974 the
Security Council adopted a resolution recommending membership
and Bangladesh was admitted to the UN on 17 September
1974, with the opening of the General Assembly Session. During the general debate India's Minister of External Affairs made
a statement welcoming the new, members.
Pursuant to the decision of the 28th Session of the General
Assembly, the Secretary-General established a Committee of three
Experts to prepare a factual statement "of the great Powers military presence in all its aspects in the Indian Ocean with special
reference to their naval deployment conceived in the context of
great Power rivalry". Dr. K. Subramaniam of the Institute for
6--883MofEA/74
<pg77>
Defence Studies and Analysis, New Delhi, was one of the three
experts.
The experts submitted their report to the Ad Hoc Committee
in May 1974. The report dealt primarily with the deployment
of warships and the maintenance of naval and military installations and naval bases etc., in the area, which constituted the most
visible, elements of military and naval presence. As a result of
protests by a number of governments, the Secretary-General took
the unusual step of requesting the three experts to review tie
report. The revised version, like the earlier one, primarily dealt
with factors which constituted the most visible elements of naval
and military presence. It however, dealt with all the five great
powers in alphabetical order. References to facilities etc., the
existence of which had been denied by the concerned governments were deleted or modified. Other references were clearly
attributed to the sources from which the had been taken. The
report, however, did not contain any conclusions or make any
recommendations.
The 29th General Assembly adopted, by 103 votes (with none
against and 26 abstentions), a Resolution calling upon the great
Powers to refrain from increasing and strengthening their military
presence. as an essential first step towards the relaxation of ten-

sion and the promotion of peace and security in the area. The
Resolution further requested the littoral and hinterland States to
enter into consultation, as soon as possible, with a view to convening a conference on the Indian Ocean. France, UK, USA and
USSR continued their abstentions on the Resolution. By another
Resolution, adopted unanimously, the General Assembly decided
to include Bangladesh and Kenya in the Ad hoc Committee thus
raising its membership from 15 to 17.
This year's debate oil the Cambodian question ended with
the adoption of a resolution which called upon "the powers
which have been influencing the two parties to the conflict to
use their good offices for conciliation between the two parties
with a view to restoring peace in Cambodia". The resolution
also requested the Secretary-General to lend his support and to
report to the next session of the General Assembly. India abstained in the vote. Earlier it had voted against priority being
given to this resolution over the 33 power draft resolution asking
for the restoration of the lawful rights of GRUNK in the UN.
This resolution was not put to the vote. Towards the end of the
<pg78>
Session, India voted in favour of a proposal not to accept the
credentials of the Khmer delegation. This proposal was, however, not approved by the Assembly.
The question of Korea also engaged the attention of the
Political Committee of the General Assembly. Supporters of
North Korea requested the inclusion of a new item : "withdrawal
of all troops stationed in South Korea under the UN Rag". In a
counter move, countries supporting South Korea asked for a
separate item entitled "urgent need to implement fully the consensus of the 28th Session of the UN General Assembly on the
Korean Question and to maintain peace and security on the
Korean Peninsula". Efforts made to bring about a compromise
resolution failed. The resolution eventually adopted expresed
the hope that the Security Council would in due course, give
consideration. in consultation with the parties directly concerned,
to those aspects of the Korean question which fell within its responsibilities, including the dissolution of the UN Command, in
conjunction with appropriate arrangements to maintain an armistice agreement which was calculated to preserve peace and
security in the Korean Peninsula, pending negotiations and conciliation between the two Korean governments leading to a lasting
peace between them. India abstained, in keeping with its basic
position that the solution of the problem between the DPRK and
ROK could best be found through peaceful bilateral negotiations
without outside interference.
India continued to participate activity in the deliberations of
the General Assembly on items pertaining to colonialism and
apartheid in accordance with its well-known stand in such
matters. India continued to be a member of the UN Special

Committee on Decolonization (Committee of 24), the Special
Committee on Apartheid and the Council for Namibia.
The General Assembly adopted a resolution on Namibia urging the Security Council to convene urgently in order to take
without delay effective measures to put an end to South Africa's
illegal occupation of Namibia. The Security Council met on 17
December 1974 and unanimously adopted a resolution demanding
that South Africa make a declaration to the Council that it would
comply with the resolutions of the UN and advisory opinion of
the World Court and take necessary steps to withdraw from
Namibia and transfer power to its people with the assistance of
the UN. The Security Council also decided to meet before 30
<pg79>
May 1975, to review the position and in the event of non-compliance by South Africa, to consider appropriate measures under
the Charter.
A comprehensive debate took place in the General Assembly
on the item of "Strengthening the role of the UN". The USA and
other developed countries took the opportunity to mount a concerted attack against what they termed as the "tyranny of the
majority". A number of developing countries including India
rebutted this charge.
The Conference of the Committee on Disarmament (CCD)
held two sessions in Geneva in 1974, the first from 16 April to
23 May and the second from 2 July to 22 August. During this
period, the Committee held 28 formal plenary meetings with
verbatim records and 7 informal meetings without records.
Although several disarmament measures were considered by
the members, the two questions with which the Committee mainly
occupied itself were a comprehensive nuclear test ban and the
prohibition of chemical weapons. No final agreement could,
however, be reached at the CCD on any of the questions which
were discussed. Following some critical comments on India's
peaceful nuclear explosion experiment of 18 May 1974, particularly by Pakistan, India reiterated in the CCD its policy of
utilization of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes, its consistent
position on the question of underground nuclear explosions for
peaceful purposes, and her opposition to nuclear weapons as well
as their testing.
The CCD, whose original membership of 18 was increased
to 26 in 1969, was further expanded with effect from 1 January
1975 by the addition of 5 new members, namely, FRG, GDR,
Iran, Peru and Zaire.
The United Nations General Assembly adopted a record number of 24 resolutions on items relating to disarmament, outer
space and atomic energy. Of particular interest to India were

the resolutions on the questions of. a nuclear-free zone in South
Asia and peaceful nuclear explosions.
Without consulting the other countries of South Asia, Pakistan inscribed an item entitled "Declaration and Establishment of
a Nuclear-free Zone in South Asia". Pakistan's proposal was
<pg80>
politically motivated and was a part of the propaganda launched
by it against India's peaceful nuclear explosion experiment of 18
May 1974. It may be mentioned that India had supported the
concept of nuclear-weapon-free zones in different parts of the
world provided suitable conditions existed in a particular region
and the proposed zone was to be established with the initiative of
and agreement amongst the countries in that region. As the
Pakistani proposal was not concerned with genuine disarmament
considerations and was in violation of the well-established principles and procedures in bringing up such matters before the
United Nations, India introduced a draft resolution emphasising that "the initiative for the creation of a nuclear-weapon-free
zone in the appropriate region of Asia should come from the
States of the region concerned, taking into account its special
features and geographical extent." This resolution was adopted
by 104 votes eight votes more than those secured by Pakistan's
resolution. All the countries of South Asia voted in favour of
the Indian resolution, except Pakistan which abstained. On
Pakistans resolution, Sri Lanka, Nepal and Pakistan voted
affirmatively, Bangladesh abstained, and India and Bhutan voted
against.
The other resolution against which India voted was cosponsored by Japan and Canada. It dealt with the question of
peaceful nuclear explosions. The resolution was unacceptable to
India as it sought to perpetuate and institutionalize the discriminatory approach of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT) in respect of peaceful nuclear explosions. India had made it clear on a number of occasions that it
would not accept any unilateral or discriminatory international
controls over its peaceful nuclear activities.
The Ministry continued to assist the Department of Atomic
Energy and the Department of Space in respect of the international aspects of their activities. The Indian Ambassador in
Vienna continued to be a Governor on the Board of Governors
of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA).
The Non-aligned Summit in 1973 had decided to set up the
Non-aligned Solidarity Fund for Economic and Social Development. Financial and legal experts of the Bureau of non-aligned
countries met in Kuwait in May 1974 and January 1975 to finalize the draft convention for the Fund. The draft convention Will
be put up for approval to the Foreign Ministers of the Bureau at

<pg81>
their meeting in Havana during 17 to 19 Match 1975. It has
been decided that Kuwait will be the seat of the Fund. It is proposed that the initial subscription of members of the Fund will
be kept at a modest level to enable fullest participation, while
the bulk of the capital will be constituted by voluntary contributions from member countries that are in a position to do so.
The Non-aligned Summit had decided to convene a conference of developing countries with a view to developing an
effective strategy of re-structuring the world trade and improving their bargaining power. At the meeting of the Bureau of nonaligned countries at Foreign Ministers level in March 1974, it
was decided to set up an inter-governmental group of nonaligned countries on raw materials to study the trends of international commodity trade and to prepare for the Conference of
developing countries on raw materials. The Conference was held
in Dakar from 3 to 8 February 1975. The Conference adopted a
comprehensive declaration on raw materials and a Programme
of Action for co-operation between the developing countries in
the field of raw materials and other primary commodities and
enumerated points for international action. The Conference
adopted 10 resolutions to give effect to the Programme of
Action. Another 9 resolutions were adopted on economic decolonisation. In one of its resolutions, it was decided to establish
a Special Fund to finance buffer stock of raw materials and
primary commodities exported by developing countries. In
another resolution, the Conference recommended that the
agenda of the proposed international conference on Energy convened by France should include problems of raw materials in
development. On India's initiative, the Conference decided to
extend the mandate of the Inter-governmental Group on raw
materials to ensure effective follow-up action on the Conference
decisions.
In pursuance of a decision of the Bureau meeting of March
1974, a meeting of the coordinators was held in Belgrade in
September 1974 to identify in a more specific manner the lines
along which economic and technical co-operation among the
non-aligned and other developing countries could be further
stimulated.
The question of promoting technical co-operation among the
developing countries was examined also in the UN context and
the Working Group set up by the UNDP Governing Council pro<pg82>
duced a very useful analysis of the issues and recommended a
number of measures.
India has been actively participating in all these meetings.
Two important conferences held during the year under UN

auspices were the World Population Conference (Bucharest,
August 1974), and the World Food Conference (Rome, November 1974). The Population Conference for the first time, considered population policies within the over-all framework of the
economic and social development policies of the national governments. The World Plan of Action adopted by the Conference
also stressed the disirability of assuring equitable consumption of
world's resources to the present and future generations of mankind living in both developed and developing countries.
The World Food Conference made concrete proposals regarding world food security. it recommended setting up of buffer
stocks and called for the establishment of an international fund
for agricultural development to finance, in particular, agriculural
development projects in the developing countries. These decisions were endorsed by the 29th Session of the General Assembly.
A World Food Council, reporting to the General Assembly
through the ECOSOC, and assisted by both FAO and IN Secretariats, was set up to take necessary follow up action. India
wits elected a member of the Council.
The activities of transnational corporations received further
attention this year. The Report of the Group of Eminent Persons submitted to the ECOSOC expressed concern, inter alia,
over the impact of transnational corporations on the domestic
and international affairs of nation States. The Report also concluded that, while the role of transnational corporations was
mainly economic in character and influence, the non-economic
impact was frequently as important as or even more important
than the economic impact. The Report unequivocally condemned subversive political intervention on the part of the transnational corporations in the affairs of the host countries. The
Group's Report contained many suggestions for action by host
governments at national, regional and inter-regional levels. The
ECOSOC decided to set up an information and Research Centre
and an inter-governmental Commission on transnational corporations. These are likely to start functioning in 1975.
<pg83>
The Second Session of the Governing Council of the UN
Environment Programme (UNEP) was held in Nairobi in
March 1974. The Session decided to establish an International
Habitat and Human Settlements Foundation (IHHSF), for human
habitat. management and environmental design and improvement
of human settlements.
Following an initiative of the President of Mexico at the
Third UN Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD),
a Working Group had been working intensively on the preparation of a Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States. The
29th Session of the General Assembly finally adopted by 120
votes this Charter. The Charter formulated fundamental principles of international economic relations and enumerated the

economic rights and duties of States. It represented an endeavour to promote the development of international economic
relations on a just and equitable basis, having regard to the interdependence of interests of developed and developing countries.
India as a co-sponsor supported the resolution but abstained on
sub-para (o) of Chapter I concerning the free access to and from
the sea by landlocked countries on the ground that this was a
matter for bilateral agreement between the countries concerned,
Important developed countries including USA, UK, FRG voted
against this resolution.
India was re-elected to a number of- bodies including the
Governing Council of the UN Environment Programme, and
the Industrial Development Board of the UNIDO. India could
not get re-elected to the ECOSOC in which its membership expired by the end of 1974. India was elected, however, to the
preparatory Committee which would focus attention on the preparations for the mid-term review of the International Development Strategy for the Second Development Decade and for the
7th Special Session of the UN General Assembly scheduled
for early September 1975 to deal with international co-operation
and development.
On 5 July 1974, the President of India ratified the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and
Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons
and on their Destruction (1973). The Convention, inter alia,
prohibits the development, production, stockpiling, acquisition
and retention of biological and toxin weapons, equipments and
means of their delivery. Under the Convention the State Parties
<pg84>
also undertake to destroy or divert to peaceful purposes all
agents,. toxins, weapons and means of delivery specified in the
Convention. The parties are also under an obligation not to
transfer directly or indirectly, these weapons to any recipients or
to encourage or assist any State or entity to manufacture or acquire such weapons.
The Thirteenth Session of the Legal Sub-Committee on the
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space was held in Geneva from 6 to 31
May 1974. India continued to take an active part in its deliberations. Pursuant to the UN General Assembly resolution concerning the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space adopted at its Twentyeighth Session, (1973), the Legal Sub-Committee, gave the
highest priority to the draft treaty relating to the Moon and the
draft convention on Registration of Space Objects Launched into
Outer Space. The Sub-Committee was unable to resolve some
of the controversial issues relating to the Draft Moon Treaty.
However, it finalised and approved the text-of a draft convention
on the Registration of Objects Launched into Outer Space. This
draft convention envisaged, inter alia, compulsory registration of
space objects launched into outer space on a national Register

maintained by the launching State, as well as on an international
register maintained by the Secretary-General of the UN. The
draft Convention, with some minor amendments, was adopted by
the UN Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space in July,
1974 and subsequently commended by a resolution of the General Assembly in November 1974. The UN General Assembly
also adopted a resolution which inter alia approved continuing
sponsorship by the United Nations of the Thumba Equitorial
Rocket Launching Station (TERLS) in India.
The other items discussed and considered by the Legal SubCommittee were
(a) the various implications of space communications,
report of the Working Group on Director Broadcast
Satellite; and
(b) legal implications of the earth resources survey by
remote sensing satellites.
The second session of the Conference on the Law of the
Sea was held in Caracas (Venezuela) from 20 June to 29 August
1974. A number of proposals on a variety of issues relating to
<pg85>
the law of the sea were introduced during the Caracas session.
The leader of the Indian delegation, Shri H. R. Gokhale, Minister of Law, Justice and Company Affairs, made a statement in
the plenary indicating India's policy on the various issues. India
supported a 12-mile territorial sea, a 200-mile economic zone, a
continental shelf extending to the outer edge of the margin and
the concept of the archipelago provided it also applied to archipelagos of a coastal Slate, like the Andaman and Nicobar Islands.
India co-sponsored a proposal which dealt with a number of
subjects including the territorial sea, the economic zone. the, continental shelf and the archipelagos. India also co-sponsored a 12
power proposal on the contiguous zone beyond the territorial sea
and a 10 power proposal on a zonal approach to the preservation
of the marine environment.
Further intensive negotiations and drafting of a convention or
conventions on the various law of the sea issues including the
exploitation of the seabed and its resources will be taken up at
the next session of the Conference scheduled to be held in Geneva
from 17 March to 10 May 1975.
The United Nations Conference on Prescription (Limitation)
in the International Sale of Goods was held at the UN Headquarters, New York, from 20 May to 14 June 1974. Sixtyfive
States including India were represented at the Conference. The
Conference adopted a Convention, which limited the period of

prescription to four years within which the buyer or seller may
bring legal proceedings to exercise his rights or claims relating to
a contract of international sale of goods. For the Convention
to apply, the buyer and seller must have their place of business
in different States.
India continued to make its contribution in the work of the
Commission/Working Groups concerned with the progressive
development on international trade law. The work on International Sale of Goods and the International Shipping Legislation
has progressed to its final stages and it is expected that the drafts
on these subjects will be finalised in the meeting to be held in
1975. The Working Group on Negotiable Instruments is making
satisfactory progress. In addition to the above, the seventh session of UNCITRAL held in New York in May 1974 considered
the subject of multinational corporations. However, the Commis<pg86>
sion had not completed the study which it was asked to prepare
in connection with that work. This study is now expected to be
ready in time for the eighth session of UNCITRAL to be held in
June 1975.
During 1974, India concluded 99 treaties and agreements, a
list of which is given in Appendix III.
The Senior Commonwealth Officials Meeting in May 1974,
in London. in which India's Foreign Secretary participated, prepared the general groundwork for the next meeting of the Heads
of Government of the Commonwealth countries to be held in
Jamaica in April/May 1975. The meeting also discussed other
subjects of interest to Commonwealth countries especially at the
Civil Service level.
<pg87>
INDIA
USA ALGERIA GUYANA LIBERIA NEPAL SRI LANKA CYPRUS GREECE TURKEY UNITED
KINGDOM SWITZERLAND ISRAEL SYRIA EGYPT MOROCCO SOUTH AFRICA FRANCE
PORTUGAL MOZAMBIQUE ANGOLA CAPE VERDE BANGLADESH GRENADA GUINEA
GUINEA!!GUINEA-BISSAU PAKISTAN KENYA CAMBODIA KOREA NORTH KOREA NAMIBIA
IRAN PERU ZAIRE BHUTAN CANADA JAPAN AUSTRIA KUWAIT CUBA SENEGAL
YUGOSLAVIA ROMANIA ITALY MEXICO RUSSIA ECUADOR CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC
VENEZUELA JAMAICA
Apr 09, 1974

Technical And Economic Co-operation
CHAPTER X
TECHNICAL AND ECONOMIC CO-OPERATION
The Economic Division of the Ministry continued to deal
with the following subjects :
I. Promotion of closer external economic and commercial
relations, bilateral agreements, co-ordination of action
and in particular the inter-governmental Joint Commissions;
II. Working of the technical assistance programme (ITEC)
which is geared to the possibilities of utilising to the
maximum India's technical advancement.
III. Support for economic co-operation at the regional and
international level. The Economic Division worked
vigorously towards these objectives in spite of unprecedented challenges resulting from powerful world-wide inflationary pressures, escalation in prices of oil and other
inputs like fertilizers, necessary for development of
India's economy, and consequent internal economic difficulties.
I. Joint Commissions
The Economic Division serviced the inter-governmental Joint
Commissions which became clearing houses to strengthen economic and technical co-operation with important countries especially India's neighbours. The salient features of progress achieved
in the work of the Joint Commission was as follows :
India's economic and technical co-operation with Afghanistan
has been regulated under the decision taken in the Indo-Afghan
Joint Commission set up in 1969. During the six year period
1970-75 India has agreed to spend Rs. 370 lakhs in deputation
of experts to Afghanistan, supply of equipment and training facilities for Afghan nationals in India.
<pg88>
A 100 bed Institute of Child Health was established in Kabul
in 1972. A 20 member team of Indian doctors, nurses, technicians and administrative personnel is assisting in running the
Institute and providing training to Afghans in the field of paediatrics.
An Industrial Estate near Kabul is being set up. India's
co-operation is for supplying the technical and supervisory staff,
the prototype sheds and equipment for a common facilities

centre. An Indian team has prepared a techno-economic survey
which contains recommendations regarding the small scale industries to be located in the Estate.
Indo-Afghan co-operation in the field of irrigation and power
production has been close and extensive. The Chardeh Ghorband
micro-hydel project is due, to be commissioned by July 1975.
Construction work on two other micro-hydel schemes, at Faizabad and Khulm is scheduled to commence by April 1975. A
feasibility study of the Khawaja Ali Dam on the Helmand River
is being conducted by WAPCOS (Water and Power Development
Consultancy Services) a public sector consultancy organisation.
Co-operation from India for the construction of a masonry dam
on the Hari Rud River also been sought by Afghansitan and is
under consideration.
A team of agricultural experts from India has been in Afghanistan since 1971 to assist in setting up research stations in the
field of rice, wheat and potatoes. India has also supplied agricultural implements, vehicles, laboratory equipment, pesticides
and insecticides for the project.
During the year under review two meetings were held
of the sub-committee set up under the Indo-Shri Lanka Joint
Commission. The discussions covered a wide-ranging field,
including development of rural technical centres, deputation of
experts, training facilities for Sri Lanka personnel, expansion of
trade, telecommunications, the linking of the Indo-Sri Lanka
power grids, shipping and co-operation in the field of science and
technology.
A sum of Rs. 2.5 lakhs was sanctioned for the supply of
equipment for the rural technical centres. Equipment for one
of the centres was supplied during 1974-75 while two others will
be provided equipment during the year 1975-76.
<pg89>
As follow up of a project report prepared by Indian experts,
the National Rubber Manufacturers Ltd. was assigned to collaborate with the Government of Sri Lanka in setting up rubber-based
Industries in Sri Lanka. An Animal husbandry project is also
being implemented, for which an expenditure of Rs. 60 lakhs has
been provided. During the year under review, two experts were
deputed to Sri Lanka to co-operate in establishing hand-made
paper units. A joint committee, consisting of representatives of
the two Governments, was set up to study the question of linking the power grids of India and Sri Lanka.
The Agreement to set up the Indo-Iraq Joint Commission
for Economic and Technical Co-operation was signed on Mar 28, 1974.
The first meeting of the Joint Commission was
held in Baghdad from 12 to 15 January 1975. As a result of
the discussions held during the first meeting of the Joint Com-

mission, India and Iraq have expressed confidence that there win
be increased economic co-operation in the fields of petroleum,
petrochemicals and other industries, transportation, agriculture
and irrigation. India also assured Iraq of continued co-operation in the field of technical training.
Relations with Iran developed rapidly following the fourth
meeting of the Indo-Iran Joint Commission held in January and
February 1974. These were further strengthened with the visit
of India's Prime Minister to Iran and Shanshah of Iran's visit to
India. A number of projects including the Kudremukh iron
project, an alumina project, a joint shipping line and a scheme
to maximise industrial production are in an advanced stage of
negotiations. Proposals for co-operation in the fields of communications, banking, railways, shipping,
road transport and
tourism are also being processed. Training facilities were made
available to Iran in the fields of tea production, handicrafts,
rural electrification, agriculture and livestock development. India
agreed to help Iran in the recruitment of a large number of technical personnel from India, including some three hundred doctors.
Closer links are proposed to be established between the Atomic
Energy Organisations of the two countries.
A proposal to set up an Indo-Saudi Arabia Joint Commission for economic, technical and scientific collaboration is under
consideration. Draft letter of exchange has been forwarded to
Saudi Arabia and their reaction is awaited.
<pg90>
The Indo-UAE Joint Commission for Economic and Technical Co-operation headed by Ministers of External Affairs of the
two countries was established during the visit of the President of
the UAE in January 1975.
Indian experts were deputed to Dubai and Abu Dhabi
for conducting detailed feasibility studies for setting up projects
for the production of sponge iron, steel and fertiliser. MECON,
a Government of India undertaking, completed a detailed feasibility report on a sponge iron/steel plant in Dubai on commercial terms.
Dr. Henry Kissinger, Secretary of State, visited New Delhi
in October 1974. The highlight of his visit was the signing of an
Agreement for the setting up of an Indo-US Joint Commission
for Economic, Commercial, Scientific, Technological, Educational and Cultural Co-operation.
Among the three Sub-Commissions set up under the IndoUS Joint Commission, the Economic and Commercial SubCommission and the Science and Technology Sub-Commission
met at Washington on 20-21 January 1975, and on 27-29
January, 1975, respectively, while the Education and Culture
Sub-Commission met at New Delhi on 3-5 February 1975. The

recommendations/decisions of the Sub-Commissions will be
reviewed by the Joint Commission, at its first meeting. The coChairmen of the Joint Commission, are Shri Y. B. Chavan,
Minister of External Affairs, from the Indian side, and Dr.
Henry Kissinger, Secretary of State, from the American side.
The establishment of the Milt Commission is an important
landmark in Indo-American economic relations and reflects it
concrete expression of the desire of the two Governments to
build up an institutional framework for meaningful co-operation.
The Joint Commission established in November 1972, between Sweden and India, held its first meeting in New Delhi in
April 1974. The meeting was fruitful; various areas of co-operation being identified in commercial, industrial and scientific
fields. Follow-up action has already been embarked upon, especially in the field of science and technology and considerable
progress has been achieved. Incidentally, the Joint Commission
with Sweden was the first such Joint Commission established
with a country of Western Europe.
<pg91>
Indo-French trade has showed considerable increase in
recent years. The total volume rose to Rs. 11835 lakhs in 197374 as against Rs. 8531 lakhs in 1972-73. A meeting of the IndoFrench Joint Commission on Trade took place in Paris in
June, 1974, immediately after the annual bilateral talks. An
Indian Trade Delegation visited France in December 1974.
While in France, this Delegation discussed new avenues for the
diversification of trade and industrial, co-operation between the
two countries.
For 1974-75 France signed an aid Agreement for French
Francs 274 M consisting of 189 M as project and 85 M for nonproject aid. France also announced its willingness to participate
in debt relief and would raise its debt relief contribution to 40%
of debt payments due (68-61 M).
The Second meeting of the Indo-Soviet Joint Commission
was held in Moscow from 17 to 19 September 1974. The Indian
delegation was led by Shri D. P. Dhar, Minister of Planning, and
the Soviet delegation by Mr. S. A. Skachkov, Chairman of the
USSR State Committee for Foreign Economic Relations. The
Commission arrived at proposals which were set out in a Protocol for further strengthening of co-operation in the fields of steel
production, heavy machine building, power and power equipment, coal and ore mining, oil exploration and production, production co-operation, trade exchange and science and technology.
The first meeting of the Indo-Romanian Joint Commission
was held in Bucharest from 16 to 23 and September 1974.
The
Indian delegation was led by Shri D. K. Borooah, Minister for
Petroleum and Chemicals, and the Romanian delegation by Mr.

C. Babalau, Minister for Electrical Power. The two sides discussed co-operation in the various fields in Working Groups and,
in the Protocol concluded after the meeting, set out agreements
reached in pursuing co-operation in the fields of trade exchanges,
petroleum and chemicals, power and energy, agriculture and
water and land management and science and technology. Both
sides discussed the most suitable arrangements for ensuring
exchange of commodities of mutual interest to the two countries
such as iron ore, chemical fertilisers, oil field equipment and
equipment for refineries. Agreement was also reached on the
supply, of 14 deep drilling rigs from Romania.
The first meeting of the Indo-Bulgarian Joint Commission
was held in New Delhi from 7 to 11 October 1974. The Indian
<pg92>
delegation was led by Shri C. Subramaniam, Minister for Industrial Development and Science and Technology, and the Bulgarian
delegation by Mr. T. Chakarov, Minister for Metallurgy and
Machine Building. In the Protocol concluded after the meeting
both sides agreed on steps to strengthen co-operation in the fields
of food processing industry and agriculture, machine building,
heavy industry and joint ventures, electronics, pharmaceuticals
and chemicals and trade exchanges. Of particular interest was
co-operation agreed upon in setting up two rural agro-industrial
complexes in India and co-operation in production collaboration
and trade exchanges in the field of electronics. The Joint Commission meeting had been preceded by a visit of Bulgarian
experts to India in January 1974 led by Mr. Y. Tenov, First
Deputy Minister of Machine Building and Metallurgy of the
Government of Bulgaria.
The first meeting of the Indo-Hungarian Joint Commission
was held in New Delhi from 28 October to 2 November 1974.
The Indian delegation was led by Shri T. A. Pai, Minister for
Industries and Civil Supplies, and, the Hungarian delegation was
led by Dr. Guyla Horgos, Minister for Machine Building and
Metallurgy. In the Protocol concluded after the meeting the two
sides agreed on steps to be taken to strengthen co-operation in
the fields of telecommunications and electronics, agriculture,
science and technology, chemicals and pharmaceuticals, industry
and trade exchanges. Of particular interest was the co-operation
agreed upon in the field of telecommunication equipment, nonferrous metals and heavy industry.
The second meeting of the Indo-Polish Joint Commission for
Economic, Trade, Scientific and Technical Co-operation was held
in New Delhi from 20 to 24 January 1975. The Indian team was
led by Shri T. A. Pai, Minister for Industry and Civil Supplies,
and the Polish delegation was led by Mr. Jan Mitrega, Deputy
Prime Minister. In the Protocol concluded after the meeting, the
two sides agreed on strengthening co-operation in the fields of
trade exchange, mining industry and machinery, fisheries and

agriculture, ship-building and shipping, heavy and machine building industries, electronics and science and technology. Of particular interest was the co-operation agreed upon in the speedy
completion of Sudamdih-Monidih projects, preparation of a
feasibility report for the setting up of trawler construction yard
in Kerala, delivery of ships and long-term possibilities for supply of heavy and machine-building equipments.
7-883 MofEA/74
<pg93>
The fifth meeting of the Indo-Czechoslovak Joint Committee
for Economic, Trade, and Technical Co-operation was held in
New Delhi from 20 to 28 November 1974. The Indian delegation was led by Prof. D. P. Chattopadhyaya, Minister of Commerce, and the Czechoslovak delegation by Ing. A Barcak,
Minister of Foreign Trade. In the Protocol concluded after the
meeting both sides agreed on strengthening co-operation, already
significant in certain areas in the fields of industry', science and
technology and trade exchanges. Of particular interest were discussion on ways to increase the export of non-traditional commodities from India to Czechoslovakia and fuller utilisation and
expansion of Czechoslovak assisted projects in India.
During the visit of the GDR Prime Minister, an agreement
was concluded on the establishment of a Joint Commission for
Economic, Scientific and Technical Co-operation, which would
open up promising new avenues for more comprehensive and
accelerated all-round co-operation. Indo-GDR Trade and Economic Co-operation has already reached significant proportions and
given the advanced level of the GDR industry and technology,
many new areas of co-operation have been identified for example
in the fields of machine tool industry, food processing, electrical
equipment, the mining and processing of lignite and chemicals.
II. Economic and Technical Assistance Programme
Under the Indian Technical and Economic Co-operation
Programme India registered a significant increase in requests from
developing countries of Asia, Africa and Latin America for
Indian expertize, training facilities and equipment.
The ITEC Programme envisages the following form of economic and technical assistance :
(i) Provision of training facilities in India.
(ii) Long and short term deputation of experts abroad.
(iii) Gifts of equipment, drugs, medicines etc., wherever
possible.
(iv) Financial assistance for conducting feasibilty studies

and techno-economic survey's within resources available.
<pg94>
(v) In certain countries co-operation in development
projects.
The programme which was conceived and inaugurated in
September 1964 continued to expand to cover a larger number
of countries and increased turnover of technical expertize. Mention should be made of new contacts established with Frenchspeaking African countries during the visits of Presidents of
Senegal and Gabon and countries like Mozambique, GuineaBissau and Angola which were part of Portuguese colonial
empire in Africa and which have gained independence or are
well set towards it at an early date.
The expenditure on Technical Assistance programme which
was Rs. 120 lakhs in 1973-74 is estimated to increase to
Rs. 334.55 lakhs during 1974-75.
A provision of Rs. 4.7 crores has been made in next year's
budget for the Programme to cope with increasing requests from
the developing countries. In order to avoid its limited resources
being thinly spread over a large number of countries, India
attempted to render the ITEC more effective by resorting to the
principle of selectivity at all levels, in the choice of projects and
in the nature of development. The ITEC has been particularly
designed to ensure that its coverage in the neighbouring countries
is effective and that basic economic and commercial interdependence is maintained at a steady level. At the same time,
it places emphasis on countries with which India has either
developed significant relations or which have considerable development potential Forty five (45) countries are covered by the
ITEC programme out of which substantial co-operation has developed with Afghanistan, Sri Lanka, Burma, Maldives, Malaysia,
Indonesia, Fiji, Iran, Iraq, UAE, Saudi Arabia, Libya, Somalia,
Tanzania, Mauritius, Gabon, Zambia, Oman and People's Democratic Republic Yemen.
India has at present about 146 trainees under ITEC during
the current year in fields such as medicine, nursing, handicrafts,
teaching, home science, pharmacy, vocational training, agriculture, civil aviation, small scale industries, forestry, leather
technology, sugar and food technology, cinematography, journalism, architecture and structural designing, wireless communication, irrigation, power generation, etc. There are besides several
hundred trainees whose places have been arranged by this
Ministry where costs of training have been met by individual
<pg95>
trainees or their governments. Seventyfive experts have been
selected during the current year, covering a wide field of specia-

lization. Details of the experts sent on deputation abroad
as
foreign trainees in India, are given in Appendix IV. Important
progress in India's economic and technical assistance programme
is as follows :
(i) India's Neighbours
Following the visit of India's Minister of External Affairs to
Burma in April 1973 and the Burmese Foreign Minister's visit
to India in July-August 1973, Burma has shown greater interest
in bilateral co-operation in the economic, commercial, technical,
scientific and cultural fields. A 5- member Indian team visited
Burma in July 1974 and submitted a report which envisaged
Indian co-operation in setting up 19 pilot plants in key industries
of Burma. India also deputed a number of experts to Burma and
provided facilities to Burmese officials for technical training. To
assist the Burmese Government in tiding over a difficult economic situation, India has agreed to extend a commodity loan, of
of Rs. 7.5 crores to be repaid partly in the form of Burmese commodities and partly in foreign exchange, over the next few years.
Indian experts visited Maldives in June 1974 and prepared a
detailed project report for setting up a fish-canning plant. A
request from the Maldives for further assistance from India for
setting up the plant is under consideration. Two Indian teachers
were deputed to Maldives in February 1974. The Indo-Maldivian
radio-teleprinter link, set up at a cost of Rs. 3.44 lakhs, was inaugurated in March 1974.
Although the trade with Bangladesh moved sluggishly, falling far behind expectations, economic co-operation continued to,
be strengthened and expanded vigorously.
The first year of the 3-year agreement under the Balanced
Trade and Payments Arrangement (BTPA), which ended on..
27 September 1974, showed a trade turnover of only Rs. 14.53
crores, with India's exports being Rs. 10.48 crores and imports
Rs. 4.05 crores, as against the target of Rs. 30.5 crores each
way. Apart from the inevitable teething troubles, various constraints such as transport bottlenecks, strikes, go-slows, flood,
<pg96>
ravages, etc., were responsible for the shortfall. Experience
showed that balanced trade was difficult to achieve because of
constraints on supply, and other factors and the Rupee payment
arrangement with Bangladesh became a barrier to the natural
flow of goods.
After a searching examination of the situation by the Commerce Ministers of the two countries at their meetings at
Dacca and Delhi in September and December 1974, it was
decided to abolish the rupee payment arrangement.

A new protocol was signed on 17 December 1974, under
which trade will be conducted from I January 1975, in freely
convertible currencies. However, in respect of coal, jute, tobacco,
newsprint and fresh fruit, commercial contracts for which have
already been completed were extended till 28 February 1975,
to enable uncompleted deliveries to be completed by both sides
on existing prices and (rupee) payment arrangements.
The technical credit outstanding against Bangladesh on 28
February 1975 will be converted into an intergovernmental
loan, repayable in two years at 5% interest. Crucial items of
trade, coal, exported from India, and jute, imported from
Bangladesh, would be the subject of negotiations as to price and
quantity. India also undertook to buy Rs. 3.5 crores worth of
fish from Bangladesh during 1975.
On 14 February 1975 two contracts were signed between
the MMTC and the Bangladesh Coal Controller and Bangladesh
Railways for the supply of 4 to 5 lakhs tons of coal to Bangladesh from 1 March 1975 to 29 February 1976.
Despite her own straitened circumstances, India made available loans and credits worth Rs. 69 crores to help Bangladesh
overcome its temporary economic difficulties in May 1974.
A further credit of Rs. 10 crores was made available in
August 1974 to assist Bangladesh in meeting an acute balance
of payment position.
The re-scheduling of principal payments of about Rs, 1.6
crores falling due in June-July was also agreed to.
At the request of the Bangladesh Government the emergency
credit of Rs. 10 crores was allowed to be utilised to set off
<pg97>
repayments in foreign exchange of US $ 6 million plus interest
(a total of Rs. 5.78 crores) owing to the Indian Oil Corporation
for POL products supplied during 1972-74.
As a token of sympathy and solidarity with the victims of
the July-August flood ravages in Bangladesh, a commodity grant
of Rs. 5 lakhs was made by the Government of India. The
Indian Red Cross Society, the West Bengal Red Cross Society
and the Textile Export Promotion Council also contributed
gifts worth a total of Rs. 5 lakhs.
During the summit meeting of the Prime Ministers in May
1974 an agreement was announced on the setting up of four
industrial projects (cement, fertiliser and sponge iron plants in
Bangladesh and a clinker plant in Meghalaya) based on supply
of raw materials and products from one country to the other and
a guaranteed off take of the exportable surplus of these products

on mutually acceptable terms and conditions.
Under India's programme of Technical Assistance to
Bangladesh, three feasibility studies at a cost of about Rs. 16
lakhs on cement, fertilisers, and sponge iron plants were completed by Indian Consultants and reports submitted to both the
Governments of Bangladesh and India.
Also under the above programme 70 educational scholarships
were given to Bangladesh nationals and 64 Bangladesh personnel were trained in India in fields like railways, banking, administrative management, agriculture, small industry, nuclear science,
etc.
The Government of Bangladesh agreed to the grant of
direct transit facilities across its territory, to Tripura, which
would make for great convenience and economy in moving
goods from and to the Eastern States across Bangladesh rather
than through the existing circuitous overland routes. The transit
facilities will be provided from Calcutta to Agartala via
Chandpur/Akhaura and Belonia. A joint engineering survey, to
be financed by India, will be undertaken shortly regarding the
provision of railway sidings at Akhaura/Singarbil and Belonia
in Bangladesh.
It was decided to set up a Joint Commission on jute, a commodity of vital importance in the economy of the two countries,
<pg98>
to advise on various problems connected with its production,
manufacture, marketing, etc.
In pursuance of the decision taken during the Bangladesh
Prime Minister's visit to India in May 1974 the Minister of State
in the Ministry of Finance has been nominated as the Government of India's nominee on the ministerial level joint committee
to be set up in connection with the prevention of illegal trade and
currency transactions between the two countries.
The Government of India offered the fullest co-operation in
checking the common menace of smuggling and also took the
most stringent preventive measures on their own to curb this
evil. These measures included enforcement of the provisions of
the MISA against smugglers, strengthening of border check posts,
intensified searches and river patrols, restrictions on movement
of goods across the border to daylight hours, etc.
The Second meeting of the Indo-Bangladesh Joint Review
Committee on the utilisation of economic assistance extended to
Bangladesh was held in Dacca from 3-5 February 1975. There
was general agreement between the Indian and the Bangladesh
delegations regarding the speedy utilisation of the various credits.
The meeting also reviewed the working of the technical assistance

programme for Bangladesh.
(ii) East and South East Asia
A sum of Rs. 6 lakhs was sanctioned during 1975 for gifting machinery and equipment to Malaysia for setting up of a
Technical Training Institute in Negri Sembilan State in Malaysia.
Four teachers were deputed to Indonesia during the year to
joint the five already working in the Gandhi Memorial School
at Djakarta.
Five trainees in forestry have joined their courses in Dehra
Dun and Coimbatore. Two senior forestry officials of the Government of Laos visited India in November-December 1974 to
study the administration of forests in India.
India agreed to provide training facilities to 14 trainees from
North Vietnam in agriculture and animal husbandry for periods
ranging from 6 months to 1 year.
<pg99>
A five member agricultural delegation is scheduled to visit
India for a month to study agriculture and animal husbandry.
India proposed deputing an expert for assisting the Fiji
Government in setting up an industrial training centre. Another
expert in coconut research is also likely to be sent to Fiji. The
Deputation of a skin specialist is under consideration.
(iii) West Asia and North Africa
India's economic collaboration with Oman has increased
recently. As a follow-up of the Techno-Economic: Survey conducted by the NIDC in 1973, India deputed a fisheries team to
advise on fishery development in Oman and a team for road
development and town planning. A small scale industries team
is expected to visit Oman in the near future.
There are at present 14 ITEC experts on deputation in Yemen
and more are expected to join there soon, Teams of experts were
deputed to the PDRY in the fields of agriculture and fertilizers,
soda-ash, and caustic soda. As a part of India's assistance in agriculture India is gifting seeds and agricultural machinery to the
PDRY. An industrial team from the PDRY visited India to see
the working of our small scale industries.
Teams of Indian experts in water resources, steel-smelting
and agriculture visited Libya during the year to advise the
Government of Libya on their development programmes. Twenty
four Libyan trainees have come to India for training in different
vocational fields. A large number of experts, including doctors,
professors, engineers, hydrologists and cement technicians have

been deputed to Libya on direct contract. Further requests for
experts in other fields are being processed.
Upon request from the Government of Malta, a handicraft
expert was deputed to Malta in May 1974 to help establish and
organise a handicraft school in Malta. The deputation which was
under the ITEC Programme of the Ministry of External Affairs,
was initially, for a period of one year. The Government of Malta
has already indicated that they are anxious to avail themselves
of the services of this expert for another year.
The Maltese authorities have now requested for the services
of two more experts under the ITEC Programme in the, fields of
<pg100>
casting processes and engraving on metal. The request is now
being processed.
The services of an Indian expert in Weights and Measures,
deputed to Cyprus in 1972 to advise that Government regarding
the advisability of changing over to the Metric System of
Weights and Measures were much appreciated by them. They
were extended for one year in April 1973 and again in April
1974, at the request of the Cyprus Government. In July,
1974 however, in view of the serious disturbances in Cyprus,
the expert had to leave and return to India. The Cyprus
Government has now requested for his return to complete his
work. This request of the Cyprus Government is under consideration. The Weights and Measures Bill prepared by the Indian
expert passed into law in Cyprus during April 1974.
Assistance to Somalia under ITEC Programme has been
continuing since 1966. 17 Indian deputationists have been sent
to Somalia. Indian experts completed a survey for the development of the textile and paper industries in Somalia.
Some seven to eight hundred experts, including doctors,
nurses and teachers are working in Ethiopia on a direct contract basis. Six experts have been deputed under the ITEC
Programme. An Indian team of specialists visited Ethiopia for
two weeks to advise the Ethiopian Government, on planning and
land reforms.
A 3-member team of Indian experts visited Algeria to explore
the possibilities of co-operation in small-scale industries. Algerian
requests for direct recruitment from India of professors, engineers, technicians, geologists, hydrologists and experts in oil
exploration are being processed.
An Indian expert was deputed to make a preliminary study
of requirements of the Egyptian railways in the Suez Canal area.
Training facilities have been extended to Egyptian candidates in
India in the field of telecommunication research and sugar

technology.
During the State visit to India of Sudanese President Nimeri
in November-December 1974, an agreement on economic, technical and scientific co-operation was signed between India and
Sudan. This provides for exchange of experts, documents and
<pg101>
scientific material, setting up of joint ventures, co-operation between the industries of both sides and promotion of tourism.
A team of Indian experts from the Engineering Products
(India) Ltd., conducted a techno-economic survey in Sudan for
setting up cement, textiles, chemicals and sugar industries. Following the team's recommendations, India has offered to undertake feasibility studies for setting up industrial units in Sudan and
executing projects on a turnkey basis. These would be on strictly
commercial lines. Three experts are being deputed to Sudan
under the ITEC Programme.
(iv) Africa
In addition to the 38 Indian experts already in Mauritius
10 more experts are proposed to the deputed. These will be
in the fields of agriculture, engineering, education and fisheries.
It has been agreed to contribute to the Mahatma Gandhi Institute being set up in Mauritius by the Mauritian Government
by sending items like equipment, building material, laboratory
equipment, books, objects d'art, etc.
An, agreement for economic and technical co-operation between India and Senegal was signed in May 1974. The agreement envisages exchange of personnel for training purposes,
services of experts, exchange of technical and scientific documents, feasibility studies, co-operation in scientific research and
joint venture projects. During the year under
review, the
Government of India proposes to gift a consignment of irrigation pumps at a cost of Rs. 1 lakh.
During the visit of the President of Gabon to India in October 1974 agreement was reached on economic and technical
co-operation between the two countries. In terms of this India
agreed to make available to Gabon the services of doctors, professors and engineers on a direct contract basis. Further, both
sides will consider setting up joint ventures for producing footwear, soap, plywood, glass. tobacco, cement, textile and machine
tools and for collaboration in iron ore mining, production of
oil and natural gas, and fisheries. India also offered to make,
available consultancy services to Gabon.
A 9-member team from India visited Tanzania for assisting
in drawing up an integrated regional development plan in the

<pg102>
Singida region. The National Industrial Development Corporation, a public sector consultancy firm, has been commissioned
to provide assistance in setting up an industrial estate and a billet
casting unit, and in the manufacture of machine tools, sheet
glass, sugar and farm equipment. India also agreed to gift
equipment for the common facility centre of the Industrial
Estate in Zanzibar. During the visit to India in September
1974 of the Tanzanian Junior Minister for Commerce and Industry, proposals were discussed for industrial joint ventures, training of Tanzanian technical personnel and deputation of Indian
expert. India has already made available the services of architects,
accountants, engineers, auditors and experts in small scale industries under direct contract. At the request of the Tanzanian
authorities a special training programme for 40 Tanzanian students in Civil Engineering is being worked at Roorkee University.
During the visit of the Second Vice-president and Prime,
Minister of Tanzania, H. E. Mr. Rashidi M. Kawawa, in January 1975, it was agreed to set up a Joint Commission for Economic and Technical Co-operation between the two countries.
India also agreed to send two delegations of experts in the
fields of railways and civil aviation to Tanzania.
A delegation from Ghana visited India in October 1.974 to
study the working of small-scale industries and industrial research institutes.
India agreed to in principle to provide the services of Indian
experts in the fields of accountancy, engineering and science and
technology to Lesotho.
A request from the Government of Malawi for experts in the
field of life insurance and general insurance is being processed.
At the request of the Nigerian Government India have deputed
experts on direct contract of water resources, palm oil research,
and for the Nigerian Railways.
A request from the Sierra Leone Government for the services of quantity surveyors is being processed.
Zambia has a very large number of India expatriates
(approx. 1600) on direct recruitment. During the year under
review, a Zambian team visited India for recruitment of doctors,
<pg103>
nurses, railway experts, accountants, radio engineers, fire
officers. auditors and assessors. A 3-member delegation from
Zambia also visited India to study sales tax system both at the
centre as well as in the States.

The Zaire Minister of Communication and Transport visited
India during June 1974. Following this visit a Zaire recruitment team visited India and selected 130 doctors. Zaire has
also expressed interest in consultancy services from India for
its development projects. At the request of the Zaire Government, Shri Bhaskaran Nair, Managing Director of RITES, a
public sector undertaking under the Ministry of Railways, made
a brief visit in December to study possibilities of India's participation in these projects. As an immediate consequence of
this visit India has been awarded a contract for the feasibility
study of the 450 km. Lisala-Zongo railway line.
A Ugandan trade delegation visited India for exploring the
possibilities of increasing bilateral trade. A recruiting team led
by the Permanent Health Secretary of Uganda visited India in
November 1974 and made selections of medical personnel to
serve on direct contract in Uganda.
Americas
Experts have been deputed to Guyana in the fields of
agriculture, geology, medicine, education, leather, cement and
textiles.
(iii) International Economic Organizations
ESCAP
An Indian delegation headed by the Minister of Commerce,
Prof. D. P. Chattopadhyaya, attended the 30th session of ECAFE
(now ESCAP-Economic and Social Council for Asia and
Pacific) held in Colombo in March/April 1974. Prof. Chattopadhyaya welcomed the timely and constructive proposal of the
Sri Lanka Prime Minister for the creation of a World Fertilizer
Fund. The Executive Secretary of ESCAP Mr. J. B. P. Maramis, paid a second visit to India in September 1974. India is
taking keen interest in projects of regional co-operation under
ESCAP and in the proposals to rationalize the structure and
redefine the objectives of ESCAP.
<pg104>
The 31st Session of ESCAP was held in New Delhi from 26
February to 7 March 1975. Along with 33 members and associate members, representatives of 16 non-member countries, UN
bodies, specialised agencies and non-governmental organisations
participated in the Session. The Commission elected Prof. D. P.
Chattopadhyaya, Minister of Commerce, as its Chairman. The session was inaugurated by the Prime Minister.
The Commission adopted seven draft resolutions, including the
New Delhi Declaration, at its plenary session on 6 March 1975.
These resolutions included the proposal to set up a Regional Centre for the Transfer of Technology, the establishment of a separate

legislative committee for shipping and ports and the setting up of
an Asian Centre for Agricultural Machinery. One of the resolutions was on a regional plan of action for the enhancement of the
role of women in the task of development. Another resolution
was regarding the future structure of the four regional training
institutions under ESCAP, namely the Asian Institute for Economic Development and Planning, the Asian Centre for Development Administration, the Asian Statistical Institute and the Asian
Centre for Training and Research in Social Welfare and Development. A resolution was also adopted for changing the name of
the Asian Institute for Economic Development and Planning to
Asian Development Institute.
The Commission also adopted the Programme of work for
1975-77, The programme is based on an integrated, multi-disciplinary and action oriented approach to the development problems of the region, particularly in the priority areas identified at
the Colombo session in 1974.
E. E. C.
The European Economic Community with which India had
concluded a Commercial Co-operation Agreement about a year
ago decided to give India 300,000 tons wheat as grant and
700,000 tons on commercial terms.
The Community also decided to contribute US $ 150 million
as its initial contribution to the United Nations Emergency
Operations Fund.
<pg105>
INDIA
USA AFGHANISTAN LATVIA SRI LANKA RUSSIA IRAQ IRAN UNITED KINGDOM SAUDI
ARABIA UNITED ARAB EMIRATES SWEDEN FRANCE OMAN ROMANIA BULGARIA NORWAY
SLOVAKIA GABON GUINEA MOZAMBIQUE SENEGAL ANGOLA GUINEA-BISSAU BURMA
MALAYSIA MALDIVES FIJI INDONESIA LIBYA MALI SOMALIA MAURITIUS TANZANIA
ZAMBIA YEMEN BANGLADESH LAOS VIETNAM MALTA CYPRUS ETHIOPIA ALGERIA EGYPT
SUDAN GHANA LESOTHO MALAWI NIGER NIGERIA SIERRA LEONE ZAIRE UGANDA GUYANA
Mar 28, 1974

External Publicity
Jan 01, 1974

CHAPTER XI
EXTERNAL PUBLICITY
The External Publicity Division worked to promote understanding, sympathy and support for India's foreign policy and to
project a balanced and objective image of the country abroad.
This involved close contact with Indian and foreign Press, informing Missions of developments at home, and the supply of books,
films, photographs, articles, pamphlets and exhibition materials.
In spite of financial stringency, efforts were continued to provide
India's Missions abroad with the information and material necessary for their publicity efforts.
In the international media's coverage of India during the year
under review, the main subjects of interest were India's peaceful
nuclear experiment, issues and developments in the sub-continent,
the economic and agricultural situation in India and the Constitution (Amendment) Bill on Sikkim. As regards external publicity
emphasis was laid on India's commitment to develop and use,
nuclear energy only for peaceful purposes, her earnest desire to
consolidate friendly and co-operative relations with her neighbours
and further the process of normalisation in the sub-continent for
achieving the aim of durable peace; her determination in the
face of global economic crisis to build up self-reliance and economic and social justice at home; and her response to democratic
urges of the people in Sikkim. Measures were taken to counter
adverse and mischievous propaganda on some of these subjects
in the habitually hostile media of certain countries.
Indian Missions abroad and representatives of the Indian and
foreign Press here were regularly briefed on major issues as well
as other subjects of significance to India's, foreign policy and her
image abroad. With regard to foreign Press representatives, many
of these briefings were conducted.. under arrangements made in
consultation with the Departments concerned at the level of
Prime Minister and other Ministers and senior officials. The
Joint Secretary for External Publicity, in his capacity as the official spokesman of the Ministry of External Affairs, held regular
<pg106>
briefings for Indian and foreign correspondents in Delhi when
Parliament was not in session, and was available for consultation
even when it was.
The Division's regular publicity work continued under the
following heads
Press Work
The Press Relations Section catered to the needs of 55 visiting
foreign journalists and 57 TV teams. It also provided assistance
to 91 Indian journalists going overseas on professional visits,

some on cultural exchange programmes. Nine foreign journalists
visited India as guests of the Government of India.
The Division issued 366 Press releases on various subjects,
material for which was generally supplied by Indian Missions
abroad and the Territorial Divisions, of the Ministry. Representatives of mass media, both Indian and foreign, made use of these
releases, as well as the transmission unit of the Division and All
India Radio.
The Transmission Unit regularly sent out two news-casts per
day to Indian Missions abroad. Up-to-date information on political and economic developments in India was essential for them
to project India's image.
Audio-Visual Publicity
Forty-five documentary films were approved for external
publicity. One thousand and fifty prints of films were supplied
to Indian Missions abroad. The! purchase of nine selected Indian
feature films and five short films produced at the Films and TV
Institute, Poona, was finalised.
Informal film festivals, were held in Colombo and Hanoi with
some selected features and documentaries. Similar films supplied
through the good offices of the Ministry of Information and
Broadcasting have been sent to Brasilia for the same purpose.
Special compilation films were produced on the State visits
of H. E. Mr. Leonid Iiyich Brezhnev, Secretary-General of the
Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union
and President of the Supreme Soviet of the USSR; H. E. Dr.
Gustav Husak, General Secretary of the Central Committee of
<pg107>
the Communist Party of Czechoslovakia; Their Imperial Majesties
the Shanshah and Shahbano of Iran; H. E. Mr. Josip Tito, President of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia; H. E. Mr.
Stanko Todorov, Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the
People's Republic of Bulgaria, and H. E. Mrs. Sirimavo R. D.
Bandaranaike, Prime Minister of Sri Lanka.
A special film was produced on the passing out parade at the
Indian Military Academy of H. R. H. Prince John `Uluvalu Taku
'ako of Tonga, at the request of India's Mission in Suva.
Prints of the above films were supplied for presentation to
the respective governments and also to the Missions concerned for
local publicity. Compilation films on the State, visits of H. E.
Mr. Gaafar Mohammed Nimeri, President of Sudan and H. M.
The Yang Dipertuan Agong of Malaysia are under production.
Selected films were supplied for advance publicity in Iran on

the eve of the visit of the Prime Minister to Tehran.
The following audio-visual equipment was sanctioned :
Nine 16 mm projectors; one each for our Missions at Sofia,
Moscow, Madrid, Manila, Addis Ababa, Kuala Lumpur and XP
Division, and two for Dacca.
Four cinema vans : one each for our Missions at Kuala
Lumpur, Port of Spain, Nairobi, and Gangtok.
Two radio-receiving sets; one each for our Missions at Hong
Kong and Vienna.
Seventy-five gramophone records of Indian classical and
popular music were supplied to different Missions.
Between November 1973 and November 1974, 50,000 photographs, including 6,000 in exhibition size, on various subjects were
sent to our Missions abroad.
Exhibitions and Cultural Works
For exhibitions in France, Tunisia, Japan, the United States
of America, Switzerland, Bangladesh, Sri Lanka, Algeria, Malaysia, Lebanon, Turkey, Trinidad, Czechoslovakia and Guyana, the
Division supplied. books, photographs, dolls, paintings, postage
<pg108>
stamps, posters, reproductions of Indian art, picture postcards and
other relevant publicity material. The Missions were also assisted
in organising Children's Day painting competitions on 14 November 1974. In addition, the Division received a number of ad hoc
requests for material on Indian life/culture, and sent the Missions
concerned relevant material. The Division also liaised with the
Department of Culture and the Indian Council for Cultural Relations in connection with the trips of Indian artists and cultural
troupes abroad. Indian Missions were requested to co-operate
with these delegations to ensure that their exhibitions/performances abroad were a success.
Print Publicity
The production unit of the Division supplied publicity material to the Missions regularly. There were some reductions in the
print order of the Ministry's publications-Foreign Affairs Record (monthly), Indian and Foreign Review (fortnightly) and
"Courrier de i`Inde" (French fortnightly)-due to economy
measures. Similarly, it was possible to produce only nine pamphlets for distribution abroad. Special articles were sent out for
Republic Day and Independence Day. Individual requests for
articles on topics of special interest were also met.

About 2,700 books on Indian history, culture and economic
development were supplied to the Indian Missions abroad for
their libraries and for presentation to local institutions. In addition, Missions received 120 Indian newspapers and journals for
their reading rooms and for distribution.
Reference Work
Indian Missions abroad sent up a large number of Press clippings for screening, analysis and future reference. In addition,
the World Press Review based on telexes, cables and despatches
from Missions on coverage of interest to India, appeared regularly.
In order to function effectively the Division worked in close
co-ordination with several Ministries, Government Departments
and other agencies, particularly the Ministry of Commerce, the
Department of Culture, ICCR and the Ministry of Information and
Broadcasting and all its media units.
8--883 M of EA/74
<pg109>
INDIA
USA MALI SRI LANKA VIETNAM BRAZIL NORWAY SLOVAKIA IRAN YUGOSLAVIA
BULGARIA FIJI TONGA SUDAN MALAYSIA RUSSIA ETHIOPIA PHILIPPINES SPAIN KENYA
AUSTRIA FRANCE JAPAN TUNISIA ALGERIA BANGLADESH SWITZERLAND GUYANA
LEBANON TURKEY CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC
Jan 01, 1974

Cultural Relations
CHAPTER XII
CULTURAL RELATIONS
The Indian Council for Cultural Relations increased its activities in fulfilment of its responsibilities to project the composite
image of Indian culture and civilization and to support India's
diplomatic efforts through diverse kinds of cultural exchanges
and activities.
India now has bilateral cultural agreements with 33 countries
under which agreed programmes have, been worked out with most
of our partner nations. Under these programmes, four distinguished Indian professors were to take up appointments in uni-

versities in Berlin (GDR), Beirut, Sofa and Zagreb in chain
connected with Indian Studies.
On the occasion of our own National Day functions or to
participate in the National Day celebrations of friendly countries,
cultural delegations were sent to Afghanistan, Nepal, Sri Lanka.
Bangladesh and Mauritius. A Cultural troupe was sent to Tehran
to perform during the Asian Games and another accompanied the
Prime Minister's goodwill visit to the country. For the first time
two Qazis were sent to Kuala Lumpur to participate in the Quran
Reading Competition. Other Indian cultural troupes were assisted by the Council in a variety of ways on their tours abroad.
The Council played host to many important dignitaries who,
under different auspices, visited India. During the year under
review, President Kenneth Kaunda and Dr. Andre Malraux came
to receive the Jawaharlal Nehru International Understanding
Awards for 1970 and 1972 respectively. The Azad Memorial
Lectures were delivered by Professor Dorothy Hodgkin, the
British Nobel Laureate, and Dr. Sayyed Hossein Nasr, Chancellor of the Arya Mehr University, Tehran for 1974 and 1975
respectively. Lectures of many other distinguished personalities
were similarly arranged by the Council.
On the other side, Indian distinguished academic personalities were sent abroad-Professor Amalesh Tripathi of Calcutta,
for example was sent to London to deliver the last of the series
of the Gandhi Memorial Lectures.
<pg110>
The Council has also assisted in holding seminars and conferences on intellectual and cultural subjects in Delhi. In cooperation with the Max Mueller Bhawan, a seminar was held on
India and Germany: Intellectual Responses in Modern Times."
In co-operation with the British High Commission, a Librarian's
Conference was held to dwell on the problems and policies involved in the setting up and running of modern libraries. On
behalf of the United States Information Services, the Council
managed two US Book Corners in Gauhati and Kanpur.
The Council continued to supervise over foreign cultural
centres established outside Consular towns in India. This included British libraries and the House of. Soviet Culture in
Trivandrum. The Council also supervised over the Max Mueller
Bhawan and Office of Alliance Francaises in India.
The Council assisted in arranging several foreign exhibitions
in India. This included :
(i) An exihibition of Original Prints collected by Museum
of Modern Art. New York;
(ii) An exhibition of wood-sculptures from Mauritius;

(iii) An exhibition on Senegal;
(iv) An exhibition of Hungarian folk art;
(v)

An exhibition of numismatic and archeological finds
in India and Italy;

(vi) An exhibition of French period costumes of two
centuries;
(vii) Similarly, the Council arranged for the exhibitions of
Indian arts and handicrafts in London and Chile;
(viii) An exhibition of Reproduction of Indian paintings is
still touring South and Central America; and
(ix) An exhibition of selected modem Indian paintings is
still touring Eastern and Western Europe.
In response to the growing interest in the cultural heritage of
India, three Cultural Centres have already been established in
Suva (Fiji), Georgetown (Guyana) and San Francisco (USA).
The Centre in San Francisco has still not started functioning in
<pg111>
full strength because of the problems of finding suitable accommodation.
The Council is also actively associated with the establishment
of the Mahatma Gandhi Institute in Mauritius. Two teachers
were sent to the School of Music in Kabul.
As a part of its responsibility, the Council looks after foreign
students coming to India for studies and training. Orientation
programmes were arranged for such students as also for a special
80-member academic delegations of British teachers and 26member group of Swedish Intellectuals,
As a part of the Cultural programme, Indian books and publications have been sent for libraries and institutions both of a
general and specialised nature in many countries.
A bust of Shri Lokmanya Tilak was sent to Fiji, and musical
instruments to Mauritius.
As an offshoot of this programme, the Council also offered
assistance to the Maison des Sciences de l'Homme, Paris, and
the Australian National University, Canberra, to select books on
their behalf to build up their specialised libraries on India.
Following the merger with the Indian Council for Africa, the
Council took over-the circulation of Africa Quarterly and continued activities regarding the welfare of the African students. A

number of functions were held for African students including, one
on launching an appeal for liberation of Rhodesia and South
Africa
The `Nomination Scheme' under which the Ministry has been
assisting, for the past several years, self-financing students from
developing countries in Africa and Asia to secure admissions to
Medical and Engineering Colleges in India, was continued during
the year. Under this scheme, seats were reserved by the Ministries of Health and Education in Medical and Engineering Colleges all over India and are placed at the disposal of the Ministry
of External Affairs. The categories of foreign students who are
covered under the above scheme also include students of Indian
origin domiciled in foreign countries.
In 1974, the Ministry arranged admissions, in Medical and
Engineering Colleges, of a total of 293 foreign students against
<pg112>
284 in 1973.-74 of these were admitted to Medical Colleges and
219 to Engineering Colleges. There were 25 students from
Africa, 67 from West Asia, 109 from South East Asia, 35 from
Sri Lanka, 46 from Nepal and 11 from other countries. Distribution of re-served medical and engineering seats is shown in Appendix V.
Our earlier decision of non-allocation of medical seats for selffinancing South African students under our `Nomination Scheme'
due to the South African Government's decision not to recognise
the Indian Medical Degrees after Dec 31, 1978, was reviewed during the year, in the light of the representations and
difficulties faced by a large number of South African students
who look towards India for further medical studies and it was
decided to accept applications from South African students though
we continue to disapprove strongly of the above unilateral decision of the South African Government.
There is increasing demand from foreign students to avail of
training facilities in medical and engineering courses in Indian
institutions. Indeed because of the paucity of vacancies available, only a small fraction of such applications even from qualified candidates could be accommodated.
<pg113>
INDIA
CROATIA GERMANY LEBANON AFGHANISTAN NEPAL SRI LANKA BANGLADESH IRAN
MAURITIUS USA MALAYSIA MALDIVES UNITED KINGDOM SENEGAL ITALY CHILE FIJI
GUYANA FRANCE AUSTRALIA SOUTH AFRICA
Dec 31, 1978

Protocol Matters
CHAPTER XIII
PROTOCOL MATTERS
The Government of Senegal opened a resident Embassy in
New Delhi with effect from Oct 12, 1974.
His Excellency Mr. Babacar Diop, the Ambassador of the
Republic of Senegal, presented his credentials to the President on
10 December 1974.
The State of Bahrain opened a Consulate in Bombay with
effect from 23 April 1974. Mr. Mohamad Hassan Kamaluddin
assumed charge as Consul on the same date.
<pg114>
SENEGAL
INDIA CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC BAHRAIN
Oct 12, 1974

Passport Visa And Consular Services
CHAPTER XIV
PASSPORT VISA AND CONSULAR SERVICES
During the year 1974, there was a marked increase in the
number of applications for new Passports, miscellaneous services,
etc., at all the Regional Passport Offices in India. A new Passport
Office for the State of Kerala was established on Apr 30, 1974
and it is functioning at present from Madras. As soon as suitable
office accommodation becomes available, it will shift to Ernakulam. The total sanctioned strength of the Central Passport and
Emigration Organisation at the end of the year was as follows :
Regional Passport Officers

8

Assistant Passport Officers

7

Public Relations Officers

9

Superintendents/protectors of Emigrants

20

Non-gazetted clerical staff
Class IV Staff.

361
108

Consequent on Government of India's decision to establish
diplomatic and consular relations with Portugal, restrictions an
grant of endorsements for Portugal were removed and all Passport
Issuing Authorities and Government of India Missions abroad
were authorised to grant such endorsements freely. Was to
Portuguese nationals are now being granted freely. The Governmen, of Portugal announced the grant of similar facilities to Indian
nationals.
Following a decision by the Governments of India and Pakistan to restore normal travel facilities between the two countries,
passports and endorsements for Pakistan are now being granted
freely by all Passport Issuing Authorities. Under the agreement,
the old system of issuing India-Pakistan Passports has been dis<pg115>
continued and Indian nationals desiring to visit Pakistan are now
required to travel on ordinary international passports. A separate
cell was established in the Ministry for processing visa applications from Pakastani nationals.
During the year, the problem of large number of Indian
nationals in the United Arab Emirates who were without any travel
documents were also successfully tackled. The Government of
the UAE agreed to let these persons stay on provided the Government of India gave them travel documents and the persons concerned were able to obtain work permits. A crash programme for
screening passport applications of over 8,000 persons was accordingly taken up and with the exception of a few who had no
claim to Indian citizenship, passports were issued to all of them.
The Government of India concluded a Visa Abolition Agreement, for a stay of upto 90 days, with the Government of Bulgaria,
effective from 5 April 1974. A similar agreement effective from
1 August 1974 was concluded with the Government of Iceland.
Due to a sharp increase in the number of Passport applications
in the Regional Passport Offices in Madras, Bombay, Ahmedabad
and Chandigarh, senior officers of the Ministry visited these
offices and the Staff Inspection Unit of the Ministry of Finance
and the work Study Unit of the Ministry of External Affairs inspected them. Based on their recommendations, steps were taken
to increase the establishment of these offices to enable them to
cope with the additional work.

The numbers of ordinary, diplomatic and official passports
issued, serviced and other miscellaneous services rendered are
given below. Figures for 1973 are given in brackets.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)

Ordinary passports-3,34,756(2,01,308)
Diplomatic passports-796 (672)
Official passports-3556 (3104)
Ordinary passports serviced.-1,17,809 (1,11,769)
Diplomatic and official passports serviced-2287
(2331).

The Passport and Visa Division continued to make efforts,
through its varions Regional Passport Offices, to issue passports
<pg116>
with the minimum of delay. In spite of a sharp increase in the number of passport applicants, these offices were able to cope with the
rush. During the year, only 46 passport applications were rejected. Consistent with the increase in the number of passport
applications, the revenues earned by the Passport Offices also
increased. Total amount collected in fees in 1974 was Rs. 1,11,
01.742.09 as compared with Rs. 78,67, 152.00 in 1973.
Consular Section co-ordinates consular activities of Indian
Missions abroad.
During the period under survey, 86 destitute Indian nationals
were repatriated to India at government expense, and 16 stranded
Indians Were extended financial assistance. Efforts are being made
to recover the government dues with the help of the respective
State Governments. Cases of arrest/deportation of 120 Indian
nationals abroad have been reported. Besides continuing efforts
to secure the extradition of E. Jhirad from the USA, eight
fresh cases of extradition of fugitive offenders are being examined
in consultation with the Legal and Treaties Division. 143 cases
of registration of persons as Indian citizens were processed and
77 complaints of various kinds have been looked into. In addition
to handling 26 death cases, 48 cases of estates of deceased Indians
are being dealt with. More than 15,030 judicial, commercial and
educational documents were authenticated for facilitating their
presentation abroad. Steps are under way to conclude a General
Agreement with Nepal for examination of witnesses in criminal
cases.
A Convention on Consular Relations between India and
Czechoslovakia was signed in New Delhi on 3 December 1974.
By and large the provisions of the Convention conform to international State practice on the subject as well as the existing Indian
practice relating to consular posts in India. According to the
Convention the head of the consular post will enjoy full immunity
from criminal jurisdiction of the receiving State. This immunity
will be recognised on the basis of reciprocity. This Convention is
similar to the Convention which was concluded last year with the

USSR.
<pg117>
USA
INDIA PORTUGAL PAKISTAN UNITED ARAB EMIRATES BULGARIA ICELAND NEPAL NORWAY
SLOVAKIA
Apr 30, 1974

Administration And Organisation
CHAPTER XV
ADMINISTRATION AND ORGANISATION
In October 1974, Shri Y. B. Chavan took over as Minister
of External Affairs from Sardar Swaran Singh, Shri Surendra
Pal Singh demitted the office of Minister of State and Shri
Bipinpal Das took over as Deputy Minister. Recently Shri G.
Parthasarthy was appointed Chairman of the Policy Planning
Committee in the Ministry of External Affairs.
Shri Kewal Singh and Shri V. C. Trivedi, continued as
Foreign Secretary and Secretary (East) respectively. On transfer of Shri Avtar Singh, Secretary (West), Shri B. K. Sanyal,
formerly Additional Secretary (ED) took over as Secretary
(ED); Shri J. S. Mehta, took over as Additional Secretary
(Administration and Policy Planning). Shri M. A. Rahman,
continued as Additional Secretary.
In the changing spectrum of the world scene and diplomatic
activity the administrative structure of this Ministry and the
Foreign Service need to be continuously strengthened and adjusted to the new priorities. In recognition of these factors, the
IFS (Pillai) Committee recommended in 1965 a cadre strength
of 550 for the Indian Foreign Service over a period of ten
years, The strength of the IFS has now reached 495; which is
still short of the, target by 55. 22 officers were on deputation
to other Ministries/Departments etc., during 1974-75-two in
the Department of Economic Affairs (Ministry of Finance); two
in the Ministry of Commerce; two in the Department of Cabinet Affairs; one in the Prime Minister's Secretariat, one in the
Planning Commission; one with the Indian Council for Cultural
Relations; one of the Senior Instructing Staff of the National
Defence College and two among the officer-trainees in the
National Defence College; two in the Department of Atomic

Energy; six on deputation with the United Nations Organisations
and two on Fellowships in the USA and Great Britain.
<pg118>
The Ministry is now responsible for the administration of
117 Missions/Posts (including 4 Special Offices in Sikkim,
Bhutan, New York and Geneva) with a total strength of 3183
personnel including local staff. The Ministry has 19 Divisions
With a total strength of 2137 of officers and staff.
In the previous year steps had been taken to enlarge and
strengthen our representation in the Gulf region. In the context
of the Energy crisis and the need for strengthening of India's
economic co-operation and commercial relations with the area, it
is proposed to appoint an Additional Secretary to effectively
superintend over this work.
With the developing relations with Tanzania, a Consulate
General was opened at Zanzibar under the charge of a resident
Consul General. Following political changes and the general
improvement in India's relations with the two countries of the
Korean penninsula and the prospects of growth in trade with
these countries, the Consulates-General at Seoul and Pyong
Yang were raised to the Embassy level in December 1973. The
first Ambassadors to the Democratic Peoples' Republic of Korea
and the Republic of Korea took up their respective appointments in the year under review.
The expenditure of the Ministry during 1974-75 is estimated
to be of the order of Rs. 7668.00 lacs (excluding Loans to
Bangladesh amounting to Rs. 2469 lacs) details of which are
given below
(Rs. in lacs.)
Headquarters
Missions/Posts abroad

319.44
1562.00

Other Items
Contributions to the United Nations
and Commonwealth Secretariat
Central Passport & Emigration
Organisations
Other Miscellaneous items
<pg119>
Subsidies and Aid
Subsidy to Sikkim
Subsidy to Bhutan

281.95
61.33
1377.21

816.55
1577.09

Aid to Nepal
897.81
Aid to other developing Afro-Asian
countries
375.00
Aid to Bangladesh
341.26
Special Security & Welfare
58.36
-------TOTAL
7668.00
-------The details of sub-headwise expenditure on Headquarters,
Missions/Posts abroad and on External Publicity are given in
Appendix VI. But even from these figures it will be seen that an
expenditure of Rs. 15.62 crores only is a small fraction and in
fact works out to 0.42 per cent of the Government's total Civil
Disbursements from Revenue.
In the administration of the Ministry, two objectives remained in the forefront. On the one hand it was often the consistent endeavour that there should be no extravagance and
on the other that certain minimum standards should be maintained and that India's representatives abroad should be effective and responsive to the political and economic challenges. If
the Foreign Service had not been administered with constant
regard for economy the costs would have been increasing very
considerably whereas they have been substantially contained;
India's Missions generally have a small staff and run at low cost
compared even to Missions of most developing countries. The
staffing patterns are kept under constant review with accent on
economy consistent with functional effectiveness. The measures
instituted in earlier years in pursuance of the Prime Minister's
directives to economise in non-Plan expenditure continued to be
operative during the year. The need for expansion had to be
largely resisted and the unavoidable compulsions to essential
expansion of India's representation was accommodated largely
by reallocation of posts and personnel. Notwithstanding upward revision of foreign allowances, pay scales of local staff
and rental ceilings, the resultant increase was by and large
neutralised by keeping posts in abeyance, and other economy
measures such as curtailment of leave passages and limiting
contingent expenditure.
<pg120>
During the year, the Foreign Service inspectors carried out
inspection of Missions in 13 stations viz. Kinshasa, Geneva,
Madrid, Lagos, Accra, London, Dacca, Dubai, Abu Dhabi,
Doha, Aden, Kuwait and Beirut. They made a number of recommendations regarding staffing patterns, rationalisation of
work methods, revision of foreign allowances etc. One of the
major recommendations of the Foreign Service Inspectors during the year was in respect of restructuring of the High Commission of India, London, through abolition of its local cadres,
by Dec 31, 1974 and employment of its local staff on a
contract basis. Correspondingly, a greater proportion of the

posts will in the future be manned by India-based personnel.
Winding up of inherited Estacode and Rupee Cadre of the High
Commission, London, was aimed at restricting increase in the
expenditure on current account and more so on the spiralling
pension establishments.
In view of the steep increases in rent every effort is being
made to acquire as many buildings abroad as possible. A sum
of Rs. 50 lacs per annum in foreign exchange is, therefore, earmarked for acquiring properties abroad. With the acquisition
of the Chancery buildings in the Hague, Government now owns
Chanceries in 14 countries, residences of the Heads of Missions
in 26 countries and staff residences in 11 countries. Plots of
land have been purchased in Ottawa and Bangkok for construction of Chancery buildings and residential accommodation for
members of the Missions. The construction of the Chancery
and the Head of Mission's residence in Thimpu and of officers'
quarters in Tokyo is in progress.
The Ministry had earlier established direct Teleprinter/
Telex links with 51 Indian Missions/Posts abroad. Similar
links were established during the year with 3 more Missions/
Posts abroad viz. Baghdad, Bagota and Kinshasa.
With the opening of a Regional Passport Office in Kerala,
there are now 8 Regional Passport Offices. There was a continuous increase in the workload of the Regional Passport Offices
in India because of liberalisation of passport regulations. Senior
officers of this Ministry and the Staff Inspection Units conducted inspections, to assess staff requirements of these offices to
improve their functional efficiency, and to find ways and means
for clearing accumulated arrears of work. There was a progressive increase in revenue on account of passport fees and
<pg121>
consular fees etc.; the likely receipts on this amount would be
of the order of Rs. 104 lacs, as against the expenditure of Rs. 44
Lacs on these offices. Special efforts were also made to streamline the existing procedures and staff patterns to achieve maximum efficiency even in the face of mounting increase in passport servicing work.
The Welfare Unit in the Ministry looks after the general welfare of all the officials serving at Headquarters and in Missions
abroad. For reasons beyond the control of the Ministry, it has
not been possible to obtain satisfactory facilities to provide admission of children of Foreign Service personnel in schools, nor
to provide accommodation etc., of the officials reposted in India.
Nevertheless, steps to explore the feasible improvements are constantly engaging the attention of this Ministry.
Efforts to achieve progressive use of Hindi in the official
work of this Ministry, Regional Passport Offices and in Mis-

sions abroad have been fruitful and encouraging. As a positive
step in this direction, the Sub-Committee of the Kendriya. Hindi
Samiti in the Ministry was reconstituted, and an on-the-spot
study was undertaken by the visit of the Ministry's Hindi Officer to Sri Lanka, Malaysia, Singapore, Hong Kong and Thailand. In the Ministry's work, letters or notes verbale etc., received in a language other than English, are replied to in Hindi
with an unofficial translation provided in English. Hindi is being used in the Letters of Credence, Letters of Recall, Commission of Appointments and other Protocol documents. Almost all International Treaties and Agreements were prepared
and signed simultaneously in Hindi also. A Hindi-knowing
officer is associated at the negotiation stage of a treaty/agreement to facilitate their drafting in Hindi.
Conscious measures within the framework of the `Scheme
for Propagation of Hindi abroad', partook of the nature of
supply of Hindi-teaching aids to some of the Missions. Assistance was provided through special Hindi officers by our Missions in Mauritius and Fiji to prepare curriculum for Hindi
teaching and for conducting examinations, and in organising
literary and cultural activities. A Hindi newspaper, exchange
programme was introduced with Fiji. In Nepal, Fiji, Mauritius
and UK, the Ram Charit Manas Chatushsati was celebrated in
a manner befitting the occasion. Two Hindi journalists from
Fiji visited India on a goodwill tour. A few professors and
<pg122>
lecturers were also made available by the Indian Council for
Cultural Relations to teach Hindi in India's Cultural Centres
abroad and in foreign Universities. The Ministry assisted the
organisers of the Vishwa Hindi Sammelan in inviting delegates
from foreign countries and in obtaining material for exhibitions.
During the period under review steps have been taken to
expedite the work of recording and weeding of current and old
files and to transfer such of them which are more than 25 years
old to the National Archives of India. The records lying in
our Missions abroad are also being organised properly and noncurrent ones are being transferred to the Headquarters.
<pg123>
USA
INDIA BHUTAN SWITZERLAND TANZANIA KOREA BANGLADESH NEPAL CENTRAL AFRICAN
REPUBLIC ZAIRE GHANA SPAIN UNITED ARAB EMIRATES UNITED KINGDOM KUWAIT
LEBANON QATAR CANADA JAPAN IRAQ HONG KONG MALAYSIA REPUBLIC OF SINGAPORE
SRI LANKA FIJI MAURITIUS
Dec 31, 1974

Appendix I International Conferences, Congresses, Seminars
APPENDIX I
International Conferences, Congresses, Seminars etc, In which India
Participated in 1974-75
------------------------------------------------------------------------------S.No. Conferences etc. participated.
Nature of
Foreign Exchange
participa-

Component of Ex-

tion.
penditure.
------------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
------------------------------------------------------------------------------A.ABROAD.
1. 7th Meeting of the Technical Advisery
by
Committee to the Consultative Group
on International Agricultural
Research Rome, (Feb 04, 1974-8 February
1974 and April 1974.).

Official

All expenses met
F. A. 0.

2. Conference on Research on Manab
ogement in Public Sector Corporation
Canad
a.
at Kuala Lumpur (Malaysia) (17-22 March 1974).

Do.

Expenditure was

3. A Regional Seminar on Public Enterprises was organised in Kuala
Lumpur (18-21 March 1974).

Do.

Nil

4. 8th Meeting of Board of Governors of INTELSAT held in Washing
ton (18 March 1974 to I April 1974)

Do.

Rs 5,400/-

5. 6th Session of WMO Commission for
basic Systems held at Belgrade
(18.March,to 5 April 1974).

Do.

Rs. 3,750/-

6. Meeting of the group of 77 held in
Nairobi for the Law of the Sea matters (25 March to 5 April 1974).

Do.

Rs. 11,224.20

7. Pacific Area Travel Association
(PATA) Conference & Workshop

Do.

Rs. 6,450.00

rne by IDEC

held in Jakarta (Indonesia) (25
March to 6 April 1974).
8. ABU Seminar on the Broadcaster
Do.
Nil.
in World Population "Year" Kuala
Lumpur (Malaysia) (28-30 March
1974) and also study group
meeting in Kula Lumpur (31 March
1974 to 4 April 1974).
------------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg124>
APPENDIX I-contd.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------9. Inter-Parliamentary Conference on
Official
No Expenditure was
Control on Pollution in Mediterranean Sea (in Rome) (March-April
1974)
10. 2nd European Electro-Optics Conference held at Montreux, Switzer-

incurred.

Do.

land (2-5 April 1974).
&

360 Swiss Francs
(260 Swiss Francs
as delegation fee
100 Swiss Francs

as

cost of the

proceed

ings TA/DA

expendi-

ture not known.
11.

UNDP (SF) Desert Locust Project,

Do.

Joint Survey in South West Afghanistan Govt. on Desert Locust, (2 April to
18 June 1974).
12. ICA Regional
April 1974).

Seminars (3-23

AU expenditure met
by FAO.

Do.

Nil.

13. 11th Meeting of the Committee on
International Water Resources Law
of the International Law Association
held at Geneva (4-8 April 1974).

Do.

Rs. 7,832/-

14. IAEA/WHO Working Group Me-

Do.

Nil.

eting in Vienna to revise the IAEA/
WHO recommendations for radiation sterilization of medical products.
(6-15 April 1974).
15. Plenipotentiary Conference on Code
of Conduct for Liner Conferences
held at Geneva (7-29 April, 1974).

Do.

Rs.

6,877,18.

16. UN General Assembly Special
Session on Raw Materials and
Developments. (9 April to 1 May
1974).

Do.

17. Scientific and Technical Sub-Committee of the Outer Space Committee
(15-26 April 1974).

Do.

Rs. 11,250/-

18. Second Session of FAO Committee
on Agriculture, Rome (17-30 April
1974).

Do.

Rs.

2,185.80

19. Meeting of the Working Party on
Do.
Rs. 2,742.59
Customs Enforcement of Customs
Co-operation Council held at
Brussels (22-26 April 1974)
------------------------------------------------------------------------------10-883Mof EA/74
<pg125>

APPENDIX I--contd.
------------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
------------------------------------------------------------------------------20. Seminar of Promotion of HandiOfficial
Nil.
crafts in European Markets Organised by ITC at Geneva (22 April to
17 May 1974).
21. World Administrative
S.F.

Radio

Do.

Rs. 11,536.90

22. 7th Annual meeting of the A.D.B.
held in Malaysia (23-28 April 1974).

Do.

Rs.

8,753.00

23. Meeting of the Standing Committee of C.T.C. held in Montreal (22-29 April 1974)

Do.

Rs.

2,435/-

24.

Do.

Rs.

1,50O/-

Conference Maritime Mobile
Telecommunications (22 April
1974 to .7 June 1974)

7th International Conference on

Cartography in Madrid (Spain) (24
April to 8 May 1974).
25. Meeting of Advisory Panel on
Agriculture & Rural Development

Do.

of the
World Bank, held at
Affairs
.
Washington (29-30 April 1974)
Expendi
t-

Only Local Costs
was met by Deptt.
of Economic
Rest of the
ure was met by
ECAFE.

26. Meeting of the Asian Broadcasting
Union Study group 10 at Tehran.
(2-6 May 1974)

Do.

Rs. 2,110.00

27. 16th Session of the Asian Advisory
Committee of the ILO held in Kuala
Lumpur (Malaysia) (2-10 May
1974).

Do

Rs. 1,523.83

28.

Do.

Expenditure met by

Meeting of the Deputies of Commit-

tee of Twenty held
(4-11 May 1974).

in Washington

IMF

29. IAEA Symposium on the Formation of Uranium Ore Deposit
held in Athens (6-10 May 1974).

Do.

Nil.

30. First meeting of the Committee of
Experts of Non-aligned countries
on the Establishment of the Economic and Social Development Fund
held in Kuwait (6-12 May 1974).

Do.

Rs. 2,950.00

31. Meeting of the 13th Session of the
Do.
Rs. 7,858.10
Legal Sub-Committee of the Committee on the Peaceful uses of outer
space at Geneva (6-31 May, 1974).
------------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg126>

APPENDIX I-contd.
------------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
------------------------------------------------------------------------------32. 7th Session of the IntergovernOfficial
Rs. 2,708.60
mental Group on Hard Fibres held
in Rome (7-15 May 1974).

33. Meeting of development Planners
organised by the U.N. Research
Institute for Social Development at
Geneva (13-15 May, 1974).

Do.

-

34. 42nd Executive meeting of the international Commission on large
dams held at Athens (Greece) (1316 May 1974).

Do.

Rs. 10,185.10

35. (i) Indian delegation to the Seventh
Session of the U. N. Commission on International Trade
Law held in New York (13-17
May 1974).

Do.

-

(ii) Indian delegation to the U.N.
Conference
on Prescription
(Limitation
in international
Sale of Goods held in New York
(20 May to 14 June 1974).

Do.

35A. Integration of Women in Deve-

Do.

Rs. 62,135.55

The expenditure

lopment with Special reference to

was borne by the

Population Factors organised by
the ECAFE at Bangkok (13-17
May 1974)

ECAFE.

35B. Seminars of UNICEF Executive
Board held in New York, (13-24
May 1974)

Do.

Rs. 20,330.11

36. 3rd Session of the Harmonized
(Commodity Description and
coding) System of the Customs
Co-operation Council held at
Brussels (13-31 May 1974)

Do.

Rs.

37. IAEA Seminar on the monitoring
analysis and harmonization of the
methods of recording the results of
measurements of radioactive effluent
before their release to the environment held in FRG. (14-17 May,
1974).

Do.

5,906.38

Nil

38. 3rd Session Of FAO Committee on
Do.
Rs. 5,704.00
Forest Development in Tropics
and 2nd Session of FAO Committee
on Forestry, Rome (14-31 May
1974).
------------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg127>
APPENDIX I--contd.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

--1
2
3
4
------------------------------------------------------------------------------39. Second meeting of the Governing
Official
Council of Asian Centre for Development Administration. (16-17
May 1974).
40. Asian Editors Round Table
Conference held in Bangkok (1923 May 1974).

Do.

Rs. 367.00

41. 30th General Meeting of International Federation of Film Archives held at Canada (19-27 May
1974).

Do.

Information not
available.

42. IMCO-Committee on Technical
Cooperation 9th Session on 20 May
1974.

Do.

Rs. 5,114.00

43. ABU Administrative Council meeting Kathmandu (20-22 May 1974).

Do.

Rs. 1050.00

44. IAEA Seminar on Radiological
Safety evaluation of population
doses and application of Radiological Safety Standards to Man and
the Environment held in Porterz,
Yugoslavia. (20-24 May 1974).

Do.

Nil.

45. International Symposium on the
b
y
problem related to the redefinition
Co
of North American Geodetic NetSy
mwork held at Fredericton, New
Brunswick (Canada) (20-25 May
1974.

Do.

Expr.

borne

46. 6th Session of the Committee on
preferences of UNCTAD held at
Geneva (20-31 May 1974).

Do.

Rs. 3,080.17

47. 25th Executive Committee Meeting
of the International Commission on
Irrigation and Drainage held in
Bonn (Federal Republic of Germany)
(21-24 May 1974).

Do.

Rs. 2,211.43

48. IMCO-32nd Session of Council
(21-24 May 1974).

Do.

the organising
mmittee of the
posium.

49. Expert Consultation on New Forms
me
t
of Organization and Structure of

Do.

All expenditure
by German Foun-

Agriculture Production, Berlin
inte
r(22-31 May 1974).
Develop-

dation

for

national
ment.

50. 17th Congress of the U.P.U. held at
Do.
Rs. 58,418.60
Lausanne (Switzerland) (22 May
to 5 July 1974).
------------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg128>
APPENDIX I--contd.
------------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
------------------------------------------------------------------------------51. 26th Session of WHO Executive
Official
Rs.
9,444.00
Committee at Geneva (23 May to
13 June 1974).
52. International Symposium on Lower
Cost Housing Problems 1974 Montreal (26-29 May 1974).

Do.

53. Seminar on Employment Strategy
and Planning organised by the
ARTEP. ILO (26 May to 15 July
1974.)

Do.

Nil.

54. Meeting of the F.A.O. Ad-hoc working Party on World Food Security
held in Rome (27-31 May 1974).

Do.

Rs.

1,795.12

2,695/-

55. 9th meeting of the Board of Governors of INTELSAT held in
Hawaii (29 May 1974 to 7 June 1974)

Do.

Rs.

56. VII Worked Congress FIP, New
York (30-31 May 1974).

Do.

Rs.

Do.

Rs. 1,48,246.90

57. (i) 193rd Session of the Governing
Body of ILO held in Geneva
(30 May 1974 to 1 June 1974).
(ii) 59th Session of the International
Labour
Conference held in
Geneva (5-26 June 1974).

442.56.

58. UN Centre for Housing, Building
and Planning New York (1 June
1974).

Do.

Rs.

421.97

Do.

Rs.

1035.84

59. US Deptt. of Housing and Urban
Development
Washington (2-3
June 1974).
60. International Commission for uniform Method of Sugar Analysis
(ICUMSA) (Non-Govt. Organization) held at Ankara (Turkey) (3-7
June 1974).
61. 18th Session of the governing Council of U.N.D.P. held in Manila
(3-25 June 1974).

Do.

Rs.

7253.00

62. South Asia Regional travel ComDo.
Information
not
mission (SARTC). Annual Conavailable.
ference in Tehran (Iran) (4-6 June
1974).
------------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg129>
APPENDIX I--contd.
------------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
------------------------------------------------------------------------------63. 2nd Preparatory Committee of the
Official
Rs. 4692.00
World Food Conference Geneva
(4-8 June 1974).
64. IAEA/FAO research co-ordination
meeting on isotope tracer aided
studies of foreign chemicals residues
in food held in Vienna (4-7 June
1974).

Do.

Nil.

65. Meeting of the Technical Committee of ISO/TC-113 at the Hague
(Netherlands) (4-14 June 1974).

Do.

Rs. 9,508.90

66. UNECAPE Conference in Trade
Development at Seatle and Spokane (5-20 June 1974).

Do.

Nil.

67. Aid
India Consortium meeting
held in Paris (6-16 June 1974).

Do.

Rs.23308.00

68. Meeting of the Committee of Twenty held in Washington (7-16

Do.

Rs. 3004

June 1974).
69. 3rd International Conference
held in London (9-14 June 1974).

Do.

70. FAO Consultation of Expert on
Degradation, Rome (10-14 June
1974).

Do.

71. IMCO-Sub Committee on Standards of Training and Watch, keeping-4th Session (10-14 June 1974).

Do.

Rs.

2510.00

72. 43rd/44th Sessions of the Customs
Co-operation Council held in
Brussels (10-14 June 1974)

Do.

Rs.

7,033.20

73. Meeting of the Specialised Group
for System Development (SGSD)
of CTC held In Vancouver
(Canada) (10-16 June 1974)

Do.

Rs. 3,500.00

74. Seminar on Transport Policy at
Washington organised by the
Economic Development Institute
of the World Bank (10-21 June
1974)

Pounds374-42.
-

Do.

-

75. Meeting of "The Development
Do.
Science Information System" held
in Ottawa (Canada) under the joint
auspices of International Development Centre, UNESCO and OECD
(11-13 June 1974).
------------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg130>
APPENDIX I--contd.
------------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
------------------------------------------------------------------------------76.
Seminar in International DevelopOfficial
Nil.
ment Strategy at the Institute of
Development
Studies,
Sussex
(U.K.) (13-14 June 1974).
77. Administrative Council 29th
Session Geneva (from 15 June
1974 for 3 weeks).

Do.

Rs.

1,500.00

78. 11th ASTIN Colloquium held in
Turku (Finland) 16-20 June 1974)

Do.

Rs.

1,982.00

79.

Do.

Expr. borne

Seminar No. 42 under Colombo

by
Plan on S & T Developing Countries
Government.

U.K.

at University of Sussex U.K. (16
June to 19 July 1974).
80. IAEA Second panel of experts to
discuss and prepare a report of the
capacity of the environment to
accept radioactive materials held
in Vienna (17-21 June 1974).

Do.

Nil.

81. Feasibility study for setting up
12 Pilot Plants, Burma (17-25 June
Ex
t.
1974).

Do.

Expr. borne by
Ministry of

82. Meeting of COSPAR (17 June to
I July 1974).

Do.

Rs.

83. Seminar on Science and Technology
in Developing countries organised
by the Science Policy Research Unit
of the University of Sussex (U.K.)
(17 June to 19 July 1974).

Do.

Nil.

84. Conference of African Planners
held at Addis Ababa (19-28 June
1974.)

Do.

Rs.

85. Third U. N. Conference on the Law
of the Sea in Caracas (20 June, 1974
to 29 August 1974).

Do

Rs.3,07,581.00

Affairs.
8072.00

1485.00

86. 69th and 70th Sessions of InterDo.
Rs. 13,163.19
national Wheat Council and Conference of Govts. preceded by the
meeting of the Advisory Committee
on Market Conditions held on 21
June, 1974. (24 to 26 June 1974).
------------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg131>

APPENDIX I--contd.
------------------------------------------------------------------------2
3
4
------------------------------------------------------------------------87. International Congress on Coastal
Engg. held at Copenhagen (Denmark) (24-28 June 1974).

Official

88. Inter-Comparison of Dobson Ozone
Spectrophotometer at the Geophysical Observatory Belsk (Poland)
(24 June to 7 July 1974).

Do.

Rs. 699/-

89. World Intellectual Property Organization Coordination Committee
Geneva (28 June, 1974 to 1 July 1974).
90. (i) Meeting of Commonwealth
Countries and Fertilizers.

Do

Do.

Rs. 705.00

Rs. 4,868.66

(ii) First Session of FAO Commission on Fertilizers, Rome
(1-5 July 1974).
91. Conference on Precision Electrotowards

Do.

magnetic
Measurements held in
London (1-5 July 1974).

pound 35.00
registration fee
TA/DA expenditure not known.

92. Meeting of Main Committee of the
Outer Space (1-12 July 1974).

Do.

Rs. 12,575/-

93. Sixth Session of the Committee on
Manufactures of UNCTAD held at
Geneva (2-12 July 1974).

Do.

Rs. 2086.93

94. Conference of Commonwealth
Sugar Exporting Countries convened by British Govt. (3-5 July
1974).

Do.

95. IMCO-Legal
Committee 23rd
Session (3-7 July 1974).

Do.

96. (i) Golden Jubilee Annual Session
of German Association of Large
Boiler operators held at Dortmund (FRG) & Aero-dynamic
aspects of NOHA Wind Mill,
West Germany (3-18 July 1974.)

Do.

Rs. 10,525/-

Do.

Rs. 14,614.00

(ii) Pugwash
(4-8 July 1974).

Conference-France

(iii) Schonhall Inventor of HOAH
Wind Mill-Geneva (16-17 July
1974).
97. 57th Session of Economic and
Social Council in Geneva (3 July to
2 Aug. 1974).

<pg132>
APPENDIX I--contd.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
--------------------------------------------------------------------------98. FAO Agriculture Census, WFP

Official

Rs. 945.00

and Fishers Programmes, Rome
(7-9 July 1974).
99.
by

Conference of Overseas Natural

Do.

All Expr. met

Resources, U. K. (7-13 July 1974).
Develop
-

Overseas
ment Admn.

Lon-

don.
100. IAEA Panel to consider waste
management in the Uranium and
Thorium Mining and Milling Industry held in Ottawa (Canada) (8-12
July 74).
101.

Meeting of the Consultants Groups
borne
of Experts of the United Nations
Fund for Drug Abuse Control held
at Geneva (10-13 July 1974)
101A.

XVII International Conference

Rs. 2115.00

Do.

Expenditure
by U. N.

Do.

Rs. 13,979.89

on Social Welfare held in Nairobi
(Kenya) (14-20 July 1974)
102. IAEA Symposium on Dynamic
Studies
with Radio-isotopes in
Clinical
Medicine and Research
held in Knozville, Tennesee, U.S.A.
(15-19 July 1974)

Do.

Nil.

103. 63rd
Session of FAO Council,
4,968.
70
Rome (15-19 July 1974).

Do.

Rs.

104. XIII Plenary Assembly meetings of
6,345.
00
CCIR at Geneva (15-26 July, 1974).

Do.

Rs.

105. 6th International Sunflower Con3,619.
41
ference Bucharest (22-24 July 1974).

Do.

Rs.

106. IAEA Symposium on the Sterility
Principle for Insect Control at Innsbruck, Austria (22-26 July 1974).

Do.

Nil.

107. Indo-Soviet Cultural Exchange
Approx.
programme 1972-74 USSR (23
July to 7 August 1974).

Do.

Rs. 400/-

108. Meeting of Group Deputies of
4,030.
00
Commonwealth
Telecommunication council held in London
(24 July 1974 to 2 August 1974)

Do.

109. Annual Scientific meeting of the
International Medical Society of
Paraplegia at Stoke Mandeville,
U.K. (25-27 July, 1974).
Visit
National Spinal Injuries
Centre, Stoke Mandeville Hospital
Aylesbury and Spinal Injuries Unit
Lodge Moor Hospital, Sheffield,
U. K. (28 July to 9 August, 1974).

Do.

Rs.

pound 109.88

<pg133>
APPENDIX I---contd.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
--------------------------------------------------------------------------110. Meeting of the Study Directors of
the Comparative Study on InputOutput
Relationship in Family
Planning Programmes Organised
by the ECAFE at Bangkok (25-30
July 1974).

Official

111. 6th Session of the Committee of
Shipping of UNCTAD held at
Geneva (29 July to 10 August 1974).

Do.

Rs. 7,501.00

112. Regional Training Course on the
Analysis of Manpower Data organised by the ECAFE (1 August to 14
September, 1974).

Do.

Nil.

113. Meeting of the Advisory Panel of
the World Bank held in Washington (5-6 Aug. 1974).

Do.

-

114. International Symposium on Recent
Crustal Movements 1974 and the
7th Meeting of the International
Gravity Commission (6 to 31 August
1974 and 7th Sept. 1974).

Do.

Rs. 3567.10

115. Visit Spinal injuries Unit, Orthopaedische Anstalf der Universitiat,
Heidelberg, West Germany (10-16
Aug. 1974).

Do.

DM 453.75

116. WHO inter Regional Symposium in
Geneva (12-16 Aug. 1974).

Do.

Nil.

117.

Do.

Rs. 2,363.00

ABU Shiraz Film Festival Youth

held in Tehran (15-23 Aug. 1974).
118. 2nd international Congress of Engifigure
s are
neering Geology held at Sao Paulo
(Brazil) (18-24 Aug. 1974).

Do.

Expr.

119. International Symposium on TerAppr
ox.
restrial Electromagnetic Distance
Measurements and Atmospheric
Effects on Angular Measurements
held in Stockholm (Sweden) (1924 Aug. 1974).

Do.

Rs. 1984/-

120. ESCAP-Meeting of Experts in
Maritime Training among COORDOM (19-24 Aug. 1974).

Do.

Rs. 1137.00

not available.

<pg134>
APPENDIX I--contd.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
--------------------------------------------------------------------------121.

World Population Conference held

Official

No

statement of

at Bucharest (Romania) under the
recei-

expenditure

auspices of the World Health Organization,
of the United Nations
(19-30 Aug. 1974).

ved.

122. Conference on Mass Consumption
at Penang (Malaysia)(20-24 Aug.
1974).
123. 14th Session of the Trade and
Development Board of UNCTAD
held at Geneva (20 Aug. to 13 Sept.
1974.)
124. IV
International
Congress of
for
Air
International Primatological Socie594
40
ty, Japan (21-24 August 1974).
for

DO.

Do.

Do.

Rs. 6,180.00

Rs. 8256/fare & Yen
--Rs. 1257.62
other

expenses
.
125. Study tour & Seminar on Occupational Safety and Health in large

Nil.

Do.

Nil.

scale Public Works in USSR (21
Aug. to 3 Sept. 1974).
126.
IAEA Symposium on Physical &
Biological effects on the environment of Cooling Systems and thermal Discharges at Nuclear Power
Stations held in Oslo, Norway (2630 Aug. 1974).

Do.

127.
First Regional Seminar on Field
Workshop, Bangkok (26-30 Aug.
1974).

Do.

128.
ECAFE/SIDA Seminar on "MobiCos
ts.
lisation of Private Savings" held at
Bangkok (26 Aug. to 7 Sept. 1974).

Do.

Only Local

129.

Do.

Rs. 11,924/-

9th Session of the Coordinating

Nil.

council and 7th Conference of the
International Hydrological Decade
at France (29 Aug., to 14 Sept, 1974).
130
Meeting of Ad-hoc group
1,8
44.00
examine cable development plans
for South East Asia area held in
London (27-31 August 1974)

to

Do.

Rs.

(Estimated)

131. 10th Congress of Inter-American
sanctio
ned
Planning Society held in Panama
City (31 August to 10 Sept. 1974).

Do.

pound 25 (was
for C.P.).

<pg135>
APPENDIX I--contd.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
-------------------------------------------------------------------------132. International
Conference of the
U.N.
International Federation
of Training & Development of Oslo
and the Follow-up discussions with
the Conference Organisers including discussions at I.L.O. Headquarters in Geneva for a period of
two weeks in August-September
1974.

Official

133.

Do.

International Symposium of the

international

Society for Photo-

Rs. 1262.00

grammetry, Commission III, held
at Stuttgart (West Germany) (2-6
Sept. 1974).
(a) 62nd Meeting of the Federation
Dentaire International and
(b) Meeting of the International
Conference on Military Dentistry at London, U. K. (7-14
Sept. 1974).
134.

pound 157.75

Session of WHO Regional Commit-

Do.

tee for S. E. Asia (Denpasar) Bali
kn
own.
(3-9 Sept. 1974).

Exchange Component is not

135. Regional Seminar on Plant level
feeding services for workers and
their families in Tashkent (3-14
Sept., 1974).

Do.

Nil.

136. International Conference on "Perspectives in Spectroscopy, held in
Canada (4-7 Sept. 1974).

Do.

Nil.

136A U. N. Seminar on National Machinery to Accelerate the Integration
of Women in Development and
to Eliminate
Discrimination on
Grounds of Sex held in Ottawa
Canada (4-17 September 1974)

Do.

137.

Do.

10th

Commonwealth Forestry

Nil.

Rs. 4,714.00

Conference U.K. (4-28 Sept., 1974).
138. IV International Symposium on
894
.14
animal, Plant, and Micro-bial
exchange
.
Toxians in Tokyo (Japan) (8-13
Sept., 1974).

Do.

139. Joint ILO-WHO-IAEA International symposium on Radiation
protection in Mining & Milling of
Uranium & Thorium held in France
(9-11 Sept., 1974).

Do.

pound 13 & Yen.
in foreign

Nil.

<pg136>
APPENDIX I--contd.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
--------------------------------------------------------------------------140.

Non-Proliferation Treaty Preview

Official

Rs. 2330.00

Conference at Divonne (9-11 Sept.,
1974).
141. Meeting of Non-Aligned Co-ordinators Belgrade (9-13 Sept. 1974).

Do.

Rs. 1,860.00

142. 2nd meeting of the Working Party
on Customs Enforcement of the
Customs Co-operation
Council
held at Brussels (9-13 September 1974)

Do.

Rs. 2,942.50

143. Meeting of Standing Committee
of Common-wealth Telecommunication Council held in Sydney
(Australia) (9-13 September 1974)

Do.

Rs. 1,020.00

144. World Conference on "Toward a
plan action for mankind : Needs &
resources method of provision" held
under the auspices of the institute de la vie, Paris (9-14 Sept. 1974).

Do

145. Second International Seminar on
"Change in Agriculture" held at
University of Reading England (919 Sept., 1974).

Do.

Nil.

146.

Do.

No

I.F.R.B.

Seminar-Frequency in

Expenditure

Management and use of Radio
delegation

as the

Spectrum-Geneva
September 1974)

was on
UNDP/
ITU
Fellowship

(9-20

147. 18th Session of
the Intergovernmental Group on Grains and the
Special Session of the Intergovernmental Group on Grains. Rome
(12-21 Sept, 1974).

Do.

Rs. 3,060.47

148.

Do.

Expenses met by

UNESCO working Group Meeting

Bangkok (16-20 Sept., 1974).
149. Study Session on National Accountb
y
ing Work in Developing Countries,

UNESCO.
Do.

Expenses

met

organisation for

Paris (16-20 Sept., 1974).

Economic Cooperation and Development.

150.
8,00
0

International Pet. Economics Semi-

Do.

Swiss France

nar held at Geneva (16-27 Sept,
1974).
151. 12th FAO Regional Conference
for Asia and the Far East, Tokyo (1722 Sept., 1974).

Do.

Rs. 23,197.36

<pg137>
APPENDIX I-contd.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
--------------------------------------------------------------------------152. 10th Conference of the Commonwealth Broadcasting Association
held in Malta (17-27 Sept, 1974).

Official

Rs. 6,440.00

153. Seventh Session of the Advisory
Committee on Salaried Employees
& Professional Workers of ILO
Geneva. (17-27 Sept. 1974).

Do.

Nil.

154. Jury of XXVI Session of the Italia
Prize, Florence (Italy) (18-30 Sept. 1974

Do.

Rs. 2,647.00

155. 43rd Annual Conference of the
International Criminal Police Organisation (Interpol) held at Cannes
(France) (19-25 Sept. 1974).

Do.

-

156. Annual meeting of the Commonwealth Finance Ministers held in
Ottawa and IMF/IBED meeting
held in Washington (20 Sept. to 9
October, 1974).

Do.

Rs, 7232

157. 3rd Preparatory Committee Meeting of World Food Conference,
Rome (23 Sept. to 4 Oct. 1974).

Do.

Rs. 10,102.25

158.

Do.

Not available.

159. 11th General Assembly of ABU
held in Tokyo (29 Sept. to 11 Oct.
1974).

Do.

Rs. 6,169.00

160. 85th/86th Session of the Permanent Technical Committee of the
Customs Co-operation Council
held at Brussels (30 September
1974 to 18 October 1974)

Do.

Rs. 7,527.40

ICAO's General Assembly Session

held in Montreal (24 Sept. to 16
Oct. 1974).

161. (i) IMCO-Committee on Technical Co-operation-10th Session
on 30 Sept. 1974).

Do.

(ii) IMCO-33rd Session of Council (1-2 Oct. 1974).
(iii) IMCO-5th
Extraordinary
Session of Assembly (16-18
October 1974).

Rs. 11,025.00

162. IAEA Symposium on information
systems connection & compatibility held in Bulgaria (30 Sept. to
3 Oct., 1974).

Do.

Nil.

<pg138>
APPENDIX I-contd.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
-------------------------------------------------------------------------163. Indian delegation to the Meeting
of the UNCITRAL Working Group
on International Legislation on
Shipping-7th
Session held in
Geneva (30 Sept to 11 October
1974).

Official

164. ILO Asian Regional Seminar on
Social Security, National Planning
Manila (30 Sept. to 12 Oct. 1974).

Do.

165. Second Meeting of the Series of the
met
Permanent Panel on Coconut Productions
& Productivity of the
Asian Council Community, Manila
(1-5 Oct. 1974).

Do.

166. Seminar on Surveying and Land
Economy in Colombo (Sri Lanka)
organised by the Commonwealth
Association of Surveying and Land
Economy, London (1-6 October,
1974).

Do.

167. Preparatory Meeting for Civil
Aviation of ILO held in Geneva
(3-10 Oct. 1974).

Rs. 6,045.45

Nil.

Expenditure
by UNDP.

Do.

Nil.

Nil.

168. Dag Hammarskjold Foundation
Seminar held in UPPSALA (Sweden) (6-20 Oct. 1974).

Do.

1,251.50 Std.

169. FAO Inter-Governmental Group
on Jute, Kenaf and Allied Fibres
Rome (7-10 October 1974).

Do.

Rs. 2,732.24

170. Biennial Congress of CLUSA at
San-Francisco (7-11 Oct. 1974).

Do.

US$/52.31

171. Meeting of the Third Working
Group on Papaver Broctoatum

Do.

Expenditure borne
by U. N.

under U. N. Fund for Drug Abuse
Control held at Beltsville, in
U. S. A. (7-11 October 1974)
172. Annual meeting of the Consultative
Council for postal studies held at
Berne (Switzerland) (7-12 Oct. 1974).

Do.

173. Regional Seminar for Asia on
Agricultural Credit for Small Farmers Bangkok (7-18 Oct. 1974).

Do

174 18th Session of United Nations
Statistical Commission, Geneva
(7-18 Oct. 1974).

Do.

Rs. 2,997.35

All expenditure met
by FAO.

Rs. 5,600/<pg139>
APPENDIX I-contd.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
-------------------------------------------------------------------------175. Ist Session of the Regional (Region
as 1 and 5) Administrative Radio
Conference for LF/MF Broadcasting held under the aegis of international
Tele-Communications
Union at Geneva (7-25 October
1974).

official Rs. 12,808.00

176. Seminar on S & T Djakarta/Singapore (8-16 Oct. 1974).

Do.

177. Conference on international OffShore Technology Organised by
the Financial Times Petroleum
Times and Fair Play International
Shipping weekly at London (9-10
Oct. 1974).

Do.

pound 236/-

178. Business workshop organised by the
international Off-Shore Suppliers
Information Centre at London on
(10-11 Oct. 1974).

Do.

pound 161/-

179. 33rd
Session of International
office of Documentation on Military Medicine at San Marino Italy
(10-13 October 1974).

Do.

Lire 32620

180. Construction in Seismic Regions
and in Regions
with Difficult
ground Conditions organised in
Romania (12-22 October 1974).

Do.

Nil.

181. 49th session of FAO Committee on
Commodity Problems and IGC

Do.

Rs. 366.89
(Exp. borne by
UNESCO).

Rs. 6,553.55

meeting Rome (14-31
1974).

October

182. 9th Session of the FAO Committee
on Fisheries & 14th Session of the
Executive Committee for the Implementation of the international
Indian Ocean Fisheries Survey &
Development Progress Rome (1525 Oct. 1974).

Do.

182A. The Commonwealth
Engineer
office's
Meeting held at BATH,
UK (16-17 October 1974)

Rs. 4,129.00

Do.

183.
Second General Assembly of the
International Rural Housing Association, Caracas, Venezuela (a nongovernmental Organisation) held in
San-Juan (Peurto-Rico)
(20-24
October 1974).

Nil.

Do.

Nil.

<pg140>
APPENDIX I--contd.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
-------------------------------------------------------------------------184. IAEA Symposium on Thermodynamics of Nuclear Materials held
in Vienna (21-25 October 1974).

Official Nil.

185. Round Table meeting of the
Asian Reinsurance and Co-operation held in Bangkok (21 to 26
October 1974)
186.

IMCO-International

Do.

Conference

Nil.

Do.

Rs. 8,527.00

187. ICA Seminar on Consumer Cooperative held at Kuala Lumpur
(Malaysia) (23-25 October 1974).

Do.

Nil.

188. UNESCO Regional Seminar on
not
Book Distribution methods in Asia
held in Colombo (Sri Lanka) (2329 Oct. 1974).

Do.

on Safety of Life at Sea (21 Oct.,74
to 1 Nov. 1974).

189.

Plan Committee

meeting

available.

for

Do.

Asia and Occania held in Tokyo
(23-30 October 1974)
190. UNESCO Regional meeting on the
seismicity and seismotechnonics of

Information

Rs. 2,312.00
(Estimated)

Do.

Nil.

South & Central Asia at Tehran
(27-31 October 1974).
191. Regional Preparatory Meeting for
the 2nd General Conference of
UNIDO in Bangkok (27 Oct. to 5
Nov. 1974).

Do.

-

192. ILO/Japan Seminar on Industrial
Safety & Health held in Tokyo (27
Oct, to 29 Nov. 1974).

Do.

Nil.

193.

Do.

Rs. 1,880.00

2nd Meeting of the National Co-

ordinators for the Asian Telecommunications-Network in Kabul
(28-31 October 1974)

(Estimated)

194. IAEA-Panel Meeting to consider the
Radiological surveillance for Airborne Contraminants in the working environment held in Vienna
(28 Oct., to 1 Nov. 1974).

Do.

Nil.

195. IAEA Panel on quality assurance
Programme for nuclear Power projects held in Vienna (28 Oct. to I
Nov. 1974).

Do.

Rs. 2149.00

------------------------------------------------------------------------11-883 M of EA/74
<pg141>
APPENDIX I--contd.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------2
3
4
-------------------------------------------------------------------------196. Asian
Experts Meeting on the
Social Elements of Managerial
Responsibilities Bangkok (28 Oct.
to 1 Nov. 1974).

Official

Nil.

197. Second Planning Meeting on Menex
at Singapore (28 October to I Nov.
1974).

Do.

Rs. 2883.00

198. Regional Export Workshop on the
Organization of Peasants in Asia
Bangkok (28 October to 2 Nov. 74).

Do.

199. Working Group on Manpower &
Labour Studies organised by ECA
FE/ILO (28 Oct. 74 to 4 Nov. 1974).

Do.

All expenes met
by FrienrischEbert-Stiftung.
Bangkok.

200. Solid Waste disposal Bangkok (29
October to 7 Nov., 1974).

Do.

201.

Do.

16th Session of the Indo-Pacific

Exchange component is not known.
Rs. 4,196.53

Fisheries council. Djakarta (30
Oct. to 8 Nov. 1974).
202. First Asian Regional. Training &
Development Conference held in
Manila under the auspices of U.N.
(in October-November 1974).

Do.

-

203. 12th meeting of the Commonwealth
Telecommunications
Councils held
in
Lagos (1-7
November 1974)

Do.

204. IAEA Panel on Quality assurance
and Control in Nuclear Fuel Manufacture held in Vienna (4-7 Nov.
1974.)

Do.

205. International Bauxite Association
held in Georgetown (Guyana) (410 Nov. 1974).

Do.

Rs. 6,100.00

206. 18th Session of the FAO Desert
Locust Control Committee and 10th
Session of the Commission for
Controlling the Desert Locust in the
Eastern Region (4-15 Nov. 1974).

Do.

Rs. 2,708.00

207. ILO Asian Regional Seminar on
Management of Family Planning
Programme Singapore (5-9 Nov.,
1974).

Do.

Nil.

208. Meeting of the ESCAP Committee
on Natural Resources held at Bangkok (Thialand) 5-11 Nov., 1974).

Do.

Rs. 2,716.00

Rs. 4,648.00
(Estimated)

Nil.

<pg142>
APPENDIX I--contd.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
-------------------------------------------------------------------------209. World Food Conference (5-16
Nov. 1974).

Official Rs. 45,394.00

210. 194th Session of the Governing
Body of ILO Geneva held in Geneva
(11-15 Nov. 1974).

Do.

211. IMCO-Legal Committee-24th Session. (11-15 November 1974).

Do.,

212. ABU Seminar on Broadcasting in
the National Interest Singapore (I 1
-15 Nov, 1974).

Do.

213. Intergovernmental
working
party of
Telecommunication

Do.

Nil.

No Expenditure.
Rs. 163.00

Rs. 2,000.00
(Estimated)

Experts under ECAFE held
Bangkok (12-18 November 1974).

in

214. International Lead and Zinc. Study
Group's 18th Session held in Geneva
(13-19 November 1974).

Do.

Nil.

215. Joint IAEA/FAO Symposium on
Isotope Ratips as Pollutant Source
and behaviour indicators held in
Vienna (18-22 Nov 1974).

Do.

216. IAEA-Reserach
Co-ordination
meeting on the Physical & Biological
effects on the environment of cooling systems & Thermal Discharges
at Nuclear Power Stations, (1822 Nov., 74).

Do.

Nil.

217. IAEA Regional Study Group Meeting on Radiological & Environmental Protection held in Bandung
Indonesia (18-22 Nov 1974).

Do.

Nil.

218. IMCO-Marine Environment Protection Committee 2nd Session
(18-22 Nov. 1974).

Do.

No Expenditure.

219.
Meeting of the Working Group on
Aerodrome Meteorological Observing System of WMO Commission
for instruments and Methods of
Observation
at Geneva (18-22
Nov. 1974).

Do.

Nil.

Nil.

220.
WHO/IAEA Seminar on training in
Nuclear Medicines held in Vienna
(18-29 November, 1974).

Do.

Nil.

221.
64th Session of FAO Council,
Rome (18-29 Nov. 1974).

Do. Rs. 12,576.70
<pg143>
APPENDIX I-contd.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
--------------------------------------------------------------------------222. ILO Workshop on Administrative
arrangement for the exercise of
responsibilities of Labour Deptt.
with regard to Women Workers,
Tokyo (18-29 Nov. 1974).
223.

Meeting on the "Collaetion and

Evaluation of Water & Waste Data"
at Geneva under the W.H.O. (1925 Nov., 1974).

Official Nil.

Do.

Only Local Costs.

224. Ist Session of the Committee on
Statistics, Djakarta (21-27 Nov.,
1974).

Do.

225. Colombo Plan Consultative Committee meeting held in Singapore
(24 Nov. to 7 Dec. 1974).

DO.

226. 71st Session of International Wheat
Council held in London (25-28
Nov. 1974).

Entire Expn. of Rs.
7,990/- met by the
Govt. of India.
Rs. 27000.00

Do.

N.A.

227. IAEA Panel of experts held in
Vienna on a Trg.
Course syllabus
of Nuclear Power Projects Engineering (25-29 November 1974).

Do.

Nil.

228. IAEA Panel on Plutonium Utilization in Thermal Power Reactors
held in Vienna (25-29 Nov.1974).

Do.

Nil.

229. IMCO-Sub-Committee on Standards of Trg. & Watchkeeping-5th
Session (25-29 Nov. 1974).

Do.

Rs. 2510.00

230. Seminar on "Foreign Investment &
Tax Admn." held-at Manila under
UNDP (25 Nov. 74 to 7 Dec.1974).

Do.

231. ILO Second Tripartite Technical
Meeting of Hotels, Restaurants &
Similar
Establishments held in
Geneva (26 Nov, 74 to 6 Dec., 1974).

Do.

Nil.

232. Meeting
convened by Director
General
Food and Agricultural
Organisation at Rome (29-30 Nov.
1974).

Do.

N.A.

233. IMCO Conference on Liability
of Passenger & their luggage (213 December, 1974).

Do.

Rs. 3569.00

The
Expenditure
involved was met
by the ECAFE our
liability was restricted to payment
of local costs only.

<pg144>
APPENDIX I--contd.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
-------------------------------------------------------------------------234. 3rd meeting of the Asian Centre
for Development Administration
(3-4 December 1974).

Official

235. Seminar on Population Problems
related to Food & Agricultural

Do.

Nil.

Development in Asia and the Far
East at Bangkok (9-13 December 1974).
236. West South East Asia Regional
AFS informal Meeting (10-13
Dec. 1974)

Do.

236-A. Conference on Social Welfare
aspects of Family Planning convened by ESCAP (12-22 Dec.
1974).

Do.

Nil

237. ESCAP Transport and Communications Committee-23rd
session
(16-23 Dec. 1974)

Do.

Rs. 6828/-

238. Second Session of W M O/ESCAP
Panel on Tropical Cyclones at Colombo 18-23 Dec. 1974.

Do. Rs, 2500/(Estimated)

239. 24th Session of the U. N. Commission for Social Development in New
York (6-24 January 1975)

Do.

240. U. No Commission on Human.
Rights. Geneva (3 Feb 1975 to 21
March 1975)

Do.

Rs. 47,990/-

241. 6th Session of the U. N. Group of
Experts on Geographical Names
held in New York from 1 March
1975.

Do.

Rs. 12, 760/-

242. 9th Arab Pet.
Congress
in Dubai (10-16 March 1975)

Do.

held

243. 22nd Session of Transport & Communication Committee of ECAFE,
Bangkok.

Do.

244. Fifth Session of the ECAFE
Railway Research Co-ordinating
Committee, Bangkok.

Do.

Not available.

Rs. 1,987/-

Rs. 5,275/-

245. Railway Group Meetings-TransAsian Railway Bangkok.

Do.

To be borne by
ECAFE.

246. 23rd Session of the Transport &
Communications
Committee of
ESCAP, Bangkok.

Do.

Rs. 2486/-

<pg145>
APPENDIX I-contd.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
--------------------------------------------------------------------------247.

Third International Parliamentary,

Official

No expenditme was

Conference
Nairobi

on

Environment

incurred.

248. Conference of Government experts on prohibition of certain
weapons at Luceme (Switzerland)

Do.

Rs. 2,286.41

B. IN INDIA
1. Session of ASCA held at New Delhi
(8-10 April, 1974)

Do.

Nil

2. Asian Regional Workshop for Youht
Workers in Rural Communities sponsored by ECAFE and hosted by
Government of India in Collaboration with Vishwa Yuvak Kendra and
the Punjab Agricultural University
(11-24April, 1974)

Do.

Nil

3. ILO National Symposium of Labour
and population policies New Delhi
(15-18 April 1974)

Do.

4. First Planning meeting of the Second
World Congress of Water Resources
convened by the Indian National
Committee for International Water
Resources Association in
Vigyan
Bhavan, New Delhi on 25
April
1974.

Do.

Nil

5. Symposium on `Surveying and Surveying
Education in India and
other Commonwealth Countries'
held in New Delhi organised by the
Institution of Surveyors (India) in
collaboration with Survey of India
and CASLE (Commonwealth) Association of Surveying and Land
Economy, London. (25-28 Sept.
1974).

Do.

Nil

6. Inter-regional seminar-cum-workshop on the integrated use of folk
media in family Planning Communication Programme, heldin New Delhi
under UNESCO Project founded
by the U. N. Fund for population
activities (7-16 October 1974).

Do.

7. `XXVI International Congress of
Physiological
Sciences'
held
New Delhi (*20-26 October 1974).

in

Do.

Nil

Not available.

Nil

-----------------------------------------------------------------------*Organised by the International Union of Physiological Sciences.
<pg146>
APPENDIX I---contd.

------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
------------------------------------------------------------------------8. UNLDO/India Manufacturing Development Clinic on Agricultural
implements and Machines was held
at Vigyan Bhavan, New
Delhi
(21-30 October 1974).
9. ILO National Regional Seminar on
National and International Labour
Standards (28 Oct. to 8 Nov. 1974).

Official Nil

Do.

Nil

10. Indo-German Seminar held at Trombay (18-23 November 1974).

Do.

Nil

11. World Congress on Asthma Bronchitis and Conditions Allied held in
New Delhi, (9-15 November 1974).

Do.

Nil

12. International Symposium on `Digital
Communications' held at Allahabad
organised by the Indian Telephone
Industries Ltd., Naini and the Motilal
Nehru Regional in Engg. College.
Allahabad
and
Co-sponsored
by I. E. E. E. (USA), IEE (UK)
IERE (UK) (15-17 November, 1974).

Do.

Nil

13. Seminar on Packaging Technology
held at Bombay organised by the
Indian Institute
of
Packaging,
Bombayin association with the United
Nations
Industrial Development
Organisation (UNIDO).

Do.

Nil

14. ILO National Seminar on Minimum
Wages at Madras (19-20 November
1974).

Do.

Nil

15. 58th Session of the International
Dairy Federation was held at Vigyan
Bhavan New Delhi (24-29 November
1974)

Do.

-

16. FAO/UNDP/Expert
Consultation
on the use of improved agricultural
technology by farmers in the Rainfed
areas of monsoon Asia held at
Hyderabad (25-30 Nov. 1974).

Do.

Nil

17. ILO National Seminar on Minimum
Wages at Calcutta (2-3 December
1974).
18. XIX Session of the Intenational
Dairy Congress was held in India at
Vigyan Bhavan, New Delhi (2-6

Do.

Do.

Nil

Nil

December 1974)
<pg147>
APPENDIX I-contd.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
-------------------------------------------------------------------------19. WHO Seminar on Planning of Environmental Health Services, New
Delhi (5-13 Dec. 1974)

Official

Foreign Exchange
component
is not known.

20. Symposium on Ionizing Radiation
Sterlization of Medical Products
and Biological Tissues
held at
Trombay (9-13 December 1974)

Do.

21. First Asian Regional Congress on
Rediation Protection held at Trombay (15-20 December 1974).

Do.

Nil

22. Fifth International Film Festival
of India held in New Delhi under
Federation of International Film
Producers Association
(Paris)
(30 Dec. 74 to 12 Jan. 1975)

Do.

Not available.

23. Seminars on Infant Mortality in
relation to the level of fertility held
under the auspices of the Committee
for International Co-ordination of
National Reasarch in Demography,
France, (CICRED) 21-27 January
1975.

Do.

Nil
However Rs. 35000/-

24. Hosting of FAO World Consultation Wood Based Panel Products
held in India at Vigyan Bhavan,
New Delhi (6-16th Feb. 1975)

Do.

US $ 86.000/

25. Roving Seminar on the Implementation of Modular Co-ordination and
component building in Asia & the
Far East, Sponsored by the United
Nations & the Govt. of DenmarkOrganised by National Building
Organisation, New Delhi.

Do.

Nil

<pg148>
INDIA
ITALY MALAYSIA YUGOSLAVIA KENYA INDONESIA USA SWITZERLAND AUSTRIA
BELGIUM CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC SPAIN IRAN GREECE KUWAIT CANADA NEPAL
LATVIA GERMANY TURKEY PHILIPPINES FRANCE UNITED KINGDOM FINLAND SRI
LANKA BURMA ETHIOPIA VENEZUELA DENMARK POLAND RUSSIA ROMANIA BRAZIL
SWEDEN OMAN JAPAN NORWAY PANAMA UZBEKISTAN AUSTRALIA MALTA BULGARIA
SAN MARINO AFGHANISTAN REPUBLIC OF SINGAPORE GUYANA

Feb 04, 1974

Appendix II International Organizations
APPENDIX II
International Organizations of which India became a
member/ceased to be a member
-------------------------------------------------------------------------Sl.
Name of International Organization
Ceased to be a member
No.
of which India became a member
-------------------------------------------------------------------------1. Regional Animal Production and Health
Commission for Asia and Far East and
the South-West Pacific under the aegis of
FAO.

American Society of
Testing and Material.

2. PIRA (Research Association for the paper and
board, printing and packaging Industries)
England.

Associate Member
of
International Water Resources Association.

3. The Indian Ambassador in Thailand has
signed the Instrument on behalf of the Government of India for joining the Asian Rice Trade
Fund on Jun 29, 1973. The Instrument of
Accession has been deposited with the
ESCAP on 29 November 1974.
------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg149>
INDIA
USA THAILAND
Jun 29, 1973

Appendix III Treaties/Conventions Agreements Concluded or Renewed by India
APPENDIX III
wit
h

Treaties/Conventions Agreements Concluded or Renewed by India
other Countries in 1974*

(*This list is not exhaustive)
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------Sl.
Title of Convention/
Date of
Date
Date on
R
eNo.
Treaty/Agreement
signature
of Ratiwhich
m
arks.
fication/
entered
Accepinto
tance/
force.
Confirmation.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
5
6
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------MULTILATERAL
Convention on Biological Weapons
1. Convention on the
Prohibition
of the Development, Production
and Stockpiling of
Bacteriological
(Biological) and Toxin
Weapons and on
their Destruction.
Signed at London
Moscow &
Washington

Jan 15, 1973

International Bank for Reconstruction and Development:
Loan No.

1011 IN

2. Loan Agreement (Chambal Command-Area
Development
Project-Rajasthan)
between
India and International Bank
for Reconstruction and Development.

19-6-74

Loan No. 1011 IN
3. Project Agreement (Chambal
Command Area Development
Project-Rajasthan) between
the State of Rajasthan and International Bank for Reconstruction and Development

19-6-74

15-7-74

<pg150>
APPENDIX III---contd.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
5
6
-------------------------------------------------------------------------Loan No. 1011 IN
4. ARC Agreement
(Chambal
Command Area Development
Project-Rajasthan)
between
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development and
Agricultural Refinance Corporation

19-6-74

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
Credit No. 474 IN
5. Development Credit Agreement
(Ninth Industrial Imports Project) between India and International
Development Association

29-5-74
INTERNATIONAL SUGAR AGREEMENT

6. International Sugar Agreement,
1973 as adopted by the United
Nations Sugar Conference held
in Geneva during September and
October 1973.
13-10-73 27-3-74

15-10-74

UNITED NATIONS FUND FOR POPULATION
ACTIVITY (U.N.F.P.A.)
7. Agreement between the Government of India and the United
Nations Fund for Population
Activities for an assistance of
U.S. $40 million (for five years)
for Family Planning Programme
in India

18-7-74

BILATERAL
AUSTRALIA
8. Exchange of Letters between
the Government of India and
the Government of Australia
for the establishment of the
Indo-Australian Cattle Breeding Project, Hissar, (Haryana).
9. Exchange of Letters between
the Government of India and

5-7-74

5-7-74

the Government of Australia
for the
establishment
of
Indo-Australian Cattle Breeding Project, Barapetta. (Assam)
and Deep Frozen Semen Centre, Gauhati (Assam).

5-7-74

-

5-7-74

<pg151>
APPENDIX III---contd.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
5
6
-------------------------------------------------------------------------BANGLADESH
10. Cultural Co-operation Agreement between the Government
of the Republic of India and the
Government of the People's
Republic of Bangladesh

30-12-72

7-5-74

11. Agreement between the Government of the Republic of India
and the Government of the
People's Republic of Bangladesh relating to Letter Post.

27-11-74

27-11-74

12. Agreement relating to the Exchange of Insured Letters and
Boxes between the Government
of India and the Government of
People's Republic of Bangladesh.

27-11-74

27-11-74

BELGIUM
13. Agreement between the Government of the Republic of India
and the Government of the
Kingdom of Belgium relating
to the granting of Financial
Assistance by the Government
of the Kingdom of Belgium to
the Government
of
the
Republic of India for 275
(two hundred and seventy five).
million Belgian Francs

2-8-74

14. Exchange of Letters between
the Government of the Republic
of India and the Government
of the Kingdom of Belgium regarding the Implementation of
Article 4 of the Financial Assistance
Agreement
dated 2
August 1974

2-8-74

15.

Exchange of Letters between the

2-8-74

Government of India and the
Government of the Kingdom of
Belgium regarding the date
from which the Financial Assistance Agreement
dated
2
August
1974, shall become
effective as
required
under
Article 7 of the above mentioned
Agreement

2-8-74
<pg152>
APPENDIX III--contd.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
-------------------------------------------------------------------------BHUTAN
16. Agreement between the Government of India and the Royal
Government of Bhutan regarding the CHUKHA HydroElectric Project in Bhutan

23-3-74

23-3-74

...

5-4-74

...

BULGARIA
17. Exchange of Letters between the
Government of the Republic of
India and the Government of
the People's Republic of Bulgaria for the abolition of Visas
for a stay upto 90 (Ninety)
days

6-3-74

18. Protocol of the first meeting of
the Indo-Bulgarian Joint Commission for Economic, Scientific and Technical Co-operation .

11-10-74
CANADA

19. Exchange of Letters between the
Government of India and the
Government of Canada concerning a Development Loan
of seven million five hundred
thousand
Canadian
dollars
(C. $ 7,500,000) for the purchase
in Canada of certain technology,
services, equipment, materials
and training necessary for the
establishment of a plant for the
production of synthetic rubber
20. Exchange of Notes between the
Governments of India and
Canada for Canadian Wheat

14-5-74

Aid of C $ 25 million to India
during 1974-75

29-10-74

21. Ten million Canadian dollors
(C $10,000,000)
development
Loan Agreement between the
Government of India and the
Government of Canada for
Import of Potash fertilizer

6-12-74

22. Exchange
of Letters between
the Government of India and
the Government of Canada for
a grant of C $ 16.7 million
(16,700,000) for the import of
rapeseed or rapeseed products
from Canada .

6-12-74

- 29-10-74

6-12-74

<pg153>
APPENDIX III---contd.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
5
6
-------------------------------------------------------------------------CZECHOSLOVAKIA
23. Protocol of the Fifth Meeting of
the Indo-Czechoslovak Joint
Committee for Economic, Trade
and Technical Co-operation

4-12-74
DENMARK

24. Agreement between the Government of India and the Government of Denmark on a Danish
Government Loan to India of
50 (fifty) million Danish Kroner
25. Exchange of Letters between the
Government of India and the
Government of Denmark regarding the Implementation of
Article VI of the Credit Agreement dated 2 Sep.- 1974

2-9-74

2-9-74

2-9-74

-

FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY
26. Loan Agreement between the
Government of India and KREDITANSTALT FUR WIEDERAUFBAU for (twenty million) DM 20,000,000 for Capital
Goods V.
27. Arbitration
Agreement between the Government of India
and KREDITANSTALT FUR

31-1-74

2-9-74

WIEDERAUFBAU with reference to Article X, paragraph
(6) of the Loan Agreement
dated 31 January 1974
.

31-1-74

28. Exchange of Letters between the
Government of India and the
Federal Republic of Germany
regarding
supply of fertilizer
for the Indo-German Agricultural Development Project, Nilgiris (Tamil Nadu) .
29. Agreement between the Government of India and the Federal
Republic of Germany Concerning Money Order Service from
the Federal Republic of Germany to India

1-3-74

-

19-12-73

1-3-74

5-3-74

Money
order
service
commenced
w.e.f.
1-7-74.

<pg154>
APPENDIX III-contd.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
5
6
-------------------------------------------------------------------------30. Exchange of Notes between the
Govt. of India and the Government of the Federal Republic of
Germany regarding promotion
of co-operation in the fields of
scientific research and technological development

7-3-74

31. Loan Agreement between the
National Small Industries Corporation Ltd. and KREDITANSTALT FUR WIEDERAUFBAU for DM 7,000,000 (Seven
millions)

29-3-74

32. Arbitration Agreement with reference to Article XI,
paragraph
(6), of the above mentioned
Loan Agreement dated
29
March 1974

29-3-74

33. Guarantee
Agreement
reference to the above noted

with

7-3-74

-

Loan Agreement
March 1974

dated

29

34. Arbitration Agreement
reference to Article IV, paragraph (7) of the above mentioned
Guarantee
Agreement dated
29 March 1974

29-3-74

-

with

35. Loan Agreement between the
Industrial Credit and Investment Corporation of India Ltd.
and KREDITANSTALT FUR
WIEDERAUFBAU for DM
5,000,000 (Five million) .
36. Arbitration
Agreement with
reference to Article XI,
paragraph (6) of the above mentioned
Loan Agreement
dated 31
March 1974

29-3-74

31-3-74

31-3-73

37. Guarantee
Agreement with,
reference to the above mentioned
Loan
Agreement dated
31
March 1974

31-3-74

38. Arbitration Agreement with reference to Article IV, paragraph (7) of the above mentioned
Guarantee
Agreement dated
31 March 1974

31-3-74

-

-

<pg155>
APPENDIX III--contd.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
5
-------------------------------------------------------------------------39. Exchange of Notes between the
Government of India and the
Government of the Federal
Republic of Germany regarding
the extension of Indo-German
Agreement
dealing with the
Institute for the Training of
Foremen at Bangalore
.
40. Exchange of Letters
between
the Government of Federal
Republic of Germany for the
supply of 5,000 tonnes of fertilizer for
the
Indo-German
Agricultural
Development
Project,
Mandi
(Himachal
Pradesh).
41.

Agreement between the Govern-

7-6-74

18-6-74

7-6-74

18-6-74

6

ment of India and the Governof the Federal Republic of Germany concerning Financial Assistance, 1974

8-7-74

-

42. Exchange of Notes between the
Government of India and the
Government of the Federal Republic of Germany regarding
purchase of capital goods

8-7-74

-

43. Exchange of notes between the
Government of India and the
Government of the
Federal
Republic of Germany concerning debt service relief

8-7-74

44. Loan Agreement between the
Government of India and KREDITANSTALT FUR WIEDERAUFBAU
for
DM
100,000,000 (one
hundred
million (Commodities XVI) .

9-7-74

45. Arbitration Agreement between
the Government of India and
KREDITANSTALT FUR WIEDERAUFBAU with reference
to the provision of Article IX,
paragraph (6) of the Loan Agreement noted above .

9-7-74

46. Loan Agreement between the
Government of India and KREDITANSTALT FUR WIEDRAUFBAU for DM 15,000,000
(Capital Goods VI)

9-7-74

-

8-7-74

8-7-74

8-7-74

<pg156>
APPENDIX III-contd.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
5
6
-------------------------------------------------------------------------47. Arbitration Agreement between
the Government of India and
KREDITANSTALT FUR WIEDERAUFBAU
with reference to Article IX, paragraph
(6) (if the above noted Loan
Agreement .

9-7-74

48. Additional Agreement between
KREDITANSTALT FUR WIEDERAUFBAU and India
for DM (130,000,000 for Debt
Relief (Prolongation-1974-75) .

9-7-74

49.

Abitration

Agreement with

reference to the provision of
Article, IX, paragraph (6) of
the above Doted Additional
Agreement dated 9-7-1974

9-7 74

50. Exchange of Letters between
the Government of India and
the Government of the Federal
Republic of Germany for the
supply of 5000 Metric tons
NPK compound fertilizer 151
15/15 to the Indo-German
Agricultural Development Project, Kangra, Himachal Pradesh

3-8-74

3-8-74

51. Exchange of Notes between the
Government of India and the
Government of the Federal
Republic of Germany regarding
the Extension of the Indo-German Agreement on the Central
Staff Training and Research
Institute, Howrah, Calcutta

23-8-74

23-8-74

52. Exchange of Letters between
the Government of India and
the Government of Federal Republic of Germany for
the
extension
of
Indo-German
Project, Nilgiris Project, Tamil
Nadu State, upto 31 March
1976.

8.10.74

8.10.74

53. Loan Agreement between the
Government of India and the
KREDITANSTALT FUR WIEDERAUFBAU for DM 10,000,
000 (ten million) (Automobile
Gears Project RDL)
10-12-74
-------------------------------------------------------------------------12-883M of EA/74
<pg157>
APPENDIX III--contd.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
5
6
-------------------------------------------------------------------------54. Arbitration Agreement with reference to the provision of Article
IX, para (6) of the above mentioned Loan Agreement
10-12-74
FIJI
55. Agreement between the Government of India and the Government of Fiji relating to Air
Services

28-1-74

28-1-74

FRANCE
56. Protocol between the Government of India and the Government of France for sixty million
francs (60 million) for financing
the atomic energy and space
programmes of Indian Departments of Atomic Energy and
Space
57. Protocol between
the Government of the Republic of India
and the Government of the
Republic of France for two
hundred and fourteen million
francs (214 million) for financing the purchase by India of
French goods and services

8-2-74

8-2-74

58.
Convention between the Government of India and the Credit
National Limited of France
under the Indo-French Financial
Protocol
dated 8-2-74 for
financing expenses in France relative partly to industrial projects and partly to the purchases
of consumer goods, light equipment, raw materials and fertilizers
28-6-74
59.
Credit Agreement between the
Government of India and the
Government of France for sixty
million
French francs (FF
60,000,000)
60.
Credit Agreement between the
Government of India and the
French Banks for two hundred
and fourteen million French
francs (FF 214,000,000)

8-2-74

8-2-74

28-6-74

28-6-74

28-6-74

28-6-74

<pg158>
APPENDIX III--contd.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
5
6
-------------------------------------------------------------------------61. Convention between the Govt.
of India and the Credit National
Ltd. of France under the IndoFrench
Financial Protocol
dated 8-2-1974
for financing
expenditure in France for the
Atomic Energy and Space Programmes of Indian Depart-

ments of Atomic Energy and
Space

28-6-74

62. Debt Relief
Protocol 1974-75
between the Government of
India and the Government of
France

12-11-74

28-6-74

12-11-74

GERMAN DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC
63. Supplementary Protocol between the Government of the
Republic of India and the Government of the German Democratic Republic on scientific
and technical co-operation in
the fields of veterinary services
including veterinary sciences,
agricultural
co-operatives,
animal husbandary and food
industries, for the year
1974
and 1975.
64. Agreement on scientific and
Technical Co-operation in the
field of Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy between the Government of the Republic of India
and the German
Democratic
Republic
Vali
d

7.5.74

7.5.74

14-5-74

19-6-74

upto
31-1278.
HUNGARY
65. Record note of Discussions of
the Working Group on Chemicals and Pharmaceuticals Industry on the occasion of the First
Meeting of the Indo-Hungarian
Joint Commission for Ecnomic, Scientific and Technical
Co-operation held in New Delhi. 31-10-74
-------------------------------------------------------------------------13-883 EA/74
<pg159>
APPENDIX III-contd.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
5
6
--------------------------------------------------------------------------

66. Protocol of the first meeting of
the
indo-Hungarian
joint
Commission for
Economic,
Scientific and Technical
Cooperation
1-11-74
ICELAND
67. Exchange of Notes between the
Government of India and the
Government of Iceland for the
abolition of Visas for a stay
upto 90 (ninety) days

25-6-74

1-8-74

INDONESIA
68. Agreement between the Government of the Republic of
India and the Government of
the Republic of Indonesia relating to the Delimitation of
the Continental Shelf Boundary
between the two countries.),

8.8.74 17.12.74 17.12.74
IRAN

69. Memorandum of Understanding
between the Government of
India and the Government of
Iran regarding the expansion
of economic co-operation between the two countries

2-5-74
JAPAN

70. Loan Agreement between the
President of India and the Japanese Banks concerning Japanese
assistance for India's deep sea
oil exploration project
.

30-1-74

-

71. Rescheduling Agreement between the President of India
and the Export-import Bank of
Japan

30-1-74

-

72. Exchange of Notes between the
Government of India and the
Government of Japan concerning Japanese financial assistance
in the form of debt relief measure
for assisting the Government
of India in her foreign exchange
requirements

30-1-74
<pg160>
APPENDIX III---contd.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------

1
2
3
4
5
6
-------------------------------------------------------------------------73. Exchange of notes between the
Government of India and the
Government of Japan regarding
Japanese
financial assistance
for setting up of the Bhatinda
Fertilizer Project .

30-3-74

74. Exchange of Notes between the
Governments of India and Japan
regarding modification of the
avoidance of double taxation
in respect of taxes on income
signed at New Delhi on the 5th
day of January 1960 and as
modified and supplemented by
the Protocol signed at New
Delhi on the 8th day of April
1969
30-11-74

30-11-74

MONGOLIAN PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC
75. The extension of the Validity
of the Trade Agreement between
the Government of the Republic
of India and the Government of
the Mongolian People's
Republic
(Effective from 14-2-1974 till
13-2-1977).

3-4-74

14-2-74
NEPAL

76. Exchange of Letters between
the Government of India and
His Majesty's Government of
Nepal regarding the Maintenance of the SONAULI POKHRA Road in Nepal .
77. Exchange of Letters between
the Government of India and
the Government of Nepal for
making available funds to the
extent of Rs. 12 lakhs (Rupees
twelve lakhs) in Indian Currency for extension to the hospital building of the Paropakar
Shri Panch Indra Rajya Laxami
Devi Maternity and Child Welfare Centre for being utilised
before 31 March 1974.

15-2-74

15-2-74

1-7-74

15-2-74

<pg161>
APPENDIX III--contd.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

1
2
3
4
5
6
------------------------------------------------------------------------78. Exchange of Letters between
the Government of India and
the Government of Nepal for
the Work of black-topping of
the remaining portion of the
road from Ranipauwa to Trisuli
at a cost of Rs. 41.80 lakhs in
Indian currency.

17.3.74

17.3.74

PAKISTAN
79. Agreement between the Government of India and the Government of Pakistan on the release
and repatriation of
persons
detained in either country prior
to conflict of 1971 .
80. Agreement between the Government of India and
Government of Pakistan relating to the Exchange
Postal Articles.
81. Telecommunication
ment between the Government
of India and the Government
of Pakistan.

9-4-74

9-4-74

the
of

14.9.74

-

15.10.74

-

15,10.74

Agree14.9.74

REPUBLIC OF KOREA
82. Agreement on Trade Promotion
and Economic and Technical
Co-operation between the Government of India and the Government of the Republic of Korea

12-8-74

12-8-74

SRI LANKA
83. Exchange of Letters between
the Government of India and
the Government of the Republic
of Sri Lanka regarding the status
and future of the remaining
150,000 persons of Indian Origin
in Sri Lanka
84. Agreement between India and
Sri Lanka on the Boundary in
Historic Waters between the
two
countries and related
matters
(Sri Lanka 28,6,74)

27-1-74

26-6-74

27-1-74

---

<pg162>
APPENDIX III---contd.

8-7-74

-------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
5
6
-------------------------------------------------------------------------SWEDEN
85. Agreement between the Government of india and the Government of Sweden for executing Pre-Investment Survey of
Fishing Harbours in
India
with the Co-operation of Swedish
International
Development
Authority (SIDA).

18.1.74

86. Exchange of Letters between the
Government of India and the
Government of Sweden regarding debt relief agreement

11-3-74

87. Development
Co-operation
Agreement between the Government of India and the Government of Sweden

5-6-74

18.1.74

11-3-74

1-7-74

88. Exchange of Letters between the
Government of India and the
Government of Sweden regarding supplementary development
aid

15-7-74

15-7-74

89. Exchange of Letters between the
Government of India and the
Government of Sweden regarding supply of 640 tonnes of offset paper to the Department of
Family Planning at a Calculated
C and F value of about three
million Swedish Kr. to be used
within the Indian Family Planning Programme
.

23-9-74

23-9-74

90. Exchange of Letters between the
Government of India and the
Government of Sweden regarding transfer of the balances
of development Credits granted
to India in 1966 and 1968

30-10-74
UNITED KINGDOM

91. Exchange of Letters between the
Government of India and the
Government
of the United
Kingdom for twenty-five million
pounds (pounds 25,000,000) regarding
Maintenance Loan, 1974 .

1-2-74
<pg163>
APPENDIX III---contd.

30-10-74

-------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
5
6
-------------------------------------------------------------------------92. Exchange
Government of
Government of
dom regarding
Loan, 1974

of Notes between the
India and the
the United Kingdebt Refinancing

1-2-74

93. Exchange of Notes between the
Government of India and the
Government of the United Kingdom for amending the Maintenance Loan 1974 (dt. 1-2-1974)

27-3-74

94. Exchange of Letters between
the Government of India and the
Government of the United Kingdom regarding Mixed Project
Loan, 1974 for (18,000,000)
eighteen million pounds sterling

27-3-74

95. Exchange of Notes between the
Governments of India and the
United Kingdom regarding
interest free Maintenance Loan,
1974 No. 2 for 30,000,000 (Thirty
Million pounds sterling) .

12-9-74

96. Exchange of Letters between the
Government of India and the
Government of the United Kingdom regarding the availability of
Loan for
the full range of
Maintenance imports, components, commodities, etc., necessary to the economic development of India
12-9-74
97. Exchange of Notes between
the Government of India and
the Government of the United
Kingdom regarding interest free
Loan pounds 9,400,000 (Nine million
four hundred thousand pounds
sterling) for the purpose of reimbursing the Government of
India for payments made to the
Government of the United
Kingkom during the period
from 1 April 1974 to 31
March 1975.
23.12.74
<pg164>
APPENDIX III--contd.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------

1
2
3
4
5
6
-------------------------------------------------------------------------UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
98. Exchange of Letters between the
Government of India and the
Government of the United States
of America regarding changes
for incorporation in the Rupee*
Agreement of 18-2-74
.

16-5-74

99.
Agreement btween the Government of India and the Government of the United States of
America regarding the Consolidation and Rescheduling of
Certain
Debts owed to the
United States Government and
its agencies for the
period 5
Oct. 1973 to 31 March 1974 .

7-6-74

7-6-74

100. Amending Agreement between
the Government of India and
the Government of
United
States (regarding the 19 Dec
1973 Agreement dealing with
Record of Understanding Regarding Debt Relief to India)
and
(7 June
1974 Agreement dealing with the consolidation and rescheduling of certain debts owed to United States
Government and its Agencies)
7-6-74
-------------------------------------------------------------------------Joint Communiques
101. Gabon

Gabo
n

102.

Joint Communique issued in New Delhi on October 15, 1974 at the Conclusion of a State Visit to India by the President of the Republic of
(His Excellency Mr. Albert Bernard Bongo, Head of the Government,
Founder and Secretary-General of the Gabon Democratic Party).
Iran
Joint Communique issued in New Delhi on 4 October 1974 on the
conclusion of the State Visit of His Imperial Majesty Mohammad Reza
Pahlavi Aryamehr, the Shahanshah of Iran and Her Imperial Majesty
Farah Pahlavi, the Shahbanou of Iran.

103.

Pakistan
Joint Communique issued in New Delhi on 9 April 1974 after the
official talks between the Foreign Ministers of India and Pakistan.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*(Public Law 480 and other Funds)
<pg165>
APPENDIX III--contd.
104. Joint Communique issued in Islamabad on 14 September 1974 after
the official talks between the Foreign Secretaries of India and Pakistan.
105.

Sene
-

Senegal
Joint Communique issued in New Delhi on 26 May 1974 at the conclusion of a State Visit to India by the President of the Republic of
gal (His Excellency Mr. Leopold Sedar Senghor and Madame Senghor).
<pg166>

INDIA
USA UNITED KINGDOM RUSSIA SWITZERLAND AUSTRALIA BANGLADESH BELGIUM
BHUTAN BULGARIA CANADA NORWAY SLOVAKIA DENMARK GERMANY FIJI FRANCE
HUNGARY ICELAND INDONESIA IRAN JAPAN MONGOLIA NEPAL PAKISTAN KOREA
SRI LANKA SWEDEN GABON SENEGAL
Jan 15, 1973

Appendix IV ITEC PROGRAMME

Jan 01, 1974

APPENDIX IV
ITEC PROGRAMME
A. Deputation of Indian Experts abroad

Name of the Country
Afghanistan

Total
Number
101

Cyprus

1

Ethiopia

5

Fiji

1

PDRY

20

Indonesia

3

Kenya

3

Iran

3

Iraq

23

Libya

12

Malaysia

7

Maldives

16

Mauritius

38

Malta

1

Morocco

3

Oman

8

Senegal

2

Somalia

22

UAE

4

Sri Lanka

21

Tanzania

26

Upper Volta

2

Zambia

1

Burma

6

----------

GRAND TOTAL

339

------------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg167>
APPENDIX IV-contd.
B. Number of Foreign Trainees in India
Name of the Country

Total
Number

Afghanistan

10

Angola

25

Burma

1

Combodia

1

Cuba

1

Cyprus

1

DRVN

21

Ethiopia

2

Iran

2

Iraq

9

Laos

5

Malaysia

7

Maldives

19

Mauritius

3

PDRY

1

Senegal

1

Oman

1

Somalia

1

Sudan

11

Zambia

10

Tanzania

10

Egypt

4
------------

GRAND TOTAL
146
----------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg168>
INDIA
AFGHANISTAN CYPRUS USA ETHIOPIA FIJI INDONESIA KENYA IRAN IRAQ LIBYA
MALAYSIA MALDIVES MAURITIUS MALTA MOROCCO OMAN SENEGAL MALI SOMALIA
UNITED ARAB EMIRATES SRI LANKA TANZANIA ZAMBIA BURMA ANGOLA CUBA LAOS
SUDAN EGYPT
Jan 01, 1974

Appendix V DISTRIBUTION OF RESERVED MEDICAL AND

Jan 01, 1974

APPENDIX V
DISTRIBUTION OF RESERVED MEDICAL AND
ENGINEERING SEATS DURING 1974-75

-------------------------------------------------------------------------Medical
EngineerTotal
ing
-------------------------------------------------------------------------(A) Country
(i) Africa
10
15
25
(ii) West Asia
6
61
67
(iii) South
East
Asia
45
64
109
(iv) Other
Countries
13
79
92
-------------------------------------------------------------------------TOTAL
74
219
293
*Distribution of other countries
1. Sri Lanka
4
31
35
2. Nepal
5
41
46
3. Other Countries
4
7
11
-------------------------------------------------------------------------Total
13
79
92
(B) Countrywise distribution of Medical Seats
------------------------------------------------------------------------Name of Country
Medical seats
allotted
------------------------------------------------------------------------(I) AFRICA
1. Kenya
4
2. Malawi
1
3. South Africa
4. Tanzania
5
5. Uganda
6. Zambia
-----------------------------------------------------------------------TOTAL (Africa)
10
<pg169>
APPENDIX V-contd.
(II) WEST ASIA
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.

Afghanistan
Aden
Iran
Iraq
Jordan
Kuwait
U. A. R.

5
1

-----------

TOTAL (West Asia)
(III) SOUTH
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.

EAST ASIA

Burma .
Fiji Islands
Malaysia
Mauritius
Singapore
Thailand

1
4
23
13

TOTAL (South East Asia)
(IV) OTHER
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.

6
-----------

4
-----------45

COUNTRIES

Bahrain
Sri Lanka
Guyana
Nepal
Trinidad & Tobago
Hungary
Bangladesh

4
3
5

1
---------TOTAL (Other Countries)
13
---------GRAND TOTAL
74
--------------------------------------------------------------------<pg170>
APPENDIX V-contd.
(c) Countrywise distribution of Engineering Seats
--------------------------------------------------------------------------Name of
the Country
Engineering Scats,
allotted
-------------------------------------------------------------------------(I) AFRICA
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

Angola
Kenya
Nigeria
South Africa
Tanzania
Uganda
TOTAL (Africa)

1
6
1
1
5
1
---------15

TOTAL (West

1
30
14
14
1
1
----------61

(II) WEST ASIA
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.

Afghanistan
Iran
Iraq
Jordan
Lebanon
Kuwait
Asia)

(III) SOUTH
13.
14.
15.
16.

EAST

ASIA

Fiji Island
Malaysia
Mauritius
Thailand
Total (South East Asia)

2
40
15
7
---------64

(IV) OTHER COUNTRIES
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.

Sri Lanka
Guyana
Nepal, and Bhutan
Bangladesh
U.K.
Hongkong

31
1
41
2
3
1
---------Total (Other Countries)
79
---------GRAND TOTAL
219
-----------------------------------------------------------------------<pg171>
SRI LANKA
NEPAL KENYA MALAWI SOUTH AFRICA TANZANIA UGANDA ZAMBIA AFGHANISTAN
IRAN IRAQ JORDAN KUWAIT BURMA FIJI MALAYSIA MAURITIUS USA REPUBLIC OF
SINGAPORE THAILAND BAHRAIN GUYANA HUNGARY BANGLADESH ANGOLA NIGER
NIGERIA LEBANON BHUTAN UNITED KINGDOM
Jan 01, 1974

Appendix VI EXPENDITURE ON HEADQUARTERS AND MISSIONS/

Jan 01, 1974

APPENDIX VI
EXPENDITURE ON HEADQUARTERS AND MISSIONS/
POSTS abroad during 1974-75

The expenditure during 1974-75 on Headquarters of this Ministry
is of the order of Rs. 319.44 lakhs, a sum of Rs. 150.03 lakhs is towards
Establishment Charges, a sum of Rs. 26.27 lakhs for Dearness Allowance,
a sum of Rs. 105.51 lakhs for publicity, cables, diplomatic bags services
etc., a sum of Rs. 37.50 lakhs for travelling expenses and a sum of Rs. 0.13
lakhs for Departmental Canteen.
The expenditure on Missions/Posts abroad including special Missions
in Thimpu and Gangtok is Rs. 1562.00 lakhs out of which a sum of Rs.
781.50 lakhs. is spent on Establishment Charges including Foreign and other
compensatory allowances, sum of Rs. 85.00 lakhs on passages for transfers

and local tours, Rs. 37.00 lakhs for Publicity Contingencies, Rs. 518.50
lakhs on official and residential accommodation, P & T charges and other
office contingencies and Rs. 140.00 lakhs on loss by exchange. The average
expenditure per Mission comes to Rs. 13.35 lakhs.
The expenditure mentioned above (viz, Rs. 1881.44 lakhs as per detaile
below) on Headquarters and Missions/Posts abroad includes expenditure
on External Publicity programme/activities., The break-up of this expenditure is as under :
(Rs. in lakhs)

(a) Headquarters
(i) Salaries (Officers 28, staff 98)

10.55

(ii) Travelling Expenses

2.00

(iii) Publicity Contingencies Charges

34.00
--------

46
.55
(b) Missions/Posts abroad
(i) Salaries (Officers 53, staff 266)

43.59

(ii) Foreign Allowance, Compensatory allowance

27.65

(iii) Passages and Travelling Expenses

2.07

(iv) Publicity Contigencies

37.00

(v) Other Charges including renting of residential accommodation and other office contingencies

17.86
-------128.17

TOTAL : EXTERNAL PUBLICITY

174.72

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------The expenditure on External Publicity as detailed above comes to
9.28% of the expenditure on Headquarters and Missions/Posts abroad.

the

<pg172>
APPENDIX VI-contd.
(Rupees in lakhs)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------Establish- Travelling Office
Other
Total
ment
Expenses Expences Charges
Charges
--------------------------------------------------------------------------

I. SECRETARIAT :
(a) Headquarters
(b) External
Publicity
Division

165.75

35.50

71.64

-

272.89

10.55

2.00

34.00

-

46.55

-----------------------------------------------------176.30

37.50

105.64

-

319.44

-----------------------------------------------------II OVERSEAS
Establishment
(a) Missions/Posts
abroad
(b) Publicity
Wings

710.26

82.93

500.64

140.00

1433.83

71.24
2.07
54.86
128.17
----------------------------------------------------781.50

85.00

555.50

140.00*

1562.00

----------------------------------------------------GRAND TOTAL

957.80

122.50

661.14

140.00

1881.44

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------*Provision for loss by exchange.
<pg173>

Jan 01, 1974

Appendix VII LIST OF INDIAN MISSIONS/POSTS

Jan 01, 1974

APPENDIX VII

LIST OF INDIAN MISSIONS/POSTS OPENED IN 1974-75
------------------------------------------------------------------------S. No.
Country
Location
Remarks

------------------------------------------------------------------------1.

Tanzania

Zanzibar

Consulate
General.

------------------------------------------------------------------------*Provision for loss by exchange.
<pg174>
ADDENDUM
TO
CHAPTER VIII ON THE AMERICAS
The hopeful trends in Indo-U.S. relations in 1974 were
clouded by the American decision to reverse its ten-year old arms
policy towards the subcontinent.
On Feb 24, 1975, the United States Government announced the removal of the embargo on the supply of arms to
Pakistan. India's grave concern and serious disappointment on
this development was conveyed to the U.S. Government through
diplomatic channels as well as by the Minister of External Affairs
in Parliament. Subsequent discussion of this question in both
Houses of Parliament and the Press reflected the profound concern at the U.S. action among all sections of public opinion in
India.
Even before the official American announcement to resume
arms shipments to Pakistan, Minister of External Affairs wrote
a letter to the U.S. Secretary of State on 28 January 1975, conveying India's deep concern about the harmful effects of supply
of arms to Pakistan and drew his attention to its serious repercussions on the process of normalization on the subcontinent as
well as on Indo-U.S. relations. On 18 February 1975, Minister
of External Affairs declared in Parlament that arms supplies to
Pakistan would jeopardise the hopeful trends in Indo-Pakistan
relations, create new tensions between the two countries and
revive earlier misgivings about America's role in the region. On
25 February, he expressed in Parliament Government's strong
disappointment and sense of deep regret at the American decision to remove the embargo. This was a retrograde step which
would not further the cause of peace in the subcontinent.
On 26 February, it was announced that under the present
circumstances, Minister of External Affairs would not be able
to attend the meeting of the Indo-U.S. Joint Commission in
Washington due to be held on 13-14 March 1975.
<pg175>

INDIA

TANZANIA USA PAKISTAN MALI
Feb 24, 1975


