1958-59

Contents
Jan 01, 1958
REPORT
1958-59
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PART-I
Administration :-

PAGES

(i) Headquarters
(ii) Reorganization of the methods of work
and connected matters .
(iii) Indian Foreign Service.
(iv) Missions abroad
(v) Inspectorate .
(vi) Expenditure
(vii) Tribal areas.
(viii) Naga Hills-Tuensang Area

1
2-4
4-5
5-6
6
6-8
8-10
10-11

PART-II
A. States in special treaty relations with India:(i) Bhutan
(ii) Sikkim

12
12

B. Foreign Possessions in India
(i) Goa
(ii) Pondicherry

12-14
14

C. India's neighbours :(i) Afghanistan
(ii) Burma
(iii) Ceylon.
(iv) China (See under East Asia)
(v) Nepal
(vi) Pakistan

14-15
15-16
16-17
17
17-18
18-23

D. South East Asia, Australia and New Zealand

23-26

E.

East Asia

26-27

F.
G.

West Asia
Africa

27-30
30-33

H.

Europe

34-38

I.

The Americas :(i) North America
(ii) Central America
(iii) South America

38-39
40
40-41

J. External Publicity

41-45
(i)
(ii)

K. Miscellaneous :-

PAGES

(i) Emigration
(ii) Haj
(iii) Distinguished
visitors from abroad
(iv) Consular Division
(v) Central Passport Organization
(vi) Diplomatic and Consular Missions
in India

45-46
46
46-47
47-49
49
49

PART - III
A.

United

Nations

B.

International Conferences

50-54
54
APPENDICES

(i) Indian Missions Abroad.
(ii) Information Posts
(iii) Foreign Missions in India
(iv) Treaties, Conventions, and Agreements concluded or renewed by
India with other countries during
1958
(v) International Organizations of which
India is a member
------INDIA

55-58
59-60
61-65

66-67
68-70

BHUTAN
USA

AFGHANISTAN

BURMA

CHINA

NEPAL

PAKISTAN

Jan 01, 1958

Administration
PART I
ADMINISTRATION
Organization of the Ministry
(i) Headquarters.-The Ministry of External Affairs is responsible
for the conduct of India's relations with foreign countries. The
Ministry is also responsible for the country's representation in the
United Nations and advises other Ministries and State Governments
when the latter have dealings with foreign governments or institutions. In the domestic sphere it is responsible for the Administration
of the North East Frontier Agency and the Naga Hills and Tuensang
Area and for matters of policy relating to former French possessions
in India. The administration of the Indian Emigration Act of 1932,
the Reciprocity Act of 1943, the Port Haj Committee Act of 1932,
the Indian Merchant Shipping Act in so far as it relates to pilgrim
ships, the Indian Pilgrim Shipping Rules of 1933, the Protection of
Pilgrims Act of 1887 (Bombay) and the Protection of the Mohammadan
Pilgrims Act of 1896 (Bengal) is also the special responsibility of the
Ministry of External Affairs.
The Ministry is in charge of a Minister of Cabinet rank. At present
the Prime Minister is also the Minister of Foreign Affairs. A Deputy
Minister assists the Foreign Minister in his work.
The Secretary General is the principal official adviser to the
Foreign Minister on matters relating to foreign policy and is responsible for the supervision and co-ordination of the Ministry as a whole.
The Foreign Secretary deals with the American, Western and Eastern
Divisions and the West Asian and North African countries of the
Southern Division. the Protocol Division. the External Publicity
Division and the Historical Division. The Commonwealth Secretary
deals with all Commonwealth Countries excluding Canada (included
in the American Division). the South-Asian countries of the Southern
Division and the African Division. The Special Secretary is in general
charge of the Administration of the Ministry and of the Indian
Missions and Posts abroad. In matters involving policy the Special
Secretary works in close collaboration with the Foreign and Commonwealth Secretaries.

AUSTRALIA

NEW ZEALAND

For administrative purposes the Ministry is divided into 10
Divisions in charge of Directors. Six of the Directors are Joint
<pg1>
<pg2>
Secretaries, one is of the rank of Counsellor in the Foreign Service,
while the others are Deputy Secretaries or officers of equivalent
status. Four of the Divisions deal exclusively with India's relations
with foreign countries, each Division dealing with a number of
countries grouped on a geographical or "territorial" basis. Another
Division deals with protocol and also with some territorial areas.
There are three technical Divisions in the Ministry, respectively in
charge of External Publicity, Historical Research and of Legal matters and Treaties. The Administration Division and Establishment
Division are in the charge of two Joint Secretaries and deal with
the administration of personnel, establishment and services and
supplies relating to the Ministry as a whole and to the large number
of Indian Missions and Posts abroad.
There is also a Foreign Service Inspector, of the status of a Joint
Secretary, whose function it is to visit, from time to time, the Indian.
Missions and Posts abroad and to advise government on the fixation
of rates of foreign and daily allowances and on other administrative
and financial questions.
(ii) Reorganization of the methods of work and connected
matters.-With a view to achieving economy and improving efficiency,
the various Sections in the Ministry have been re-grouped and new
methods of work have been introduced in some of them as an
experimental measure. In a re-organized Section, the responsibility
for quick and efficient disposal of work is placed directly on an
officer of the rank of Under Secretary. Except in regard to routine
administrative work, noting and drafting by Assistants has been
eliminated. The Assistant's main work is to maintain the records and
submit the papers duly flagged and referenced to the Under Secretary.
In some Sections, the method of keeping record has also been changed.
Each administrative Section is also required to maintain certain
records to be used as a reference library which will enable all
relevant facts to be ascertained immediately, without the delay of
reference to past records. It has also been decided that normally any
paper will not be dealt with by more than two officers below the
level of Secretary and for this reason, the Under Secretary submits
papers either to the Joint Secretary or the Deputy Secretary, but not
both. Where the papers are submitted to the Deputy Secretary,
they are next submitted direct to the Secretary and not to the Joint
Secretary. This enables better utilization of officers' strength and
enables each of the higher officers to concentrate more on his own
direct charge, instead of a succession of officers dealing with the
same paper.

<pg3>
The experimental scheme was introduced in five territorial
Sections of the Ministry in the middle of August 1958. As the preliminary results of the experiment were encouraging, it was decided,
still on an experimental basis, to extend it to some more territorial
and administrative Sections. So far, nine territorial and eight
administrative Sections have been re-organized, leading to an economy
of about Rs. 2,43,000 per annum on account of pay and allowances
alone.
During the year under report, seven meetings were held by the
Joint Secretary in charge of O&M to discuss methods of speeding
up disposals. Steps were taken to reduce arrears of disposal in
primary receipts by keeping watch over Sections with heavy arrears
and by taking remedial action in consultation with the Joint
Secretaries concerned.
The practice of arriving at decisions after inter-ministerial and
inter-departmental meetings was followed more often during the
year. This has resulted in avoidance of unnecessary noting and
movement of files with the consequent increase in the speed of
disposals.
During the year, work study of six Sections of the Ministry
Was completed for rationalising the methods of work and for assessing
their staff requirements. The implementation of the recommendations
made in the work study report is expected to effect economy in time
required for disposal of work as a result of simplification of methods
of work and also lead to economy in staff.
With a view to maintain efficiency and economy in administration, an Economy Board was constituted in April 1958, to consider
all cases relating to creation of posts, continuance of temporary posts
and fixation of ceiling rentals for residences of officials in Missions
abroad. The Board consists of three Joint Secretaries and the Deputy
Financial Adviser, with the Special Secretary as the Chairman and
a Deputy Secretary as its Secretary. The Board held twenty-one
meetings during the year.
Progress was made during the year in clearing up arrears in
indexing work. The index for the year 1952 was sent for printing in
April, that for the year 1953 is ready for the press and most of the
work on indices for 1954 has been completed.
75 quarterly inspections of Sections were conducted during the
year. The defects noticed were brought to the notice of the Sections concerned with a view to eliminating those defects.
<pg4>

The Deputy Secretary in charge of O&M is also in charge of the
Vigilance Unit set up in 1955. The Vigilance Unit deals with disciplinary cases against officers and members of staff of the Ministry.
it also concerns itself with measures connected with prevention of
corruption in the Ministry and its subordinate offices. The Unit
works in close collaboration with the Administrative Vigilance
Division of the Ministry of Home Affairs.
The Unit dealt with 70 cases of complaints, 37 disciplinary cases
and 4 cases of Appeal, during the year 1958 and disposed of 49 cases
of complaints, 21 disciplinary cases and 3 cases of Appeal.
During the year under review, action was taken to delegate
powers to impose minor penalties as prescribed in Rule 13 of the
Central Civil Services (Classification, Control & Appeal) Rules, 1957,
in respect of certain categories of India-based personnel serving in
the Indian Missions and Posts, to the respective Heads of Missions
and Heads of Chanceries. This will enable Missions abroad to initiate disciplinary action against the India-based personnel concerned
and impose minor penalties whenever necessary without reference
to the Ministry. Till now all disciplinary cases were referred to
the Ministry for action and this involved considerable delay in the
disposal of such cases. It is hoped that with the present delegation
of powers, speedier action would be taken in disciplinary cases.
A new Section known as `External Affairs Instructions' was
created in February 1958, to deal with the work of compiling and
publishing of circular instructions and Office Orders issued by the
Ministry of External Affairs in a book form. Orders and circulars
issued during the period 1947 to 1956 were to be collected in a compendium form and instructions issued during the succeeding years
were to be published separately at the end of each year. The work
relating to the collection of material for the period 1947 to 1956
has been progressing satisfactorily. In the meantime, the work
relating to the publication of External Affairs Instructions 1957, is
almost complete and the material is ready to be sent to the press,
Most of the work relating to the publication of External Affairs
Instructions 1958, has also been completed.
(iii) Indian Foreign Service.-At present the permanent strength
of the Indian Foreign Service is 216. In addition, there are 10
supernumerary posts and 58 temporary posts in various grades.
Excluding 26 ex-cadre posts of Heads of Missions and Posts, the
net permanent strength of, the Indian Foreign Service for purposes
of recruitment is 190 plus 10 supernumerary posts. Apart from a
10% reservation for promotion of officers of Grade I of the IFS `B'
<pg5>
and of the External Publicity Division, recruitment is made exclu-

sively from the annual open competitive examination held by the
Union Public Service Commission. Ten candidates were recruited
during 1958 as a result of the UPSC competitive examination held
in 19.57. Including these probationers, the actual strength of the
IFS stood at 189 at the beginning of the year. Ten more candidates are to be recruited in 1959.
INDIAN FOREIGN SERVICE `B'
Recruitment to the various grades of the Indian Foreign Service Branch `B' at its initial constitution has been almost completed.
The number of persons so far appointed to each grade is as follows:GENERAL CADRE
Grade
Grade
Grade
Grade
Grade
Grade

I
II
III
IV
V
VI

35
84
128
461
143
529

STENOGRAPHERS' SUB-CADRE
Grade I
Grade II

25
278
CYPHER SUB-CADRE

Grade I

10

Against the reservation of 10% of the posts in the IFS for
promotees, 10 officers who were initially recruited in Grade I of
the General Cadre of the IFS `B' have since been appointed to the
senior scale of the Indian Foreign Service. Similarly, three officers
of the External Publicity Services were promoted to the IFS.
Recruitment to the lower grade of the Cypher Sub-Cadre of the
IFS `B', which is now in progress, is also likely to be completed
shortly
The question of the formation of a Sub-Cadre of Interpreters
and Translators is still under consideration.
(iv) Missions Abroad.-At the beginning of the year 1958, India
had 106 Missions and Posts abroad, of which 40 were Embassies, 12
High Commissions, 12 Legations, 10 Commissions, 14 Consulates
<pg6>
General, 7 Consulates, 5 Vice-Consulates, 3 Special Missions and 3

Agencies. During 1958, an Embassy was opened in Chile and the
Ambassador there has also been accredited to Bolivia. Diplomatic
relations were also established with Spain and a resident Charge d'
Affaires appointed at Madrid. In Morocco where there had previously
been only a Charge d' Affaires, an Ambassador has been appointed
and also accredited to Tunisia. It has also been decided to set up
an office in Rumania under the charge of a resident Charge d'
Affaires. Consequent on the merger of syria and Egypt into the
United Arab Republic, the Embassy at Damascus was abolished and
in its place a Consulate General has been opened.
Further progress was made towards construction of our own buildings, particularly where work had already started. A part of the
Chancery building at The Hague, which had been destroyed by fire,
has been restored and renovated The construction of the
Chancery building at Karachi is in progress and the building is
expected to be completed early in the next financial year. Another
building at Karachi, previously obtained on lease for the residence of
24 members of the staff, has been purchased. A-plot of land has
been acquired at Addis Ababa (Ethopia) for the construction of our
own building in partial exchange for a plot of land in Chanakyapuri
in New Delhi given to the Ethopian Embassy. Land has also been
taken on lease for construction of buildings at Lhasa and Gyantse
in Tibet. Work for construction of staff quarters in Nepal is also
expected to start shortly.
(v) Inspectorate.-The inspecting team visited Rangoon fromApr 30, 1958
to 5 May 1958 and made an extensive tour from 9 May
to 2 August. During this period they visited Czechoslovakia, Poland,
Hungary, Austria, France, England, Ireland, Sweden, Norway,
Denmark, Morocco, Spain, Italy and Egypt.
Their recommendations in regard to the revision of foreign
allowances have been examined. Some of them have been accepted
and some others are still under consideration. A great number of
administrative problems in connection with service and supply have
also been finalized as a result of the Inspectors' recommendations.
(vi) Expenditure.-The expenditure of this Ministry falls under
five Demands viz. (i) Tribal Area, (ii) Naga Hills-Tuensang Area,
(iii) External Affairs, (iv) State of Pondicherry and (v) Miscellaneous.
<pg7>
According to the Revised Estimates, expenditure in 1958-59 is
expected to be Rs. 2,315 - 58 lakhs. Some of the items included therein are either fixed or do not relate to External Affairs proper. These
are: Rs.

(In lakhs)
(a) Tribal Areas including Assam Rifles and provision for
development (Rs. 95.05 lakhs) and Community Projects (Rs. 8.43 lakhs)
843.78
(b) Naga Hills-Tuensang Area including provision for
development (Rs. 59.91 lakhs) and Community Development Projects (Rs. 15 lakhs)

312.66

(c) Payments to neighbouring States and expenditure on
Pondicherry
355.16
(d) Contribution to U.N., Delegation thereto and Delegations to the International Armistice Supervisory Commission in Indo-China
110.50
(e) Expenditure on Demarcation of Boundaries between
India and Pakistan
7.58
(f) Passport and Emigration Establishment

27.29

(g) Miscellaneous expenditure e.g., on pilgrimage, refugees
and evacuees, repatriation of Indians, loss by Exchange, etc.
5.41
The expenditure on External Relations proper amounts to
Rs. 653.20 lakhs. This includes Rs. 63.11 lakhs on the High Commissioner's Office in London, Rs. 115.19 lakhs on Pay and Allowances of officers and staff and other expenses at Headquarters,
Rs. 25.06 lakhs on account of the Hospitality Grant of the Government of India and Rs. 14.19 lakhs on donations and Relief Measures
in foreign countries.
The expenditure on Missions and Posts abroad amounts to
Rs. 435.64 lakhs and is spread over 86 missions This gives an average of Rs. 5.07 lakhs per Mission. Of this, an average of Rs. 1.49
lakhs per Mission is spent on Pay and Allowances of officers, Rs. 1.56
lakhs on Pay and Allowances of staff and Rs. 0.79 lakhs on office
and residential accommodation. The balance consists of contingent
and other expenditure.
During the period ending 30 September 1958, the posts of 1
Attache, 1 Assistant Press Attache, 1 Assistant, 5 Stenographers, 1

<pg8>
Steno-typist, 1 Reception Officer, 9 Clerks, 1 Editor, 1 Secretarycum-Interpreter, 1 Press Reader, and 18 Class IV Officials
were abolished while posts of 1 Assistant Press Attache, 5 Registrars, 8 Assistants, 2 Stenographers and 5 Clerks were kept in
abeyance.
(vii) Tribal Areas-North East Frontier Agency.-Satisfactory
progress has been made by the Agency during the year in extending
effective administration into the interior and in providing basic
amenities to the tribal people without disturbing their normal tenor
of life. There has been no major disturbance of law and order. A
number of new administrative centres and outposts have been
opened for the benefit of the tribal people living in the remote areas.
With the formation of the Naga Hills-Tuensang Area, a number
of IFAS officers from North East Frontier Agency; had to be posted
there to man senior appointments. As a result steps are being
taken to suitably expand the deputation posts sanctioned in the
Cadre.
There has been an increasing response from the tribal population to the developmental activities undertaken by the Administration for their welfare. There are six Community Development
and National Extension Service Blocks already functioning in the
area. Three more have been opened this year. 35 Assistant Political Officers/Base Superintendents have received training in the
Block Development Officers' Course and about a hundred Village
Level Workers have been trained in extension activities at the
Extension Training Centre in Pasighat for NES Blocks and the
Agricultural Department.
In the Block Programme special emphasis has been laid on the
following points: (a) Increase of Agricultural Production by introducing and
popularising improved methods of cultivation towards
achieving self-sufficiency;
(b) Improvement of rural sanitation and drinking water
supply;
(c) Improvement of communication facilities.
The preparation of text books, grammars and dictionaries to assist
the officers in learning the tribal languages, has been taken up.
The preparation of text books for 15 major tribal dialects in the
Deva Nagiri script is in progress. Alphabet charts in some of the
tribal dialects have also been prepared. Two books on songs and
stories etc. for the people in their own dialects are in the press.

<pg9>
A few details of the progress already made and expected to be
made upto the end of this year are given below:1. Construction of roads, paths, and tracks including improvement thereof
778 miles
2. Airstrips
6
3. Installation of power-generating sets
12
4. Agriculture :
(a) Irrigation
(b) Development
(C) Supply of tools
(d) Supply of seeds.
(e) Sugarcane sets
(f) Fruit Seedlings
(g) Plant protection

605 channels
3,021 acres
32,732
2,907 mds.
180,000
11,450
5 units

(h) Divisional Farms
(i) Horticultural Development Farms
(i) Fishery Centres
(k) Agricultural Training Stipends

3
40
2
3

5. Forest Division :
(a) Research (Survey of medical plants)

21 acres

(b) Afforestation

130 acre

(c) Demarcation

20 Miles

s
(d)

Plantation

763 acre

s
(e) Forest roads construction

82 Miles

6. Health :
(a) Base Hospital
(b) Central Laboratories
(c) Health Training & Research Centre
(d) VD Survey & BCG Campaign

1

(e) Health Units
(f) Total number of patients deriving benefits (up to September 1958).

5

4
1
3 teams

1,77,040

A film on malaria for public demonstration has been prepared.
7. Education :

(a) Primary Education :
Establishment of new lower Primary
Schools
18
Organization of inter-village L.P. Schools
Conversion of schools into basic pattern

13
20

<pg10>
(b) Secondary Education
High Schools
Inter-village N.E. Schools
Basic Education Training institute

2
10
1

8. Publicity :
(a) Mobile Units
(b) Films
(c) Newsreels
(d) Community receiving-sets

3
1
11
250

9. Co-operation :
Establishment of Co-operative Societies

10

To facilitate the adoption of the Army as a career by tribal
students, four seats have been reserved in King George School,
Bangalore and one student from NEFA has been recently admitted
to that School. A stipend of Rs. 125 per month has been sanctioned to enable him to carry on his studies.
(vii) Naga Hills-Tuensang Area.-The area continued to be
administered by the Governor of Assam as the Agent of the
President, through the Commissioner and Deputy Commissioners,
and under the general control of this Ministry.
The law and order position in the Naga Hills-Tuensang Area
improved considerably since the creation of the New Unit on
1 December 1957. Apart from occasional reports of theft, dacoity,
collection of unauthorized funds and rations by hostiles and a few
other incidents of violence, peaceful conditions generally prevail in
the area and the administration is in full control. The majority of
the Naga people have appreciated the policy of the Government
and have started blaming the hostiles for creating conditions of
insecurity and strife. Lately, there has been very significant surrender of arms and a large number of the Naga people, who had
previously joined the underground hostiles, have now come overground and are pursuing their normal peaceful avocations.

The Second Naga Peoples' Convention held at Ungma in May
1958 reinforced the Kohima Convention Resolutions and considerably helped in strengthening the hands of all those working
for peace. This representative convention, which was successfully
held despite hostile opposition, roundly condemned all acts of vioence and appointed a Liaison Committee consisting of representatives of various tribes to contact the underground leaders of the
respective tribes to ascertain their views and to explain the policies
of the Government.
<pg11>
The law and order situation in the Naga Hills-Tuensang Area
has always been connected with the underground movement for
Naga independence. The hard core of the underground leaders,
though they are now talking of non-violence, have not yet given up
their violent underground activities and as long as these do not
cease, sporadic crimes and acts of violence will continue.
In the field of development considerable progress has been
made. In addition to the schools that existed prior to 1 December
1957, the Administration, since April 1958, have opened 1 High, 3
Middle English and 74 Lower Primary Schools. Similarly, 14 new
hospitals and dispensaries have been opened. 29 miles of new
motorable roads have been widened. Some additional Executive
and Assistant Engineers and Overseers have been appointed in the
re-organized Engineering Department. Development projects amountIng to about Rs. 1.3 crores sanctioned by Government for 1958-59,
are being implemented with the advice of village elders and assistance of local people. 7 Community Development/NES Blocks have
been revived.
During the Republic Day Celebration in January 1958, a group
of Nagas were invited to Delhi to witness the celebrations. They
were taken round various parts of India.
With a view to providing security to the villagers against hostile
attacks, necessary facilities were given for the organization of Naga
Village Guards, thus associating Naga villagers with the maintenance
of security of their own villages.
INDIA
CANADA USA CHILE BOLIVIA SPAIN MOROCCO TUNISIA EGYPT SYRIA PAKISTAN ETHIOPIA
CHINA NEPAL NORWAY POLAND SLOVAKIA AUSTRIA FRANCE HUNGARY IRELAND SWEDEN
DENMARK ITALY UNITED KINGDOM LATVIA CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC
Apr 30, 1958

A. States in Special Treaty Relations with India
PART II
A. STATES IN SPECIAL TREATY RELATIONS WITH INDIA
(i) Bhutan.-The Prime Minister's visit to Bhutan was a landmark in the history of Indo-Bhutanese relations. This visit has
immeasurably strengthened the friendship between the two countries. Initial steps have now been taken to construct approach roads
from West Bengal and Assam upto the border of Bhutan. For the
purpose of internal road development in Bhutan, the Government
of India have agreed to make available a sum of Rs. 1,50,000 to the
Government of Bhutan. It is also intended to make available to
the Government of Bhutan as free gift some steel, cement, fertilizers
and trucks for development work. An offer by the Government of
India of a loan of Rs. 2,20,000 for the establishment of an orange
crushing factory in Bhutan has been accepted by the Government
of Bhutan.
(ii) Sikkim.-The Seven Year Development Plan of Sikkim has
made considerable headway during the current year. The important Gangtok-Nathula road which connects Gangtok with SikkimTibet border was completed and opened by the Prime Minister in
September 1958 on his way to Bhutan. The Government of India
are helping in the establishment of a Research Institute of Tibetology
in Sikkim. A proposal for setting up a small broadcasting station
in Sikkim is also receiving consideration. Two important schemes
for the construction of an aerial ropeway in Sikkim and explorations for copper deposits have also made significant progress.
B. FOREIGN ENCLAVES IN INDIA
(i) Goa.-There have been no important developments since the
last report in regard to the liberation of the people in Portuguese
enclaves in India. The Government of India repeatedly made it
clear that they would not use force for this purpose. The Goan
political parties are continuing, in peaceful and non-violent ways
their efforts to free themselves from colonial rule. There were
six Indian nationals in jails or in detention in Goa on Feb 01, 1958.
Out of them two were released in March-April 1958. At
present there are four Indian satyagrahis, including Shrimati Sudha
Joshi, in Goa jails. It is hoped that they will be released shortly.
A representative of the Embassy of the United States of Brazil
in New Delhi visited Bombay in March 1958 in order to look after
<pg12>

<pg13>
the interests of Portuguese nationals. The Counsellor of the UAR
Embassy in New Delhi visited Goa in October-November 1958 for
about a week. During this period he enquired into various matters
affecting Indian interests.
In the `Right of Passage' case before the International Court of
Justice, the Government of India submitted its Counter-Memorial
to the Court on 25 March 1958. The Portuguese Government submitted their reply on 25 July 1958. At our request the Court has
now fixed 26 January 1959 for the submission of India's rejoinder.
Except for certain categories of persons, no Indian or person of
Indian origin in the Portuguese enclaves in India is at present
required to possess any permit for travel between India and these
enclaves by the approved route. Unfortunately, however, the
Indians going to Goa, Daman and Diu have still to obtain visas from
the Brazilian Embassy.
Each traveller to Goa is permitted to carry Indian currency upto
Rs. 50; a traveller from the Portuguese enclaves in India is allowed
to bring with him Rs. 100 (Indian currency). In certain special
cases additional sums to and from these possessions are permitted
by the Reserve Bank of India in consultation with this Ministry.
The Government of India Pension Office in Margoa (Goa) was
opened in the middle of March 1957. After protracted correspondence, an agreed procedure for taking funds in cash from India
for disbursement of pensions in Goa has been arrived at. A pension
disbursement officer now takes a specified sum of money with him
to Goa every two months for the disbursement of pensions and
arrears, He has made two trips to Goa so far and a third one is
due shortly.
All diplomatic and Consular officers of the UAR Embassy in
India have been authorized to perform the duties of Consular Agents
in relation to these enclaves.
Every person coming to India from the Portuguese enclaves in
India is now permitted to bring with him duty-free one watch and
one fountain pen provided both of them have been in use at least
for the preceding six months.
Portuguese police violated Indian territory on more than 15
occasions during the period under report. No loss of property, or
casualties have been reported on our side. We have protested
recently to the Portuguese Government through the Embassy of
the UAR in New Delhi in respect of two such incidents. Their
reply is awaited.

<pg14>
Telegraphic communications between Goa and Belgaum and
between Diu and Delvada have been restored.
There have been a number of cases of desertion of Portuguese
soldiers/Goan recruits to India.
(ii) Pondicherry.-The Treaty of Cession of the French Establishments of Pondicherry, Karaikal, Yenam and Mahe, signed at New
Delhi on 28 May 1956, has not yet been ratified by the French Government. The delay is partly due to the recent constitutional
changes in France. It is hoped that the ratification will be made
by the new Government of France without delay.
Following dissensions among the members of the Representative
Assembly in Pondicherry, the Government of India dissolved the
Assembly and authorized the holding of fresh elections. It is
expected that these elections will be held in the first half of 1959.
Shri L. R. S. Singh assumed charge as Chief Commissioner, on
29 August 1958.
A sum of Rs. 52.8 lakhs has been budgeted for 1959-60 for
Development Works, the total Budget provision for Pondicherry
being estimated at Rs. 2.75 crores. No development scheme with
adequate preparations or reasonable chances of success has been
held up for lack of finance.
A beginning has been made in land tenancy reform in the State.
The Malabar Tenancy Act, 1929 has been extended to Mahe. in
addition. the Karaikal Cultivating Tenants Protection Order, 1958
has been issued for Karaikal. Similar protection to cultivating
tenants in other areas is also under consideration.
C. INDIA'S NEIGHBOURS
(i) Afghanistan.-During the year under review relations
between India and Afghanistan continued to be friendly and cordial.
An Indian Trade Delegation led by Shri J. K. Atal, Joint Secretary, Ministry of External Affairs, visited Kabul in July 1958 and
negotiated a fresh Trade Agreement with Afghanistan.
The aeronautical and meteorological facilities provided by the
Government of India at the Kabul and Kandahar airports were
continued during the year, and the deputation of the Indian aeronautical and meteorological staff has been extended upto 31 August
1959.
The training of 20 Afghans in the FMA and FME courses continued
during the year. Two more Afghans arrived in India in October

<pg15>
1958 for training in the Air Traffic Control Officers ab initio course
at the Civil Aviation Training Centre, Allahabad.
At the request of the Afghan Government the services of a
technical expert were made available to them to advise them on
the utilisation of magnesium dioxide and magnesite for making
tiles and slabs for flooring. He stayed in Afghanistan for about
two weeks. A brass-band instructor drawn from the Indian Army
was deputed to Afghanistan in July-August 1958 to give training
to Afghan Army personnel.
India participated in the Afghan Jashan celebrations in August
1958. A contingent of 37 members comprising two sports teams
(one of football and the other of hockey) and a troupe of musicians
were sent to participate in the Jashan celebrations. India also
participated in the Exhibition held at Kabul.
On the invitation of the Government of India an Afghan hockey
team visited India in February 1958 for about ten days.
The Government of India presented handicrafts and other Indian
goods worth Rs. 15,000 as a gift for the small industries Museum in
Kabul. 100 Ambar charkhas were also presented to the Government
of Afghanistan by the Khadi & Village Industries Commission. The
Government of India also presented a fully equipped mobile medical
van to the Government of Afghanistan in October 1958. In the
cultural field, four Afghan musicians were granted scholarships for
higher studies in Indian music. They are now undergoing training
in India. An Afghan-India friendship association has been set up
at Kabul following the example of a similar association already
formed in India.
A Radio Tele-communication Agreement was signed between
the Governments of India and Afghanistan at Kabul on 12 May 1958.
Facilities were made available to Afghan nationals for training
in different fields in India under the United Nations Fellowships
Schemes.
(ii) Burma.-Our relations with Burma continued to be close
and cordial.
Shrimati Lakshmi Menon, Deputy Minister for External Affairs,
paid a two-day visit to Rangoon on her way back to India after
completion of her tour of Australia, New Zealand and Malaya, On
9 February she attended the unveiling ceremony of the Commonwealth Land Forces Memorial at Taukkyan and later called on the
Burmese Foreign Minister.

<pg16>
A Burmese Economic Delegation led by U Raschid, Burmese
Minister for Mines. came to Delhi to hold discussions with the
representatives of the Government of India to explore the possibilities of increasing trade between the two countries in non-traditional
items. A draft Protocol to the 1956 Trade Agreement between
India and Burma, setting out the measures to be taken by the twoGovernments, was drawn up. The Protocol was signed in Rangoon
in September 1958. The Protocol will be valid during the currency
of the Trade Agreement which is due to expire in September 1961.
A further loan of Rs. 5 crores was made to the Government of
Burma under the terms of the Indo-Burma Financial Agreement of
March 1957. In terms of this Agreement the Government of Burma
are entitled to draw upto Rs. 20 crores, in such multiples of Rs. 50
lakhs as may be required by them from time to time. The total
drawal under the Agreement stood at Rs. 15 crores at the end of
the year 1958.
(iii) Ceylon.-Our relations with Ceylon continued to be friendly
and cordial.
A Ceylonese delegation, headed by their Minister for Transport
and Works, Mr. Maithripala Senanayake, came to Delhi for discussions with the Government of India on traffic rights at Bombay
to be exercised by Air Ceylon. On the understanding that Air
Ceylon would shortly purchase an aircraft to operate their ColomboAmsterdam service which was at that time being run with the help
of an aircraft chartered from a foreign firm, it was agreed to extend
traffic rights to Air Ceylon at Bombay in terms of the bilateral Air
Agreement between India and Ceylon.
Another delegation, representing the coconut oil interests of
Ceylon, came to Delhi for discussions regarding import of coconut
oil from Ceylon to India. As a result of the discussions between
the delegation and the Government of India, it was decided to import
limited quantities of coconut oil from Ceylon.
On the invitation of the Government of India, Mr. R. G. Senanayake, Trade and Commerce Minister for Ceylon, visited Delhi
towards the end of the year to see the "India 1958" Exhibition.
During his visit he also met our Minister for Commerce and Industry and discussed matters of mutual interest with him.
The language controversy between the Tamil and Sinhalese
speaking people of Ceylon came to a head with the outbreak of
communal riots between these two communities in May 1958. Indian,
nationals, as such, were not involved in these riots. Unfortunately,
however, a number of Indian shops were looted and 3 Indians were

<pg17>
killed. Our High Commissioner in Colombo took energetic action,
secured Ceylon Government's assistance to protect the life and
property of Indian nationals residing in Ceylon, organized relief
camps for a number of Indians rendered destitute as a result of
these disturbances, and took measures to repatriate those who
wanted to return home, at the cost of the Government of India.
A gift of 1,000 tons of sugar and 2,000 tons of cement was made
in 1958 to the Government of Ceylon to assist them in the rehabilitation of those stricken by. the heavy floods of 1957. The total cost
of the gift made in 1958 was Rs. 10 lakhs.
(iv) China.-(See under East Asia).
(v) Nepal.-Relations with Nepal continued to remain close and
friendly. As in previous years, exchange of delegations added to
the fund of goodwill and mutual understanding between the two
countries. Poets and troupes of musicians and dancers from India
visited Kathmandu for the celebration of the Republic Day, Independence Day and Gandhi Jayanti. From Nepal, a students'
delegation was invited to visit the Inter-University Youth Festival.
At the conclusion of the Festival, the students were taken on a
sight-seeing tour of India. Two batches of Nepalese representing
a cross section of the people of Nepal visited the "India 1958"
Exhibition and Bhakra-Nangal.
In August 1958, the Government of India extended help to the
Government of Nepal to combat the cholera epidemic which had
broken out in the Kathmandu valley. A sum of Rs. 2,500 for the
supply of medicines etc., was donated by the Prime Minister from
his Relief Fund. At the request of the Government of India, the
Indian Red Cross Society also helped to contain the epidemic by
sending substantial medical supplies to Kathmandu.
An Agreement between the Governments of India and Nepal
was signed at Kathmandu on 20 November 1958 for the construction
of the Trisuli Hydro-electric Project in Nepal. The cost of construction estimated at Rs. 3.5 crores will be met out of the Rs. 10 crores
Indian aid programme to Nepal. In June 1958, a tripartite Telecommunications; Agreement between the Governments of Nepal,
the United States of America and India was signed at Kathmandu.
This project is designed to improve telecommunications between
Kathmandu-New Delhi and Kathmandu-Calcutta and provide Nepal
with, an efficient internal telecommunications system.
In connection with Nepal's forthcoming general elections in
February 1959, the Government of India have agreed to lend the
<pg18>

Government of Nepal 15 wireless sets along with personnel to man
them for a period of six months. The entire cost of those services
will be borne by the Government of India. Some documentary
films on general elections in India have also been presented to the
Government of Nepal with a view to explain the arrangements and
technique of holding election.
The Government of India have provided a sum of Rs. 50,000 out
of the Indian aid funds towards the cost of freight on a shipment
of 1,000 tons of wheat given by Canada to Nepal as aid under the
Colombo Plan.
In order to assist Nepal in the establishment of her own internal
airlines, the Government of India sold to the Royal Nepal Airlines
Corporation at a concessional rate one Dakota aircraft belonging to
the Indian Airlines Corporation.
(vi) Pakistan.-The year began with serious deterioration in
Indo-Pakistan relations, caused by the irresponsible and aggressive
attitude of Pakistan local authorities in border areas and the occurrence of a large number of border incidents, particularly on the eastern border. A serious incident occurred on the western border at
Fazilka on 3 June 1958 involving the shooting down in cold blood of
seven members of the Punjab Armed Police by the Pakistan border
authorities while the Punjab Armed Police were holding discussions
with their Pakistani counterparts under a white flag meeting. The
frequency and the intensity of the incidents was at its highest during
June and July 1958 and, despite a temporary improvement consequent on the meeting of the Secretaries of the Governments of India
and Pakistan and the meeting of the two Prime Ministers in September, border incidents involving aggressive and irresponsible firing
by the Pakistani border authorities continued, particularly on the
eastern border, throughout the rest of the year.
On 7 October 1958, the Constitution of Pakistan was abrogated
and General Iskander Mirza assumed complete powers based on
Martial Law. About three weeks later, on 27 October, General Mirza
resigned and General Ayub Khan assumed the office of President
of Pakistan. Constitutional and parliamentary, government ceased
to exist and Governmental authority in Pakistan was concentrated
in the President who rules on the basis of Martial Law regulations.
(a) Indo-Pakistan Conferences.-The tension caused by the
intensity and frequency of border incidents between April and July
1958 was temporarily eased by the meeting between the Prime Minister of India and the Prime Minister of Pakistan in Delhi in September 1958 to discuss settlement of boundary disputes. The meeting
<pg19>

of the Prime Ministers was preceded by a meeting towards the end
of August 1958 between the Secretaries of the two Governments at
Karachi. As a result of the Prime Ministers' meeting several minor
disputes were settled; an agreement was reached for exchange of
the old Cooch-Behar enclaves in East Pakistan with Pakistani
enclaves in India and the Prime Ministers also agreed to keep in
touch with each other and consider the settlement of the other major
disputes.
Despite the change of regime in Pakistan in October 1958 and
further deterioration in the border situation due to the recurrence
of incidents, Government of India continued their efforts to maintain peaceful conditions on the border. The Indian border authorities continued to behave with calmness and restraint and dealt with
the aggressive and irresponsible behaviour of the Pakistan border
authorities according to the needs of the situation, resorting to firing
when necessary in self-defence.
(b) Demarcation of boundary.-A further length of 47 miles was
demarcated in the Punjab-West Pakistan border during 1957-58 field
season bringing the total demarcated boundary to 167 miles as
against the total boundary of 318 miles on the Punjab-West Pakistan sector. A further length of 163 miles of the Indo-East Pakistan
boundary was demarcated during the 1956-57-58 field season bringing
the total area demarcated in this sector to 1,384 miles out of a total
length of 2,481 miles. Demarcation operations on both borders have
been resumed during the 1958-59 field season.
(c) Kashmir.-On 2 December 1957, the Security Council adopted a resolution, requesting the UN Representative, Dr. Frank. P.
Graham, to visit India and Pakistan and "make any recommendations to the parties for further appropriate action with a view to
making progress towards the implementation of the resolutions of
the United Nations Commission for India and Pakistan of 13 August
1948 and 5 January 1949 and towards a peaceful settlement". The
Government of India did not accept this resolution but offered the
traditional hospitality of the country to Dr. Graham who paid three
visits to Delhi in January and February 1958.
In the course of talks with Dr. Graham, India's position, as
already stated during the discussions in the Security Council and
elsewhere, was reiterated and it was pointed out that action had
to be taken by Pakistan to vacate the aggression in terms of the
Security Council resolution of 17 January 1948 and UNCIP resolutions which Pakistan had consistently violated for 10 years.
<pg20>
Dr. Graham put forward the following suggestions:
(1) A renewed declaration by both parties in favour of main-

taining an atmosphere of peace and observing the integrity of the cease-fire line. The Government of India
pointed out that they had strictly observed the ceasefire line and were, despite Pakistan cries of holy war,
maintaining a peaceful atmosphere. They stressed that
a renewed declaration was not necessary and that such
renewed declaration on its part might imply that there
had been a breach of it on its own side. The declarations are there and it is for the Government of Pakistan
to make amends for violating them so far.
(2) Withdrawal of Pakistan troops. This action had to be
taken by Pakistan and in Government of India's opinion
should certainly be taken so as to vacate the aggression.
(3) The placing of UN troops on Pakistan territory along
the Jammu and Kashmir border. The Government considered the proposal to bring in foreign troops regrettable, but felt that it was for Pakistan to agree or not
to agree to it as the proposal related to Pakistan territory only and not to the Jammu and Kashmir State of
India.
(4) A meeting of the two Prime Ministers under Dr.
Graham's chairmanship India was agreeable to a
meeting of the two Prime Ministers wherever this might
be considered feasible and profitable, but the Government of India made it clear that it was not agreeable
to such a meeting taking place under anyone's chairmanship.
Dr. Graham submitted his report to the Security Council on 28
March 1958.
There have been no further developments on the settlement of
the Kashmir question.
(d) Canal Waters.-Mr. W. A. B. Iliff, Vice-President of the
World Bank, paid a visit to India and Pakistan in January 1958 and
held discussions with the representatives of the two Governments
with a view to exploring the possiblity of the settlement of the IndoPakistan Canal Water Dispute.
On the invitation of Mr. W. A. B. Iliff further talks were held
in Rome with effect from 24 April 1958. It was decided at the Rome
talks that Pakistan should be asked to submit a plan of works with
supporting hydrological studies, schedule of construction, schedule
<pg21>
of yearly cost and schedule of additional Indian withdrawals, at the

next meeting to be held in London.
At the meeting in London which was held in July 1958, the
Pakistan plan was given to the Indian representative by Mr. Iliff.
The comments on the Pakistan plan together with the proposals
formulated by the Government of India have been handed over to
the World Bank representative at the talks resumed in Washington
in the beginning of December 1958.
(e) Evacuee Property.-No progress was made in respect of the
implementation of the various measures discussed at the meetings
held in the course of the previous year, due to lack of co-operation
from the Government of Pakistan. On 8 September 1958, the
Government of Pakistan passed an Amending Act imposing a ban
on declaration of Evacuee Property as Non-Evacuee Property in
future and providing for a review of doubtful cases by the High
Court. This is a retrograde step and is likely to prejudice the
interests of the minority community in Pakistan.
(f) Financial Matters.-As a result of the correspondence carried
on between the Governments of the two countries during the course
of the year, settlement was reached on the following financial
issues:
(1) The last date for registration of claims for transfer of
Postal Savings Bank Accounts from Pakistan to India
and vice-versa was extended to 14 November 1958.
(2) Agreement was reached for transfer to India of Postal
Certificates pledged as security to pledgees in Pakistan.
The last date for registration of claims in this regard
was six months from the date of release of securities
or 1 August 1958 whichever was later.
(3) Arrangements have also been made for the remittance
of maturity proceeds of Postal Life Insurance Policies.
(g) Trade.-The Indo-Pakistan Trade Agreement 1957-60 provides for six-monthly review of the working of the Agreement. The
first meeting was held at Karachi in December 1957.
Since then, there has been serious deterioration in the working
of the Agreement. Towards the end of 1957, `Operation Close Door'
was launched by the Government of Pakistan, ostensibly to prevent
smuggling. As a result of the restrictive and repressive measures
adopted by the Military authorities entrusted with the job, the
border trade suffered a great set-back. Sealing of the Tripura
border for some time and promulgation of the Martial Law dealt a
<pg22>
further severe blow bringing the border trade to a complete stand-

still. The whole issue is proposed to be discussed at the next conference to be held for a review of the Trade Agreement.
A request for supply of 10,000 maunds of Madras Short Erect
Variety of groundnut seeds to the Government of East Pakistan was
received from the High Commissioner for Pakistan in India in the
last week of August, almost the fag-end of the season. Though the,
export of groundnut seed out of India is prohibited and the internal
supply position was difficult, the Government of India agreed, as a
special friendly gesture, to supply 6,000 maunds of groundnut seeds
to Pakistan to assist the Pakistan cultivators. An export permit
valid upto 31 December 1958 was issued.
(h) Steering Committees.-In spite of India's efforts to hold a
meeting of the Steering Committees no final date could be fixed.
Efforts to hold a meeting at an early date are being continued. However, some progress has been made in settling items of dispute allotted to the Ministries concerned for settlement by direct negotiations.
(i) Minorities in East Pakistan.-During the year 1958, 4,898
Hindus migrated from East Pakistan to India as against 10,920 in,
1957.
A number of cases of crimes against and harassment of members:
of the minority community in East Pakistan came to the notice of
the Government of India. Several cases of harassment of migrants
and passengers from East Pakistan by the Customs authorities and
seizure of gold ornaments and other personal effects, in contravention of the Indo-Pakistan Baggage Rules, were also reported. These
cases were taken up with the Government of Pakistan in accordance,
with the Prime Ministers' Agreement of April 1950.
(j) Shrines and Holy Places.-The Indo-Pakistan Joint Committee on Shrines set up in pursuance of the Pant-Mirza Agreement
of May 1955 to work out details of implementation of the 1953 Agreement of Shrines met at Karachi on 24 and 25 January 1958. The
following decisions were reached at the meeting:(1) The number of important shrines, the preservation and
maintenance of which should be made the special responsibility of the Government, should be limited to 200
in each country. The number is subject to revision at
the time of finalisation of the lists of shrines.
(2) Each country will be responsible for the preparation of
the final list of shrines in the other country, which would
be placed under the special care of the Government of
that country. Each country would, however, furnish
<pg23>
the other country with a list of important shrines in its

own territory for purposes of checking and comparison.
For reviewing the progress with regard to the above decision
and also for consideration of other allied matters, the Joint Cornmittee agreed to hold its next meeting at New Delhi in March 1958.
The following tentative agenda was agreed upon for the meeting:(1) Pooling of all income of the shrines in each country in
a separate account and utilization of funds in the
account for the purpose of maintenance and repairs of
the holy places.
(2) Posting of Khadims, Sewadars, Pujaris etc. to look after
important shrines in the two countries and payment of
their expenses from the income of the shrines.
(3) Liberalisation of travel and other facilities to pilgrims
and pilgrim parties to the holy places in the two
countries.
An invitation was extended to the Government of Pakistan to
send their representatives for the second meeting of the Joint Cornmittee at New Delhi on 24 and 25 March 1958. The Government of
Pakistan replied that the dates proposed for the meeting were not
convenient to them and that a further communication would follow
suggesting suitable dates for the meeting. That communication is
still awaited. The High Commission of India, Karachi are pressing
the Government of Pakistan for an early meeting of the Joint
Committee.
During the year ending 31 December 1958, 16 officially sponsored
pilgrim parties from Pakistan comprising 1,443 Muslim pilgrims
visited shrines in India and 3 officially sponsored pilgrim parties
from India comprising 1,054 Hindu and Sikh pilgrims visited shrines
in West Pakistan.
D. SOUTH EAST ASIA, AUSTRALIA AND NEW ZEALAND
Relations between India and the countries in the South-East
Asia region and Australia and New Zealand continued to be cordial
and friendly.
(i) Indo-China.-(a) International Commissions.-The International Commissions for Supervision and Control in Vietnam and
Cambodia continued their activities during the year. The stalemate
in Vietnam continues. No progress has been made towards consultations between the competent representative authorities of the two
zones on the subject of unification on the basis of general elections.
After the supplementary elections in Laos had been completed,
the International Commission in Laos adjourned sine die on 19 July

<pg24>
1958 with a provision that it may be reconvened in accordance with
normal procedure. The offices of this Commission in Laos have
closed and India's Alternate Delegate on the International Commission in Saigon has been appointed as India's representative on
the Laos Commission.
(b) Relations with Indo-China States.-Our relations with the
States in Indo-China continue to be cordial. To strengthen our
cultural relations with these countries, we have proposals to invite
a scholar each from Laos, Cambodia, North Vietnam and South,
Vietnam for a study tour of India. Arrangements are being made
to present books worth Rs. 1,000 to the Republic of Vietnam (South
Vietnam) and agricultural implements worth Rs. 5,000 to Cambodia.
It has also been decided to make a gift of cattle (8 bulls and 50
cows) to Cambodia.
Relations between Cambodia and Thailand took a turn for the
worse when diplomatic relations between those two countries were
suspended from 1 December 1958. At the request of the Government of Cambodia, the Government of India have agreed to look
after Cambodia's interests in Thailand.
Two Indian Naval Ships "Tir" and "Cauvery" visited Saigon
(South Vietnam) from 25 July to 29 July 1958. and the Indian flagship "Mysore" paid a visit to Haiphong (North Vietnam) from 18
August to 21 August 1958. These visits were greatly appreciated
and warmly welcomed by the host countries.
At the invitation of the Government of India, Dr. Ho-Chi-Minh,
President of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam (North Vietnam)
visited India from 5 to 13 February 1958. The President visited
places of historical and cultural interests, hydroelectric projects,.
industrial centres and Community Development Projects. The
opportunity was also taken for an informal exchange of views
between the President and the Prime Minister of India.
His Royal Highness Prince Norodom Sihanouk, Prime Ministerof Cambodia visited India from 10 August to 13 August 1958.
(ii) Indonesia.-During his tour undertaken for rest on medical
advice, Dr. Soekarno, President of Indonesia, accompanied by an
entourage of 13 persons paid a brief visit to India from 6 to 12
January 1958. During his stay in Delhi, he had discussions with the
Prime Minister on various matters of mutual interest.
On the invitation of the President of Indonesia,. the President
of India paid a State visit to Indonesia for 12 days from 8 to 19
December 1958.

<pg25>
A large number of Indonesian personnel arrived in India during
this period for training in various fields.
(iii) Malaya.-The President paid a State visit to Malaya from
6 to 8 December 1958, on the invitation of the Paramount Ruler of
the Federation of Malaya. The President's visit contributed in a
substantial manner towards the development of further co-operation
and understanding between India and Malaya.
In June 1958, 150,000 doses of anti-cholera vaccine costing about
Rs. 11,000 were supplied to the Government of the Federation of
Malaya as gift from the Government of India.
The Ministry of External Affairs continued to extend its good
offices in meeting various requests from the Government of Malaya
regarding educational facilities for Malayan students and training
facilities in various spheres.
(iv) Singapore.-Relations between India and Singapore continued to be friendly. The decision taken earlier by the two Governments, to extend reciprocal facilities for the acquisition of Indian
and Singapore citizenship to the citizens of Singapore and India
respectively on the basis of two-year period of residence was given
practical effect by necessary legislation in both countries.
(v) Philippines.-Relations between India and the Philippines
continued to be friendly.
The President of the Philippines had invited our President to
visit the Philippines on his way back from Japan. But it was not
found possible to accept this invitation as the President's schedule
did not allow any modification.
The Philippines abolished the annual immigration quota of 50
persons from India. Negotiations are now underway to arrive at an
understanding as to the rights of entry to be enjoyed by the nationals
of one country in the other.
(vi) Thailand.-The relations between India and Thailand continued to be friendly.
100,000 does of anti-cholera vaccine costing about Rs. 7,000 were
sent to the Embassy of India, Bangkok for presentation to the Thai
Government as gift from the Government of India to help combat
an epidemic of cholera.
<pg26>

(vii) Australia.-Relations between India and Australia continued to be friendly. Smt. Lakshmi N. Menon, Deputy Minister for
External Affairs, went on a good-will tour of Australia and New
Zealand in January-February 1958. It was decided in return to
invite a prominent lady from Austrlia to visit India during
December 1958, as guest of the All-India Women's Conference.
Accordingly, an invitation was extended to Senator Nancy E.
Buttfield, Member of the Upper House of the Federal Parliament
of Australia. Senator Buttfield accepted the invitation and visited
India in December 1958.
(viii) New Zealand.-On the invitation of the Government of
India, the Right Hon'ble Walter Nash, Prime Minister of New
Zealand visited India from 17 to 21 March 1958. During his brief
visit the Prime Minister saw some of the projects for which New
Zealand had provided sizeable assistance under the Colombo Plan.
The Office of the New Zealand High Commissioner in India was
opened in November 1958.
(ix) Fiji.-A visit by Swami Ranganathananda of the
Ramakrishna Mission to Fiji was arranged as part of the cultural
activities of the Government of India.
E. EAST ASIA
(i) China.-Relations between the two countries continued to
be cordial. At the 13th session of the U.N, India's Representative
reaffirmed India's support for China's claim to its rightful place in
the World Organization. India also supported China's stand vis-avis the off-shore Islands and advocated a peaceful solution of the
Taiwan and off-shore Islands dispute.
At the invitation of the Chinese Government, Dr. Punjab Rao
Deshmukh, Central Minister for Co-operation and Shri V. P. Naik,
Bombay Minister for Agriculture, paid a visit to China to study the
measures employed in China for the improvement of her agriculture.
On the occasion of the opening ceremony of China's first atomic
reactor, Shri Jagdish Shankar attended the function on behalf of
India. Besides these official delegations, several non-official visitors
visited China.
Under our cultural activities programme a small team of Chinese
artists is expected to visit India shortly. The Ministry of SR & CA
is also helping the Chinese Government to select teachers and
musicians for their Dance Academy at Peking.
<pg27>
(ii) Japan.-The President paid a State visit to Japan during
the months of September and October 1958. It was the first occasion

that the President left the shore of India to pay a State visit to
another country. The visit was greatly appreciated by the Emperor,
the Government and the people of Japan.
The year marked a substantial increase of co-operation and understanding with Japan in economic as well as cultural fields.
Agreement was reached with Japan on the question of the release
of Japanese assets held in India by the Custodian of Enemy Property.
Under our cultural programme a dance and music troupe consisting of eminent artists like Ravi Shankar, Kamla Laxman and
Damayanti Joshi were sent to Japan in April this year. This greatly,
stimulated interest in Indian dancing and music.
It is proposed to send shortly Indian feature films for exhibition
in Japan. Similarly, it is proposed to present Hindi books to the
Japanese Universities.
(iii) Mongolia.-The three horses presented to the President,
Vice-President and the Prime Minister of India during our VicePresident's visit to Mongolia in 1957 arrived in India in the month
of November.
A two-man Trade Delegation from Mongolia visited India during
December to explore the possibilities of establishing closer trade
connections between the two countries.
(iv) Korea.-The Government of India continued their efforts
at the United Nations to promote peaceful solution of the problem
of unification of the two Koreas.
Despite all efforts, eleven ex-Korean Prisoners of War were not
accepted by any neutral nation.
F. WEST ASIA
India's relations with the countries of West Asia continued to be
cordial. Steps were taken to further the bonds of friendship and
good-will already existing and to promote better understanding
between them and India.
Although this year again the provision for cultural activities had
to be curtailed due to the difficult foreign exchange position, under
the Cultural Activities Programme several measures were adopted
to foster better cultural understanding between the peoples of these
countries and the people of India. Grants-in-aid were given. to the
Indo-Iranian and Indo-Turkish Cultural Associations at Tehran and
<pg28>
Ankara respectively, the India Union, Cairo, and the Indo-Arab
Society, Bombay. AU these bodies are engaged in promoting

cultural relations between India and the Arab countries. Books have
been sent for presentation to some of the institutes and libraries in
these countries. Scholarships have been provided for West Asian
and North African students to study in India. Facilities have also
been extended to private students who have come either for working
in Universities in India or undertaking study tours to various Agricultural and Scientific centres.
(i) Iran.-At the request of the Iranian Consul General at
Bombay, the Bombay State Government recognized the Iranian
Cultural institute at Bombay and afforded requisite facilities to it.
The Government of India continued to look after the Iranian
interests in China through Indian Missions in that country.
The Instruments of Ratification of the Indo-Iranian Anti-Locust
Convention, which had been signed between the two countries in
July 1954, were exchanged at Tehran on 24 May 1958.
The Instruments of Ratification of the Indo-Iranian Cultural
Agreement were exchanged at Tehran on 3 November 1958.
Negotiations for an Air Agreement between the Governments
of India and Iran have been concluded. Arrangements are in hand
for the signing of the formal Agreement.
The Government of India- presented exhibits worth Rs. 5,000 to
the Red Lion and Sun Society of Iran. Handloom and handicraft
goods worth Rs. 22,500 were sent to Tehran for sale at the India
Show Room to the diplomatic personnel in Iran. Exhibits worth
about Rs. 2,500 from the India Show Room at Tehran were presented
to Iranian personalities by our Ambassador.
At the request of the Iranian Embassy in India, a five months
tour of India was arranged for an Iranian Engineer Abbas
Oroumchian for a study of dam construction in India. At the invitation of the National Iranian Oil Company, Tehran, Shri M. B.
Ramachandra Rao of the Oil and Natural Gas Commission visited
Iran to, attend the half-centenary celebrations of the Iranian Oil
industry.
A group of 6 professors and 14 students of the Tehran University
Law Faculty, Department of Public Administration visited India on
a study tour for about two weeks in March-April 1958. At the invitation of the Iranian authorities, a batch of five Indian students
visited Iran in July 1958 to participate in the students' camp held at
Ramsar (Iran).
<pg29>
Mr. Mohd. Taqi Mustafavi, Director General, Department of

Archaeology, Government of Iran, visited museums, libraries and
monuments in India in June 1958.
Under the Indo-Iranian Treaty of Commerce and Navigation,
which came into force in May 1957, the Government of Iran has
granted the "most-favoured-nation treatment" to the Indian exports
to Iran, since August 1958.
Two Iranian cartographists, Engineers Ebrahimi and Nouri, visited
the Survey of India Offices at Dehra Doon in November 1958.
The Government of Iran, in collaboration with the UNESCO held
a symposium at Tehran (Iran) in October 1958 on Salinity problems
in the Arid Zones. Two officers of the Ministry of Food and Agriculture, one officer from Bombay Government and Dr. L. A. Ramdas,
Assistant Director, National Physical Laboratory, attended the
symposium.
Dr. Zoriassatein, Director General of Medical and Public Health
Laboratories in Iran, visited important Public Health Organizations,
Public Health Laboratories and Food and Drugs Control Organizations in this country.
Professor Indu Shekhar continues to work as Professor of Sanskrit
and Indology at the University of Tehran.
(ii) Iraq.-India recognized the Republic of Iraq which was
established in July 1958. At the request of the new Government for
the services of two highly qualified irrigation engineers for a few
weeks to advise them on their irrigation and power projects, the
Chairman of the Central Water and Power Commission and a
Director of the Bhakra Dam Designs Directorate, visited Iraq. The
Iraqi Government expressed great appreciation of their services.
An Iraqi Trade Delegation visited India and a new Trade Agreement was concluded.
(iii) Lebanon.-India agreed to serve on the UN Observation
Group in the Lebanon. She provided one of the three members of
the Group and also sent a team of military officers to act as
observers. The services of the Indian representative and the Indian
contingent of observers were greatly appreciated by all concerned,
including the UN.
(iv) Palestine Refugees.-As in previous years, India contributed
to the relief of Palestine refugees by donating goods to the UNWRA.
<pg30>
(v) Saudi-Arabia.-A Saudi-Arabian Trade Delegation visited
India in March 1958 to promote trade between India and Saudi-

Arabia and held discussions with the Ministries of External Affairs,
and Commerce and Industry.
(vi) Turkey.-Dr. Manilal Patel. an Indian Professor of Sanskrit
and Indology continues at the University of Istanbul (Turkey).
Negotiations are being made for securing the services of a Turkish
Professor for Aligarh University.
G. AFRICA
(i) Sudan.-The new Government of the Sudan established in,
November 1958 was recognized by India. Cultural exchanges continued and a number of Sudanese students came to India, while Indian
teachers were welcomed in the Sudan.
(ii) Morocco and Tunisia.-The decision to establish diplomatic
relations with Morocco and Tunisia was implemented during thecourse of the year.
(iii) United Arab Republic.-On the merger of the former States
of Syria and Egypt into the United Arab Republic, India recognized
the new Union.
The Government of India continued to look after the interests of
the United Arab Republic in the United Kingdom and France and
their territories.
A Cultural Agreement with the new Government was signed on
25 September 1958. It provides, inter alia, for the exchange of
teachers, award of scholarships and training of each other's nationals
in scientific, technical and industrial institutions.
A mobile dispensary van has been presented to the Government
of the United Arab Republic on behalf of the Prime Minister and
the people of India. The van was purchased out of the funds
received by the Prime Minister from time to time for relief work
in Port Said.
The Indian contingent continued to participate in the UN Emergency Force in Egypt.
(iv) British East Africa.Kenya.-Although additional African representation in the Legislative Council was introduced from April 1958, raising the number
of African elected Members, there has been little progress towards,
the establishment of responsible self-government in Kenya.
<pg31>
Uganda.-The first direct election of African Members to the

Legislative Council was held in October 1958. The Uganda National
Congress emerged as the largest political party.
Her Majesty's Government has agreed to the appointment in the
near future of a Constitution Committee to consider and recommend
the form of direct elections on a common roll for Representative
Members of the Legislative Council to be introduced in 1961, the
number of representative seats to be filled, their allocation among
the different areas of the Protactorate and the method of ensuring
that there will be adequate representation on the Legislative Council
for non-Africans.
Tanganyika.-The first Legislative Council elections were held in
September 1958 in five constituencies and the Tanganyika African
National Union swept the polls. The second round of elections is
expected to be held in February 1959.
The other important event in the territory was an inter-territorial
Conference of African Leaders in September 1958. The 21 African
leaders who attended from five territories-Uganda, Kenya,
Tanganyika, Zanzibar and Nyasaland-agreed to form a "PanAfrican Freedom Movement of East and Central Africa".
Zanzibar.-In a statement in the House of Commons, the Colonial
Secretary expressed the view that Zanzibar's future should be a
multi-racial State, ruled by an Arab dynasty, whose position was
supported and guaranteed by Her Majesty's Government. The longterm destiny of Zanzibar was in the British Commonwealth of
Nations.
(v) Central Africa.-The general election held in the Federation
of Rhodesia and Nyasaland in November 1958 produced a landslide
victory for Sir Roy Welensky's United Federal Party, who won 44
out of the 53 elected seats. The new House has 59 seats, out of
which 53 seats are contested by open election and the remaining 6
are meant either for the specially elected European Members to
represent African interests or for the specially elected Africans from
the two Northern territories.
Madagascar.-The Provincial Assemblies of Madagascar meeting
in congress at Tananarive, following the island's approval of the new
French Constitution in the September 1958 Referendum, proclaimed
Madagascar a Republic and Member-State of the French Community.
Mauritius.-The revised Constitutional proposals based on the
recommendations of the Boundary Commission received Royal
<pg32>
assent on 7 May 1958. There will now be 40 single-member constituencies on a system of Universal Suffrage. There will also be 3

official Members and not more than 12 Members nominated by the
Governor.
The first general election of the Colony on the basis of Universal
Suffrage is, likely to be held in March 1959.
(vi) West Africa.Ghana.-The Prime Minister of Ghana, the Honourable
Dr. Kwame Nkrumah, visited India from 22 December 1958 to 8
January 1959 at the invitation of the Government of India. This
has helped to further strengthen the close and friendly relations
that exist between India and Ghana. Ever since Ghana's independence, the desire for freedom has received a new impetus all
over Africa.
Early in 1958, the Government of Ghana approached the Government of India to assist in securing the services of Engineers, Architects, Works Superintendents, Doctors, Geologists, Agricultural
Scientists, Materials Engineers, Surveyors and Science Teachers for
service under the Ghana Government. The Government of India
agreed to assist and requisitions since received for particular
technicians are being processed in consultation with the Ghana High
Commissioner in Delhi.
Guinea.-In the French Referendum of September 1958, the
former West African Territory of French Guinea was the only one
to return a negative vote to General de Gaulle's proposals for
Membership of the French Community. Immediately thereafter, the
President of the Territorial Assembly proclaimed the new Republic
of Guinea and, among others, approached the Prime Minister of India
for recognition of the new State. The State has been recognized
by the Government of India and Guinea had also been admitted as
the 82nd Member of the United Nations.
On 23 November 1958, the Prime Ministers of Ghana and Guinea
issued a joint declaration agreeing to constitute Ghana and Guinea
as the nucleus of a Union of West African States. The two States
have agreed, as a first step, to adopt a Union flag-, develop the closest
contacts and harmonious defence, foreign and economic policies.
The next step would be the formulation of a Constitution.
Nigeria.-The resumed Nigerian Constitutional Conference met
in London from 29 September to 27 October 1958. The Northern
Region will become self-governing on 15 March 1959; the Western
and the Eastern regions are already enjoying this status. The
<pg33>
Federation of Nigeria will become fully independent on 1 October
1960. Britain and Nigeria also reached unanimous agreement on the

help they will give each other in defence and other matters after
the Federation of Nigeria becomes independent in 1960.
The Assistant Commissioner for India started functioning at
Lagos from November 1958.
Cameroons.-In October/November 1958, a UN Commission composed of USA, Haiti, India and New Zealand visited the British and
the French Cameroons to make its recommendations to the UN
Trusteeship Council as to how the views of the people on their future
could be best ascertained. The British and the French had informed
the Trusteeship Council that they would not be able to administer
the Cameroons as a Trust Territory after 1960.
(vii) South Africa.-The South African Government continued
to pursue its policy of apartheid and issued proclamations under the
Group Areas Act, establishing separate group areas for the different
racial communities inhabiting the Union of South Africa. Proclamations were issued in respect of several towns and cities in the
provinces of Natal, Transvaal and the Cape of Good Hope, including
Durban, Pretoria, Klerksdorp, Ermelo, White River, Ventersdorp,
Alexandria and Moorreesburg, which will affect the life and property
of several thousands of people of Indian origin, Africans and other
non-European population of that country. These developments were
again brought to the notice of the United Nations General Assembly,
which expressed its disapproval of such discriminatory racial policies
by an overwhelming majority.
(viii) Ethiopia.-Relations with Ethiopia continued to be friendly.
The Haile Selassie I Military Academy for the establishment and
running of, which Indian, Military and Civilian officers had been
seconded for service under the Ethiopian Government, was inaugurated in October 1958, by His Imperial Majesty the Emperor of
Ethiopia. The Government of India was represented on the occasion
by its Ambassador and by a Major-General of the Indian Army. A
silver Ashoka Pillar was presented to the Academy on this occasion
on behalf of the Armed Forces of India.
Training facilities for Ethiopian Military officers and Naval
cadets who were in India continued to be given at the Defence
Services Staff College, Wellington and the National Defence
Academy, Khadakvasla, respectively. Two additional Military
Officers and two, Naval cadets from Ethiopia arrived in India during
the year to receive training at these Institutions.
<pg34>
H.EUROPE
Our relations with all European countries continued to be
cordial. For better understanding between India and the

European countries, various schemes of cultural, trade and
academic exchanges were carried out during the year. Offers of
scholarships were received from Austria, Belgium, Czechoslovakia,
France, Germany, Italy, the Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Switzerland, Spain and USSR. The Government of India greatly appreciated these offers and accepted them whenever possible. The significant developments in India's relations with different countries are
given below:
(i) Albania.-Shri Khub Chand presented his credentials as
Minister of India in Albania on 10 May 1958.
(ii) Austria.-In response to an invitation extended by the Government last year, His Excellency Dr. Loopold Figl, Foreign Minister of Austria, came to India on a State visit from 4 to 10 March
1958.
(iii) Belgium.-A six-member delegation of the Belgo-Indian
Chamber of Commerce visited India during February 1958. A
donation by the Governor of the Province of Limburg for the relief
of sufferers in the Asansol mine disaster was gratefully received.
(iv) Bulgaria.-Nawab Ali Yavar Jung presented his credentials
on 22 October 1958.
(v) Czechoslovakia.-The Vice-President of India visited Czechoslovakia on his way to Paris. Two Indian artists participated in the
International Radio Competition organized by Czechoslovakia
Radio.
The Czechoslovak Government offered scholarships for Indian
students for practical training and research work. Books were also
exchanged between various institutions of both countries.
(vi) France.-An Economic and Technical Co-operation Agreement was signed between the two countries early this year. An
invitation from the Government to send a cultural delegation to
India early in 1959 has been accepted by the Government of France.
The Vice-President of India was a State guest in France and had
talks with General de Gaulle during his stay in Paris. M. Andre
Malraux, Minister Delegate and Special Envoy of General de Gaulle
visited India from 26 November to 7 December 1958.
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS
This is a brief summary of the activities of the Ministry of
External Affairs during the year 1958-59.
The year was marked by crises in West Asia and tensions in
East Asia and Europe. India continued her efforts to bring about

relaxation of tension. The Prime Minister appealed to the President
of the United States to withdraw the United States forces from
the Lebanon and allow the United Nations to deal with the matter.
India agreed to serve on the U.N. Observation Group in the Lebanon
and sent a team of military officers to act as observers. The
services of the Indian representative and the Indian contingent of
observers were greatly appreciated. India supported the People's
Republic of China's stand on the question of the off-shore islands
and urged a peaceful solution of the off-shore islands and Taiwan
problem. She was one of the co-sponsors of the resolution in the
General Assembly which called on the Member-States to live up
to the principles of the Charter and to resort to the U.N. for peaceful
solution of disputes. She continued her efforts at the United Nations
to promote a peaceful solution of the problem of unification of
the two Koreas and to bring the U.S.S.R. and the Western Powers
to agree on the composition of the Preparatory Committee for
cooperation in the study of outer space for peaceful purposes.
Canal Waters
The Vice-President of the World Bank Mr. W. A. B. Illiff visited
India and Pakistan in January 1958 to explore with the representatives of the two Governments ways and means of bringing
about a settlement of the Indo-Pakistan differences over the Canal
Water question. At his invitation further talks were held in Rome
from 24 April when Pakistan was asked to submit a plan of works
which was handed over to the Indian representative at a meeting
held in London in July. The Government of India's comments
on the plan as well as their proposals were handed over to the
representative of the World Bank in December 1958. Discussions
between the World Bank authorities and the Indian and Pakistani
delegations are going on at Washington.
<pg1>
Kashmir
Dr. Graham visited India and Pakistan in pursuance of the
resolution of the Security Council of 2 December 1957 which called
upon him to make recommendations to the parties to take approprivate action for implementation of the U.N.C.I.P. resolutions and
for a peaceful settlement. Dr. Graham submitted his report to
the Security Council on 28 March 1958. There has been no progress
towards resolving the situation. created by Pakistan's aggression in
Kashmir.
Portuguese Possessions
The Government of India repeatedly made it clear that they
would not use force for the liberation of the people in the Portuguese
enclaves. The Goan political parties continued their non-violent
methods to free themselves from the colonial rule. In the `Right of
Passage' case before the International Court of Justice, the Govern-

ment of India submitted their Counter-Memorial on 25 March 1958.
The Portuguese submitted their reply on 25 July 1958; and at our
request the Court fixed 26 January 1959 for the submission of
India's rejoinder. The Portuguese police violated Indian territory
on more than fifteen occasions and the Government of India protested in respect of two such incidents. There have been a number
of desertions of Portuguese soldiers and Goan recruits, to India.
Apartheid
The Government of South Africa issued proclamations under
the Group Areas Act establishing separate group areas in several
towns and cities. These would affect the life and property of several
thousands of South African nationals of non-European origin. The
Government of India continued to voice their opposition to racial
discrimination and again brought this matter to the notice of
the United Nations General Assembly. The Assembly expressed
its disapproval of such discriminatory racial policies and appealed
to South Africa to revise its policy in the light of the principles
and purposes of the Charter and of world opinion.
Colonialism
The Government of India welcomed the emergence of the new
Republic of Guinea and, at the U.N., sponsored a resolution which
congratulated France on her agreement to give Togoland independence in 1960. They also upheld the right of the Cypriots to selfgovernment and urged negotiations between the Algerians and
the French. The Prime Minister of India sent congratulations to
the Prime Minister of the West Indies on the inauguration of the
first Parliament of the West Indies.
<pg2>
Indians Abroad
On the question of the treatment of people of Indian origin
in South Africa, the U.N. General Assembly adopted a resolution
urging the parties concerned to enter into negotiations. The Indian
High Commission in Colombo took measures to repatriate at the
cost of the Government of India, those people of Indian origin in
Ceylon who wanted to return to India.
India's Neighbours
Border incidents created by Pakistan led to serious deterioration
in Indo-Pakistan relations. The Government of India continued
their efforts to maintain peaceful conditions on the border. The
meeting between the Prime Ministers of India and Pakistan in Delhi
in September 1958 to discuss settlement of boundary disputes
lessened the tension for a time. At the meeting, several minor
disputes were settled and an agreement was reached for the exchange

of old Cooch-Behar enclaves in East Pakistan with Pakistani enclaves in India. A stretch of 210 miles of Indo-Pakistan border
was demarcated during 1956-58 and operations for 1958-59 have
begun. Restrictive measures adopted by Pakistan have hampered
the working of the Indo-Pakistan Trade Agreement 1957-60. During
1958, 4,898 Hindus migrated from East Pakistan to India. as against
10,930 in 1957. At a meeting of the Indo-Pakistan Joint Committee
on Shrines it was agreed that the number of shrines, the maintenance
and preservation of which should be the special responsibility of
each Government, should be limited to 200 but there has been no
follow up. The abrogation of the Constitution, the dissolution of
the National Assembly and the prohibition of political parties by
President General Mirza and the assumption, about three weeks
later, by General Ayub Khan, of the office of President of Pakistan
in October put an end to constitutional and parliamentary government in that country. The intensity and frequency of border
incidents have increased. There has been no improvement though
Government of India are continuing their efforts to reduce tension
in border areas and improve Indo-Pakistan relations.
Relations with other neighbours continued to remain close and
friendly. An agreement between the Governments of India and
Nepal was signed on 20 November 1958 for the construction of
the Trisuli Hydro-Electric Project at a cost of Rs. 3.5 crores to be
met out of the Indian aid programme. A Tripartite Tele-Communication Agreement between the Governments of Nepal, the United
States of America and India was signed in June 1958. The Government of India agreed to lend he Government of Nepal 1.5 wireless
sets for use in the general elections in Nepal and sold to the Royal
Nepal Airlines at concessional rates one Dakota aircraft.
The Deputy Minister for External Affairs paid a two-day visit
to Rangoon. A Burmese Economic Delegation came to Delhi to
<pg3>
explore the possibilities of increasing trade between the two
countries. A Protocol to the Trade Agreement 1956 setting forth
the measures to be taken by the two Governments was signed in
September 1958. A further loan of Rs. 5 crores was made to the
Government of Burma under the terms of the Indo-Burma Financial
Agreement 1957.
An Indian Trade Delegation visited Afghanistan in July 1958
and negotiated a fresh Trade Agreement. The Government of India
continued the meteorological and aeronautical facilities provided by
them at Kabul and Kandahar, and presented to the Small Industries
Museum at Kabul goods worth Rs. 15,000.
Traffic rights at Bombay were extended to Air Ceylon. During
the disorders following the language controversy, the Government
of Ceylon gave our High Commissioner assistance in protecting the

lives and property of the people of Indian origin in Ceylon. Government of India donated Rs. 1 million in kind to assist in the rehabilitation and reconstruction programme undertaken by the
Government of Ceylon to repair the havoc wrought by the floods
of December 1957.
States in Special Treaty Relations with India
The Prime Minister's visit to Bhutan was a landmark in the
history of Indo-Bhutanese relations and immeasurably strengthened
the friendship between the two countries. Initial steps have been
taken to construct approach roads from West Bengal and Assam
to the border of Bhutan.
The Seven Year Development Plan of Sikkim made considerable headway. The Gangtok-Nathula road which connects Gangtok
with the Sikkim-Tibet border was opened in September 1958.
Africa
India continued to evince great interest in the independent
nations of Africa. She agreed to assist `hana with the services
of Indian technicians and teachers. She promptly recognized
the United Arab Republic formed by the merger of the former
States of Syria and Egypt, signed a Cultural Agreement with the
new State, recognized the new Government of the Sudan established
in 1958, continued cultural exchanges with that country and
established diplomatic relations with Morocco and Tunisia.
Commonwealth
Commonwealth ties were strengthened by the visits of
H.R.H. The Duke of Edinburgh, the British Secretary of State for
<pg4>
Commonwealth Relations, and the Prime Ministers of Canada and
New Zealand. The Indian Deputy Minister of External Affairs
went on a goodwill tour of Australia and New Zealand, and the
Indian Finance Minister attended the Commonwealth Trade and
Economic Conference held at Ottawa. An Indian Delegation led
by Dr. Bhabha attended the Commonwealth Conference of Nuclear
Scientists.
West Asia
Steps were taken to further the bonds of friendship and goodwill
existing between India and the countries of West Asia. India
recognized the Republic of Iraq and concluded with it a new Trade
Agreement; she also ratified the Indo-Iranian Cultural Agreement
and the Government of Iran granted the most-favoured-nation treatment to imports from India.

East and South East Asia
The Government continued their efforts to secure the admission
of China to the U.N., supported the Chinese stand on the off-shore
islands and advocated a peaceful solution of the Taiwan and offshore islands dispute. Cooperation and understanding with Japan
in economic and cultural fields increased and it is proposed to send
Indian feature films and Hindi books to Japan. The Commissions
in Vietnam and Cambodia of which India is Chairman continued
their activities. That in Laos was adjourned sine die after the
supplementary elections in July 1958 with the provision that it
will reconvene when necessary in accordance with normal procedure.
We have proposals to invite a scholar each from Laos, Cambodia,
North Vietnam and South Vietnam for a study tour of India. Anticholera vaccine was sent as gift to Malaya. A delegation from
Mongolia visited India to explore the possibilities of closer trade
connection between the two countries.
Europe
The existing cordial relations with all European countries were
improved by various cultural, trade and academic exchanges. The
Cultural Agreement between India and Poland was ratified, an
Economic and Technical Cooperation Agreement was signed with
France and the close cooperation between the Federal Republic of
Germany and India in the fields of trade and industry continued.
The Soviet Union and India concluded a new Five Year Trade
Agreement and the former continued its cooperation with India in
establishing industrial enterprises. A separate Mission was opened
in Madrid.
<pg5>
The Americas
Discussions which the Indian Finance Minister had with various
authorities in the United States showed the confidence of the United
States in India's economic feature. There was also a growing
understanding of India's foreign policy in the United States. Several
agreements for loan were signed with the U.S. Export-Import Bank
and with the United States Government. The President of India
sent messages of congratulations to the new Presidents of Chile
and Argentina. The Governments of India and Bolivia decided to
establish diplomatic relations at Embassy level.
International Conferences
India was host to a joint session of the International Monetary
Fund, the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
and the International Finance Corporation in Delhi. India also
participated in a large number of Conferences held under the aegis

of the U.N., and its Specialized Agencies. An Indian delegation
attended the second session of the Asian-African Legal Consultative
Committee held in Cairo.
In the U.N., India again sought to raise the question of
admission of the People's Republic of China. India agreed to serve
on the U.N. Observation Group in the Lebanon. She moved a
resolution in the U.N. for the immediate discontinuance of nuclear
tests, supported a resolution urging negotiations between Algeria
and France, welcomed the admission of new members and upheld
the right of the Cypriot people to self-government. India also
participated in the United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea
held at Geneva.
North East Frontier Agency and Naga Hills - Tuensang Area
Progress was made in extending effective administration into
the interior of the North East Frontier Agency and in providing
basic amenities to the tribal people. More Community Development
and National Extension Service Blocks were opened, and the preparation of text-books for 15 major tribal dialects in the Devanagari
script is in progress. The Naga Hills and Tuensang Area continued
to be administered by the Governor of Assam as the Agent of
the President and under the control of this Ministry. The law
and order situation in the area improved considerably after the
creation of the New Unit on 1 December 1957. There was a significant surrender of arms and many underground hostiles have emerged
overground. The second Naga People's Convention held in May 1958
reinforced the Kohima Convention resolutions and condemned
violence.
<pg6>
Visits
During the year, the President paid State visits to Japan,
Malaya and Indonesia. The Vice-President was a State Guest in
France and paid a visit to-the Federal Republic of Germany. The
Deputy Minister of External Affairs paid a goodwill visit to Australia
and New Zealand. The large number of distinguished visitors to
India included H.R.H. the Duke of Edinburgh, the Presidents of
Yugoslavia, Vietnam and Indonesia and the Prime Ministers of
Ghana, Canada and Australia.
External Publicity
The External Publicity Division was given the additional duties
of establishing close liaison with the Films Division and the
All India Radio for the production of films and the provision of
news and feature services for external publicity, of looking after
the foreign press correspondents in India and of publicising the

activities Of the Ministry of External Affairs in Indian and foreign
press. For this purpose, a Press Relations Section under a Director
of Press Relations was set up. The External Publicity Division runs
49 separate information units and provides information services to
about 90 Indian posts abroad. Morse transmissions are at present
sent to 35 Posts and this is supplemented by a regular cable service
to important Posts which are not able to receive morse transmissions
and by ad hoc cable services on special occasions. Libraries attached
to the Indian Missions abroad were expanded. A review called
the "World Press Review" is issued everyday to 460 recipients,
including Indian and foreign press correspondents. The Division
assisted in India's participation in film festivals and exhibitions
and cultural activities in other countries.
Administration
Various sections in the Ministry have been re-organized on
an experimental basis. Responsibility for quick and efficient
disposal of work has been placed directly on an officer of the
rank of Under Secretary and subordinate staff reduced. It
has also been decided that normally no case will be dealt with
by more than two officers below the level of Secretary. These
measures have led to economies totalling Rs. 2,43,000 in pay and
allowances during a full year. An Economy Board was constituted
in 1958 to consider all cases relating to the creation of posts, continuance of temporary posts, etc. Recruitment to the various grades
of the Indian Foreign Service Branch `B' and its initial composition
have almost been completed. An Embassy was opened in Chile,
diplomatic relations were established with Spain and, consequent
on the merger of Syria and Egypt, the Embassy at Damascus gave
place to a Consulate General.
<pg7>
Finances
The total expenditure of the Ministry in 1958-59 is expected to
be Rs. 2315.58 lakhs. That on Tribal Areas and the Naga Hills Tuensang Area amounts to Rs. 843.78 lakhs and Rs. 312.66 lakhs
respectively. The expenditure on Pondicherry is Rs. 264.55 lakhs; that
on external relations proper amounts to Rs. 653.20 lakhs - Rs. 63.11
lakhs on the High Commissioner's office in London, Rs. 115.19
lakhs at Headquarters, Rs. 25.06 lakhs on account of hospitality
grant, Rs. 14.19 lakhs on donations and relief measures in foreign
countries, and Rs. 435.64 lakhs on 86 Missions and Posts abroad.
<pg8>
<pg35>

(vii) Federal Republic of Germany.-The close co-operation between the two countries in the fields of trade and industry continued. The visit of Dr. Ludwig Erhard, Vice-Chancellor and Minister
for Economic Affairs of the Federal German Government, to India
led to further understanding of each other's problems. The Agreements for Deferred Payments, for the establishment of a direct
Radio-telegraph and for the release of German assets vested in the
custody of Enemy Property in India, deserve mention.
At the invitation of President Heuss of the Federal Republic of
Germany, the Vice-President paid a visit to that country in November 1958.
A message of sympathy and a donation for the bereaved families
of the victims of the Chinakuri mining disaster was gratefully
received from the Ambassador of the Federal Republic of Germany.
(viii) Greece.-Shri Nawab Ali Yavar Jung presented his credentials at Athens. Proposals for the appointment of an Honorary
Consul at Athens and for concluding an Agreement for the avoidance of double-taxation are under consideration of the Government
of India.
(ix) The Holy See.-Mourning war observed on the passing
away of Pope Pius XII. The Ambassador of India to the Vatican
attended as our Special Representative the coronation of Pope John
XXIII.
(x) Hungary.-Dr. Ravaz Illes, Hony. Legal Adviser to our Legation in Budapest, visited India to study Indian Legal system. We
supplied groundnut seeds and mineral samples to some Hungarian
institutions.
(xi) Italy.-The Government of India propose to enter into
negotiations with the Government of Italy for a satisfactory disposal
of the Italian assets In India confiscated. during World War II. It
was also decided to establish a direct Radio-telegraph link between
the two countries.
(xii) The Netherlands.-An Indian trade delegation visited the
Netherlands in August 1958 in response to an invitation from the
Netherlands Government. A delegation from the Netherlands
visited India to conclude an Agreement for technical co-operation
in a hides and skins Project in Uttar Pradesh under the auspices of
the FAO.
<pg36>
(xiii) Poland.-The Cultural Agreement between India and
Poland was ratified during 1958. A protocol of trade-exchange for
1959 was also signed during the current year. The Polish Deputy

Minister for Foreign Trade visited India in September 1958. The
Government of India presented books to the Warsaw University and
decided to give financial aid to the Indo-Polish Cultural Association,
Warsaw. The Law Minister also visited Poland at the invitation of
the Polish Government. He was accompanied by some other Indian
lawyers.
(xiv) Rumania.-On 20 October 1958, an Agreement on Rumanian
assistance for the Assam Oil Refinery was signed in Bucharest.
(xv) Scandinavian Countries.-Mr. Einar Gerhardson, Prime
Minister of Norway, accompanied by the Foreign Minister Mr.
Halvard Lange paid a State visit to India from 27 November to 11
December 1958.
Lt.-Gen. Axel Liungdahl, C-in-C of the Royal Swedish Air Force,
came to India in November 1958 on a nine-day visit as a guest of
the Indian Air Force.
Of the different schemes of economic co-operation proposed between India and the Scandinavian countries, the proposals to conclude an Air Transport Agreement, for the conclusion of Avoidance
of Double Taxation Agreements, and for the establishment of direct
Radio-telegraph links with Sweden and Norway, are noteworthy.
A Danish delegation visited India in October/November 1958 for
negotiations on double taxation.
(xvi) Spain.-A separate Mission under the charge of Counsellor/
Charge d'Affairs was opened in Madrid this year. The High Commissioner of India in London has been concurrently accredited to
Spain as the Ambassador of India.
(xvii) Switzerland.-It has been decided to open a direct Radiotelegraph link with Switzerland; co-operation in various other fields
continued throughout the year.
(xviii) United Kingdom.-A Commonwealth Conference of
Nuclear Scientists was held in the United Kingdom from 15 to 20
September 1958. India was represented at the Conference by a sixmember delegation led by Dr. H. J. Bhabha, Chairman, Atomic
Energy Commission. The Conference was of an informal nature
designed to show the Commonwealth delegates the work being done.
at the UK atomic energy establishments and also to provide an
<pg37>
opportunity for informal discussion of their particular requirements
with reference to recent developments in the atomic energy field.
The Earl and Countess of Home paid a brief visit to Delhi during
February 1959.

(xix) U.S.S.R.-A Trade Delegation of representatives of the
tea, jute and coir industries visited USSR, Poland and East Germany
for investigating the possibilities of increased export. Recently
five Soviet tea-specialists visited India.
The Soviet Union and India concluded a new Five Year Trade
Agreement on 16 November 1958 by which both countries undertook "to increase the volume of trade with each other to a maximum
level on the basis of equality and mutual advantage."
An Air Transport Agreement and an Agreement on exchange of
parcels was also signed during the current year; a bi-weekly airservice has been established between Delhi and Moscow.
The Soviet Government continued its co-operation with India in
establishing industrial enterprises. The USSR agreed to extend
assistance to the Indian Institute of Technology, Bombay, and also
in the fields of education and agriculture.
Various non-official delegations, including a Lawyers' Delegation, visited the Soviet Union during the year. Four prominent
Indologists visited USSR in October and Professor C. V. Raman was
awarded the Lenin Peace Prize of 1956 at Moscow on 13 June 1958.
A delegation of Indian Workers of Art representing literature,
music, theatre and folk dance toured that country.
Two delegations representing All-India Women Conference and
All-India Congress Committee visited USSR on the invitation of the
Soviet authorities.
A delegation of eminent Indian scientists was led to the Soviet
Union by Professor M. S. Thacker, Secretary, Department of Scientific Research and Technical Education on the invitation of the
Academy of Sciences of USSR.
A senior officer of the Ministry of Commerce and Industry visited certain Soviet Republics in order to acquaint himself with the
methods of irrigation, construction, industrial enterprise, collective
and State farms, educational institutions and medical sciences.
A number of Soviet scholars came to India for research work.
<pg38>
(xx) Yugosiavia.-Nawab Ali Yavar Jung was appointed India's
Ambassador in Yugoslavia. Marshal Tito, accompanied by Madame
Jevanka Broz, paid a brief visit to India in January 1959. Their
visit further strengthened the existing close and friendly relations
between the two countries.

I. THE AMERICAS
India's relations with countries in the Americas continued to be
friendly througout 1958. At the end of the year there were signs
of greater co-operation in a number of fields.
NORTH AMERICA
(i) Canada.-At the invitation of the Prime Minister, the Rt.
Hon'ble John C. Diefenbaker accompanied by Mrs. Diefenbaker
visited India in November 1958. His engagements included talks
with the Prime Minister and the Members of the Planning Commission and an address to the Members of Parliament.
An Agreement was signed in October 1958 between Canada and
India, under which Canada will lend to India just over 8.8 million
dollars for the purchase of Canadian wheat or flour.
A delegation of 16 members from the National Defence College
Canada came to India. Dr. (Miss) Rosette Renshaw, a music critic
of Canada arrived in India in November 1958 to make a comparative study of Western and Indian Music in India for a period of one
year. The Canada Council for the Encouragement of the Arts,
Humanities and the Social Sciences awarded two Fellowships, tenable in Canada, to two Indian students during the academic year
1958-59.
On 31 March, the Canadian High Commissioner formally presented a pair of Beavers to the Prime Minister from the people of
Granby, Quebec, in token of their appreciation of the Prime Minister's gift to them of a baby elephant in 1955.
Shri C. S. Venkatachar presented his credentials as India's High
Commissioner to the acting Governor of Canada on 12 September
1958.
(ii) U.S.A.-At the invitation of the Government of the United
States, the Vice-President, Dr. Radhakrishnan paid a good-will visit
to the USA in April, 1958. Besides meeting several distinguished
Americans including the President, the Vice-President and the
Secretary of State, the Vice-President delivered lectures at the
Universities of Stanford, California (Berkeley), Columbia, Prince
ton, Harvard and Fisk.

<pg39>
In July, President Eisenhower wrote to the Prime Ministerexplaining the basis of the United States' action to send the United
States Marines to Lebanon, pledging the readiness of the US Government to withdraw their forces from Lebanon as soon as the
United Nations could act. In his reply the Prime Minister express-

ed his distress at the recent developments in West Asia and appealed to President Eisenhower to withdraw the United States Forces
from Lebanon and allow the United Nations to deal with this
situation. In September 1958, the Finance Minister visited the USA.
During his stay in Washington and New York, the Finance Minister
met leading members of the Administration including the Secretary
of State, as well as representatives of business, finance and the
Press. The private and public discussions showed confidence in.
India's economic future and a growing understanding of her foreign
policy in the USA. He also visited Canada and attended the Commonwealth Trade and Economic Conference held in Ottawa.
At the invitation of the Chief of the Army Staff, USA, and the,
Government of Canada, General K. S. Thimayya, Chief of the Army
Staff, India, paid a visit to the USA and Canada in September 1958.
In 1955, India undertook to assist in the repatriation of those
Chinese nationals resident in the United States who were desirous
of returning to China. One hundred and seven Chinese nationals
have so far been repatriated to the Chinese mainland with the
assistance of our Missions in the United States.
Shri M. C. Chagla presented credentials as India's Ambassador
to the USA to President Eisenhower on 8 December 1958. On the
occasion the President expressed the highest regard for what India
was doing for peace and democracy.
The following Agreements were entered into between the USA
and India:
(1) An Agreement with the US Department of State for the
transfer of $28 million of cotton in the P.L. 480 to wheat; (2) an
Agreement under which the US Export/Import Bank will extend a
credit of $150 million to finance the acquisition of United States
capital equipment and the Department Loan Fund will advance
$75 million: (3) an Agreement with the Export/Import Bank for loan
of $20 million from the Asian Economic Development Fund for Orissa
Iron Ore Project, and (4) an Agreement with the USA to finance
the sale to India of $238:8 million worth of United States surplus
agricultural commodities.
<pg40>
CENTRAL AMERICA
(i) Costa Rica.-The President of India sent a message of greetings to the new President of Costa Rica, Mr. Mario Echandi Jimenez,
and the Indian Ambassador in Buenos Aires attended the Presidential inauguration held an 8 May 1958.
(ii) Mexico.-The President of India sent a message of greetings
to the new President of Mexico, H.E. Licenciado Don Adolfo Lopez

Mateos, and the Indian Ambassador in Washington attended as a
Special Envoy the Presidential inauguration held on 1 December
1958.
The Indian Red Cross sent a sum of Rs. 5,000 to be used as relief
of the distressed in the serious floods which occurred in Mexico.
SOUTH AMERICA
(i) Argentina.-The President of India sent a message of greetings
to the newly elected President of Argentina, Dr. Arture Frondizi,
and a Special Mission headed by the Indian Ambassador in Buenos
Aires attended the Presidential inauguration held on 1 May 1958.
(ii) Bolivia.-The Government of India and Bolivia have decided to establish diplomatic relations at Embassy level. Shri R. S.
Mani, India's Ambassador to Chile, has been concurrently accreditas Ambassador of India to Bolivia.
(iii) Brazil.-Shri M. K. Kripalani presented his credentials as
India's Ambassador to the President of Brazil on 6 November
1958.
Dr. Lucas Lopes, President of the Brazilian National Bank for
Economic Development, accompanied by five persons, visited India.
A replica of the Ashoka Pillar and Plants of Lotus and ixora
will be presented to the "Garden of Peace" in the city of La Plata
(Brazil).
(iv) Chile.-The President of India sent a. message of congratulations to the new President of Chile, H.E. Mr. Jorge Alessandri
on the occasion of his assumption of office of President of Chile on
4 November 1958.
(v) Paraguay and Uruguay.-Shri N. Raghavan, Ambassador of
India, Buenos Airs has been authorized to pay short good-will
visits to Paraguay and Uruguay.
(vi) West Indies.-The first Parliament of the Federation of the
West Indies was inaugurated on 21 April 1958. The Prime Minister

<pg41>
and the Speaker of the Lok Sabha sent messages of good wishes and
congratulations to the Prime Minister and the Speaker of the Federation of the West Indies.
The Hon'ble Mr. D. C. Granado, Minister for Labour, Co-operative
Development and Social Services and the Hon'ble Mr. Kamaluddin
Mohd., Minister for Agriculture, Lands and Fisheries of Trinidad

visited India from 2 July to 20 August 1958.
J. EXTERNAL PUBLICITY
(i) General.-The reorganization of the External Publicity
Division, with a view to improvement in India's overseas Information
Services, proceeded further this year. The Division is now responsible
for maintaining liaison with all correspondents on all matters related
to foreign affairs. Despite financial stringency and inadequacy of staff
and other facilities, Information Posts abroad proved more effective
by concentration of efforts.
(ii) Organization and Staff.-The External Publicity Division,
both at headquarters and in the overseas Information Posts, employs
a staff of about 538; 8 Public Relations Officers, 1 Deputy Director, Information Services, 38 Information Officers, 25 Assistant Information
Officers, 21 Information Assistants 142 India-based personnel comprising Registrars. Secretarial Assistants, Stenographers, Librarians,
Clerks and messengers, and 303 locally recruited personnel in various
Missions.
During 1958, another step forward was taken in the process of
setting up of a separate organization for external publicity and making it more effective, when the Government decided to transfer to the
External Publicity Division the following additional duties:
(a) Establishment of closer liaison and coordination with Films
Division for the production of films suitable for external
publicity and with All India Radio for adapting the
News and Feature Services of External Broadcasts to the
requirements of external publicity.
(b) Looking. after the Foreign Press Correspondents in India
and visiting Press delegations and Press personalities
from abroad.
(c) Publicising the activities of the Ministry of External Affairs
in the Indian and foreign Press.
In order to meet the demands of this added responsibility a Press
Relations Section under a Director of Press Relations was set up in
this Division on 15 July 1958.
<pg42>
Owing to financial difficulties, no new Information Units could be
established abroad this year except at Khartoum, although there arestrong grounds for opening new Information Offices in several places,
e.g., Mexico City, Rabat, Kampala. The Information Unit at Lahore.
was wound up and some of the posts there, including that of Press
Attache, were transferred to Karachi

(iii) Budget & Expenditure.-The total budget provision for the
External Publicity Division as well as India's overseas Information
Units for the year 1958-59 was approximately Rs. 93 lakhs. Out of
this amount Rs. 21 lakhs represent expenditure at headquarters and
Rs. 72 lakhs on the Information Posts abroad. After meeting all administrative cost (salaries, allowances, rents, furniture, equipment,
etc.) the actual amount available for information and publicity work
is small. Nonetheless, the External Publicity Division runs 49 separate Information Units and provides information services to about 90
Indian Posts abroad.
(iv) Information & Publicity Media.-The Daily Morse Transmissions by wireless (which are sent out three times a day) continued,
to be the main channel of dissemination of authentic news and background to news relating to India. These transmissions from headquarters are at present received by 35 Posts and arrangements are
under consideration to extend this facility to some other Posts. This
service is supplemented by a regular cable service to some important
Posts, which are not able to receive the Morse transmissions and. by
ad hoc cable service on special occasions and in emergencies. The
scope and content of the transmissions were enlarged during the year
to include special material for commercial publicity; about 300 words
of commercial news and features received from the Ministry of Commerce and Industry are now covered in the transmissions every day.
Based on the material supplied from headquarters, the overseas Information Posts publish daily and periodical bulletins which are,
widely distributed in their areas.
The Information Posts continued to keep the Division informed
of the trends of public opinion abroad. A review called the "World
Press Review" was issued every day to 450 recipients including the
various Ministries and Departments of the Government of India,
and Indian and foreign Press Correspondents.
During the period January-November 1958, Indian posts abroad
were supplied with 54 feature articles on India, covering various
social, economic and cultural aspects. These included articles
specially written for 1959 Republic Day publicity and Independence
Day, 1958, articles for special occasions, such as National Children's
<pg43>
Day, Gandhi Jayanti, Prime Minister's visit to Bhutan, President's
visit to Japan, Malaya and Indonesia and "India 1958" Exhibition.
Besides, 71 illustrated feature articles were sent out.
About 45,000 prints of photographs on various subjects were distributed to overseas Information Posts, besides a collection of
ebenoids and blocks, for use in their publications and for circulation
in their areas.

During the year, the libraries attached to Indian Missions abroad
were expanded by the additions of a large number of books on various
Subjects at a total estimated cost of Rs. 1,00,000.
In addition to supplies of selected Indian newspapers and periodicals (at an estimated cost of Rs. 1,10,000), Indian Missions and Information Posts abroad were provided with a number of publications,
including periodicals on India, produced by the Publications Division
and other Departments of Central and States Governments. The
total cost on this account is estimated at Rs. 6,00,000.
Most of our Information Posts also bring out their own publications, in English and sometimes in local languages, such as Annual
Reviews on Republic Day, brochures on special subjects (Kashmir,
Goa etc.) and pamphlets, on India suitable for school children,
tourists and general readers.
Indian documentary films continued to be popular in all countries
as reflected in a growing demand for them. At present 68 Missions
are receiving regular supplies of Indian documentaries. Three
new 16 mm projectors were sanctioned during the year for the use
of our Posts. From January to November 1958, about 1,550 prints
of 22 new documentary films were supplied to our Missions abroad.
Apart from this, about 275 prints of overseas editions of Indian News
reels were sent to some of our Posts abroad.
Four Indian feature films in 16 mm size were purchased for noncommercial exhibition through our Missions abroad.
The External Publicity Division assisted in India's participation
in 31 film festivals held in Australia, Belgium, Czechoslovakia,
Canada, Denmark, France, West Germany, Italy, Japan, Philippines,
Poland, Rumania, Spain, USA, UK, USSR and Yugoslavia.
Latest gramophone records of classical, instrumental and folk
music of India were supplied to various Indian Missions. In addition, gramophone records and recordings of the National Anthem
were also supplied to foreign radio stations, universities, official and
cultural organizations.
<pg44>
During the year under review, this division supplied, with theco-operation of the All India Radio, tape recordings of classical,
vocal and instrumental music, film and folk songs of India to a
number of foreign radio stations. These stations included Radio
Moscow, Radio Nairobi, the Khmer Radio of Phnom Penh, Radio
Ireland, Radio Trinidad, the Indonesian Radio etc. Some of them
also sent us their music and children's programmes in exchange foruse by the All India Radio.
There were also requests from certain foreign radio stations for

special items, such as the Vietnamese Radio's request for copies of
the talks given by the President of Vietnam during his visit to India.
The Peking Radio wanted particularly recording of special programmes and records on Rabindra Sangeet; Radio Ireland asked us
for a recording of a special Ceremony held by the Irish Church of
Redemption at Bangalore. All these requests were promptly met
and material asked for was supplied.
Our Missions abroad were also supplied, during the year, withspecial programmes in accordance with their requirements: selections from Ravi Shankar's Orchestra, music from the film `Awara'
folk songs etc.
We also obtained for the All India Radio special recordings of
the UN Assembly proceedings, Shri V.K. Krishna Menon's speeches.
in the UN, Dr. Bhabha's speeches at the Geneva Atomic Conference
and also speeches of our representatives abroad made on special
occasions like the signing of the joint trade pacts etc.
On the occasion of the President's visit to Malaya, the Division,
arranged with All India Radio special recording for Radio Malaya.
These consisted of brief sketches of the President in English and
Tamil, general features on India and musical programmes.
(v) Cultural Activities.-The External Publicity Division rendered assistance in India's participation in various exhibitions and cultural activities abroad by supplying exhibition material, costumes,
paintings, art publications etc. During the year India participated
in 28 such exhibitions in 17 countries.
One of the tasks the Division has been called upon to undertake,
increasingly during the year is the assistance in a variety of ways
to representatives of the Press, radio, television and film visiting
India from abroad, and to Press delegations from foreign countries.
In March/April 1958, a Press Delegation of 5 important journalists
was invited from Burma and they were taken round this country
for a period of one month. Another group of journalists of the
<pg45>
United States Society of Editors and Commentators visited this
country during February 1958 on their own as part of their worldtour. They were taken to Bhakra Nangal, Chandigarh and Agra
and to the Nilokheri Community Project. A delegation consisting,
of prominent Radio and Television Editors and Commentators fromWest Germany has been invited to tour the development projects,,
in India.
Since its creation in July this year, our Press Relations Sectionhas provided facilities and assistance to a number of influential"
visiting journalists and arranged for them the necessary contacts
and in some instances interviews with the Prime Minister.

K. MISCELLANEOUS
(i) Emigration.-There was no change in the administration ofthe provisions of the Indian Emigration Act (VII of 1922) during
1958. Emigration for the purpose of unskilled work continued to be
prohibited, but Indian unskilled workers already settled in Burma,.
Ceylon and Malaya who came to India on short visits were permitted
to return to those countries with their families. 5.879 persons were
permitted to return upto September 1958.
Emigration of skilled workers to Malaya has decreased considerably due chiefly to the restrictions imposed by the Immigration regulations of that country since 1953 under which no employer in
Malaya can employ any outsider on less than $500 per month.
Due to inadequacy of passenger shipping space between Malaya,
and India, there was a backlog of unskilled workers in Malaya
waiting to return to India. The Government of Malaya have, therefore, made special arrangements this year to charter a ship formaking one or two extra trips to India to clear the backlog. This
has eased the situation to a considerable extent. The total numberof unskilled workers who availed of assisted passages and returned
to India during the year 1958 is 3,268. Action has also been taken
to check black-marketing of deck passenger tickets in Malaya which,
was mainly due to inadequacy of deck passages on vessels plyingbetween Malaya and India.
Standard agreement forms for recruitment of skilled Indian,
workers by the Qatar Petroleum Company and the Persian Gulf
Lighting Service, Bahrein, were approved. After protracted
negotiations, certain concessions and more favourable terms weresecured for the Indian nurses employed in the Government Hospitals in Bahrein.
<pg46>
The special police force sanctioned in connection with measures
for the prevention of illicit emigration to Ceylon continued to
operate efficiently. After the communal disturbances in Ceylon
this year, measures for prevention of illicit emigration were further
tightened up. A jeep motor vehicle has been purchased and placed
at the disposal of the Special Officer for quick-mobility and the
results are satisfactory. 655 illicit emigrants were deported from
Ceylon during 1958 as against 1,806 reported last year.
(ii) Haj.-During 1958, nearly 17,609 Indian pilgrims went on Haj
to Saudi Arabia. Arrangements for medical assistance to pilgrims
were made at Mecca, Medina and Jedda. A special medical team
consisting of three doctors and two compounders equipped with
medicines was also sent by the Government of India for rendering
medical aid to pilgrims. A sum of Rs. 5,000 was sanctioned for pro-

viding relief to the Indian pilgrims who suffered in the fire which
broke out at Mecca on 20 August 1958.
(iii) Distinguished visitors from Abroad.-Among the distinguished visitors to India since last year's report were Their Majesties the
King and Queen of Nepal; H.R.H. the Duke of Edinburgh; H.E.
Marshal Josip Broz Tito, President of Yugoslavia and Madame
Jovanka Broz; the Rt. Hon'ble Walter Nash, Prime Minister of New
Zealand; H.E. Mr. Adnan Menderes, Prime Minister of Turkey;
H.R.H. Prince Norodom Sihanouk, Prime Minister of Cambodia; H.E.
Mr. Firoz Khan Noon, Prime Minister of Pakistan and Mrs. Noon;
the Rt. Hon'ble John G. Diefenbaker, Prime Minister of Canada and
Mrs. Diefenbaker; H.E. Mr. Einar Gerhardsen, Prime Minister of
Norway, and Mrs. Gerhardsen; the Hon'ble Dr. Kwame Nkrumah,
Prime Minister of Ghana; H.E. Mr. Otto Grotewohl, Prime Minister
of the German Democratic Republic; H.R.H. Limer-e-Ali Sardar
Mohamad Daud, Prime Minister of Afghanistan; the Hon'ble Mr.
Ram Goolam, Minister for Finance, Mauritius; the Hon'ble Mr.
Maithripala Senanayake, Minister for Transport and Works, Ceylon;
the Hon'ble Mr. D. C. Granado, Minister for Labour, Co-operative
Development and Social Services and the Hon'ble Mr. Kamaluddin
Mohammad, Minister for Agriculture, Lands and. Fisheries, Trinidad;
Mr. Abdul Hakim, Speaker of East Pakistan Assembly; H.E. Prof.
Dr. Ludwig Erhard, Vice-Chancellor and Minister for Economic
Affairs of the Federal Republic of Germany; The Rt. Hon'ble the
Earl of Home, Secretary of State for Commonwealth Relations of
the United Kingdom and the Countess of Home; Mr. G. Lepori,
Federal Councillor of Switzerland; The Rt. Hon'ble John Dugdale,
Labour Member of Parliament of the United Kingdom; His Highness
the Aga Khan; Dr. Lucas Lopes, President of the Brazilian National
Bank for Economic Development; General Toran Shumsher Jang
<pg47>
Bahadur Rana, C-in-C of the Nepalese Army; the Rt. Hon'ble Earl
of Selkirk, First Lord of the Admiralty; Admiral Sir Gladstone,
C-in-C, Far East Station and Mrs. Gladstone; Lord and Lady Harewood; Lady Violet Bonham Carter, daughter of the late Lord Oxford
and Asquith, accompanied by Mrs. Elma Dangerfield, Director of the
European Atlantic Group; Prof. and Mrs. Nervis of Italy; Mr. Averell
Harriman, Ex-Governor of New York; Chinese Armed Forces Delegation; trade delegation headed by Mr. Mohamad Ali Raza, Minister for Commerce, Government of Saudi-Arabia; a delegation from
the National Defence College, Canada; an Expert Committee of the
United Nations Public Information and a Thai Parliamentary Delegation.
(iv) Consular Division.-Agreements were concluded under Section 29(c) of the Civil Procedure Code for the service of summons
etc. in civil suits, with the Governments of Ceylon and Sweden.
Agreements were also made with the Governments of Australia and

Ceylon for the recording of evidence of witnesses, residing in these
countries, in criminal cases in Indian courts.
44 documents consisting of letters of Request, Commissions and
other processes were received through various State Governments
for service in the countries comprising the Arab World, South
East Asia, Africa, USA, UK and Germany. The documents after
proper scrutiny were forwarded to the authorities concerned through
our Missions abroad. 15 Letters of Request, Commissions etc. received from abroad for service in India were transmitted to the appropriate authorities for execution.
222 judicial documents, such as powers of Attorney, Affidavits,
Certificates etc. for use in foreign countries were attested during
the period under review.
The question of revision of the reciprocal arrangements in regard to the estates of deceased persons, with USA, Belgium, Denmark, Iran, Poland, Afghanistan, Iraq, Argentina, Costa Rica, Netherlands Peru, Sweden, Thailand and Czechoslovakia under Section
57 of the Administrator General Act, 1913 has been under correspondence with the Governments of the countries concerned through
our Missions. since 1957. The examination of the provisions of laws
of USA, Iran and Czechoslovakia revealed that those countries afforded sufficient reciprocity in the matter and it was therefore decided
to continue the existing arrangements with those countries. The
arrangements with Belgium and Peru are being terminated as the
laws of those countries do not afford adequate reciprocity. Negotiations with the remaining countries are still in progress.
<pg48>
74 cases relating to the disposal of the estates of the deceased
Indians abroad were received and dealt with during the period.
The draft Extradition Bill is nearing finalisation. 27 individual
extradition cases were dealt with in the Consular Division.
624 cases relating to Indian Citizenship were referred by the
Home Ministry to the Consular Section.
Several enquiries were received from our Missions abroad in
regard to the interpretation of the Indian Laws, specially the Marriage and Inheritance Laws, and suitable replies were sent to them
in consultation with the Ministry of Law and other Ministries concerned.
The number of evacuee orphans under the scheme for their longterm maintenance, care and education is gradually decreasing due
to attainment of majority, marriage and employment etc. The expenditure incurred in this regard is shared equally between the
State Governments concerned and the Government of India.

The recovery of advances made to the evacuees from the WarZones has not been encouraging. This work has been entrusted to
the State Governments except West Bengal on an agency basis.
All the State Governments except Madras are allowed to retain
50 per cent of the amount recovered. The Government of Madras
are allowed to retain 80 per cent of the amount recovered. In West
Bengal. this work is handled by the Burma Loan Recovery Section
attached to the Regional Passport Office, Calcutta. Our Missions
in Burma, Malaya and Singapore are attempting to effect recoveries
from the evacuee debtors residing there. Since many of the evacuees debtors are dead and the major proportion of those living
are either not traceable due to the passage of time or, if traced, are
not in a position to repay the loan, the amount recovered during the
year was very meagre.
Intimation regarding deaths of foreigners was conveyed to the
foreign Missions concerned in India in 41 cases. In 233 cases the
death reports were conveyed direct by the State Governments to
the foreign Missions concerned.
36 requests for remittance facilities from abroad were received
and dealt with in the Division. 237 miscellaneous enquiries about
the welfare and whereabouts of Indians abroad were also disposed
of.
During the year, there were 130 cases of relief and repatriation
of destitute Indian citizens from countries like Brazil, Mauritius.
Iran, Japan, Ceylon, Burma, Malaya, Iraq, East Africa and Indonesia at a cost of Rs. 13,102 as against 82 cases at a cost of Rs. 13,083
<pg49>
last year. The recoveries effected from the repatriates after their
arrival in India were negligible, as the policy of the Government
of India is not to subject the repatriates to undue hardship. There
were also 24 cases of deportation and banishments of Indian from
abroad.
(v) Central Passport Organization.-The number and jurisdiction
of the Regional Passport Offices remains unaltered. The Chief Commissioner, Pondicherry still continues to be the passport issuing
authority for the area under his jurisdiction.
In order to eliminate delay in the issue of passports, instructions
were issued to all the State Governments to conform to certain procedures and time Schedules. This has resulted in great improvement
and passports are now issued in most cases within one month of the
date of application in cases where the applications have been filled
correctly and are complete in all respects.
It has been decided to amalgamate the Central Passport and
Emigration Organizations and to form a combined service of these

two Organizations with effect from 1 January 1959. The amalgamation of the two Organizations is expected to result in economy and
greater efficiency.
(vi) Diplomatic and Consular Missions in India.-At the end of
the year 1958, there were 40 Embassies, 8 High Commissions and 8
Legations including the Apostolic Internunciature. During the
year, diplomatic relations wore established at the Embassy level
with Morocco. New Zealand opened its High Commission at New
Delhi. Consequent on the merger of Egypt and Syria into the
"United Arab Republic" the Embassies of Egypt and Syria in India
were closed and instead the Embassy of the United Arab Republic
was opened.
The total number of foreign Consular Posts at the end of the
year was 93. Three foreign Consular Posts viz. the Consulates
General of Egypt at Bombay and Calcutta and that of Syria at
Bombay were closed down during the year. Two new Consulates
General of the United Arab Republic, one at Bombay and the second
at Calcutta were established. The status of the Consulate of Spain
at Bombay was raised to that of a Consulate General.
INDIA
BHUTAN USA BRAZIL CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC FRANCE AFGHANISTAN BURMA
AUSTRALIA NEW ZEALAND UNITED KINGDOM SRI LANKA THE NETHERLANDS CHINA NEPAL
CANADA PAKISTAN ITALY VIETNAM CAMBODIA LAOS THAILAND INDONESIA REPUBLIC OF
SINGAPORE PHILIPPINES JAPAN FIJI TAIWAN MONGOLIA KOREA IRAN EGYPT TURKEY IRAQ
LATVIA LEBANON SUDAN MOROCCO TUNISIA SYRIA KENYA UGANDA MADAGASCAR
MAURITIUS GHANA GUINEA NIGER NIGERIA CAMEROON HAITI SOUTH AFRICA ETHIOPIA
AUSTRIA BELGIUM NORWAY SLOVAKIA GERMANY POLAND SPAIN ALBANIA BULGARIA
ALGERIA CHILE ARGENTINA BOLIVIA SWITZERLAND YUGOSLAVIA GREECE HUNGARY
ROMANIA SWEDEN RUSSIA COSTA!!MEXICO PARAGUAY URUGUAY DENMARK IRELAND
QATAR SAUDI ARABIA PERU
Feb 01, 1958

A.United Nations
PART III
A. UNITED NATIONS
The crises which developed in West Asia put the purposes and
principles of the United Nations Charter to severe test. In orderto deal with developments in West Asia, which reached their climax
with the landing of American troops in the Lebanon and British

troops in Jordan, the General Assembly met in an Emergency Session
from Aug 08, 1958 to 27 August 1958. As a result of its deliberations, the
United Nations set up an Observation Group in the Lebanon, to
which India was asked to appoint a Representative. India appointed
Shri Rajeshwar Dayal as her Representative on that Group, and also,
contributed a military contingent for observation purposes in that
area. The Group has accomplished its task successfully and helped
to restore normal conditions in the country.
In East Asia also, tension had reached a dangerous point in the,
Formosa Straits when the General Assembly met for its 13th regular
session on 16 September 1958. A large number of delegations which
took part in the general debate expressed deep anxiety over this
situation. So long as China is not properly represented in the United
Nations, discussions in that body of problems relating to East Asia
will continue to be difficult and at times unrealistic. This has always
been recognized by the Government of India in all their efforts to,
relax tension in this area.
(i) Representation of China.-India again sought to raise the
question of proper representation of China in the United Nations.
This was successfully opposed, as in previous years, by the Western.
Powers. Support for the Indian move has, however, gradually
increased from year to year and it was slightly greater in 1958 than
in 1957.
(ii) Disarmament.-Long debates on this item during, the l3th
session showed the profound concern of world public opinion over
the continued arms race and the universal awareness of the need
for disarmament. The Geneva conference of experts indicated that
it was technically practicable to establish controls necessary to
ensure observance of a possible agreement on the discontinuance of
tests.
In the General Assembly, India together with thirteen other
states, moved a resolution for the immediate discontinuance of
<pg50>
<pg51>
nuclear weapons tests "until agreement is reached by the states
concerned" in regard to the technical arrangements necessary to
ensure the observance of the discontinuance of such tests. This proposal also called on all other states "to desist from embarking upon
the testing of nuclear and thermonuclear weapons pending the completion of action" as called for in the draft resolution. This resolution did not receive adequate support since at the same time an
eight-point resolution originally sponsored by seven Western Powers
calling upon the three states which have tested nuclear weapons to
make every effort at the talks which opened at Geneva on 31 October

1958 to reach an early agreement on the suspension of nuclear
weapons tests "under effective international control and not to
undertake further testing of nuclear weapons while these negotiations were in progress" was before the Assembly. It also called
attention to the importance and urgency of achieving the widest
possible measure of agreement in talks which were also being held
at Geneva on the technical aspect of measures against the possibility
of surprise attack. The resolution sponsored by the Western
Powers was, as expected, adopted by the Assembly.
Besides the above resolution, three other resolutions were adopted
by the Assembly. One of these expressed the hope that the Geneva
Conference on nuclear weapons tests "will be successful and lead to
an agreement acceptable to all." Another resolution, proposed by
India and Yugoslavia, referred to the Geneva conference on the
technical aspect of measures against surprise attack and expressed
the hope that "the widest possible measure of agreement will be
reached and that the United Nations should be informed on the progress achieved." Another resolution, again moved by India and
Yugoslavia, attempted to break the deadlock caused by last year's
decision on the membership of the Disarmament Commission; it has
now been decided that the Disarmament Commission for 1959 should
be on an ad hoc basis and composed of all members of the United
Nations. This was adopted by 76 votes to none with two abstentions.
(iii) Outer Space.-A new and important item which the General
Assembly considered this year related to the question of the peaceful use of outer space. Both the USSR and the Western Powers
moved resolutions on the subject. A significant feature of the two
resolutions was that both sides proposed to establish a preparatory
international body within the framework of the UN for co-operation
in the study of cosmic space for peaceful purposes. They were, however, unable to agree on the composition of the preparatory committee. The efforts made by the Indian delegation to bring the
parties together did not succeed and the result was that the Westernsponsored resolution was adopted by the General Assembly against
<pg52>
the opposition of the USSR. In the circumstances there seems very
little hope of any effective progress in the near future.
(iv) Algeria.-India has supported the resolution moved by
seventeen Afro-Asian countries in the General Assembly urging.negotiation between the two parties concerned for reaching a
solution in conformity with the UN Charter. Although the resolution was not adopted because it failed by-one vote to muster twothirds majority, the voting figures showed a significant change in the
general trend of opinion in this matter.
(v) Cyprus.-During the 13th session, the General Assembly
unanimously adopted a resolution urging the three governments-

directly concerned and representatives of the Cypriots to meet in a
conference to discuss not only the interim administrative arrangements for Cyprus but also a final solution in accordance with the
purposes and principles of the Charter.
India opposed the idea of partition of the island and upheld the
right of the Cypriot people to self-government. India also cosponsored a resolution in the Political Committee to that effect but
at the request of the sponsors it was not put to vote.
(vi) Treatment of people of Indian origin in the Union of South
Africa.-On the question of the treatment of people of Indian origin
in South Africa, the General Assembly adopted a resolution urging
the parties concerned to enter into negotiations. The General
Assembly appealed to the Government of South Africa to cooperate
in this matter and invited parties to report as appropriate, jointly
or separately, to the General Assembly at its next session.
(vii) Apartheid.-Regarding the policies of apartheid of the South
African Government, the item was included in the agenda on the,
proposal of India and 10 others. The Assembly deplored that the
South African Government had not yet responded to the call and
invitation of last year's resolution; it again appealed to it to revise
its policy in the light of the principles and purposes of the Charterand of world opinion. The resolution was adopted by 70 votes to
5 with 4 abstentions.
(viii) Peaceful Relations between States.-India was one of the,
co-sponsors of the resolution in the General Assembly which called
on member-States to live up to the principles of the Charter and to
resort to the UN for the peaceful solution of disputes or problems,
which might disrupt friendly relations or threaten world peace.
The resolution calls, on member-States to foster co-operation and
understanding in the fields of economy, culture, science, technology
and communication. The resolution was adopted unanimously.
<pg53>
(ix) Admission of new members.-India welcomed the admission
of Guinea as the eighty-second member of the United Nations during
the 13th session of the General Assembly.
(x) Trusteeship matters.-The Assembly was informed that the.
French and Togolese governments had decided by mutual agreement
that Togoland shall attain independence in 1960. India was one of
the sponsors of the resolution which congratulates the two Governments on their achievement and resolves that on the day the Republicof Togoland becomes independent in 1960, the Trusteeship Agreement of 13th December 1946 shall cease.
Two other trust territories in West Africa, which are expecting,
to be independent shortly, are the British and French Cameroons. A

United Nations visiting Mission which has an Indian as one of itsmembers, is now in these territories and should include in its report
methods of consultation to be adopted when the time comes for thepeople of these territories to express their wishes concerning the
future. The General Assembly has, therefore, decided that it shall
resume its 13th session on 20 February 1959 to consider exclusively
the question of the future of these two territories.
No solution has yet been found of the problem of S.W. Africa
because of South Africa's intransigence.
(xi) Non-Self-Governing Territories.-India has been re-elected
to the Committee on Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories for a further term of three years.
(xii) United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea.-During
its 12th session last year, the General Assembly decided to convene
an International Conference of Plenipotentiaries, "to examine thelaw of the Sea, taking account not only of the legal but also of the
technical, biological, economic and political aspects of the problem,.
and to embody the results of its work in one or more international
conventions or such other instruments, as it might deem appropriate." It also recommended that the Conference should study
"the question of free access to the sea of land-locked countries, as
established by international practice or treaties."
The Conference met at Geneva from 24 February to 27 April 1958,
and eighty six States besides India participated. The Conference
adopted four conventions-on the Territorial Sea and the Contiguous
Zone, on the High Seas, on Fishing and Conservation of the Living
Resource- of the High Seas, and on the Continental Shelf, besides
an optional protocol of signature concerning the compulsory settlement of disputes, and nine other resolutions. No agreement could,.
however, be reached on the breadth of the Territorial Sea, which
subject will be discussed at a second conference to be held in 1960.
<pg54>
(xiii) All-India UN Day Committee.-An All-India United
Nations Day Committee has been formed with the Deputy Minister
of the Ministry of External Affairs as the Chairman. Apart from
celebrating United Nations Day on 24 October 1958, this committee
also observed the Universal Declaration of Human Rights on 10
December 1958. Similar committees have been formed in various
states, under the auspices of the state governments, with the AllIndia United Nations Day Committee acting as an advisory and coordinating body.
B. INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCES
India was host to a joint session of the International Monetary

Fund, the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
and the International Finance Corporation in New Delhi in October
1958. The 12th session of the World Health Organization's Regional
Committee for South East Asia was also held in India in September
1958. A session of the World Meteorological Organization's Commission on Synoptic Meteorology was convened in India in January
1958.
India participated in a large number of conferences held under
the aegis of the United Nations and the Specialised Agencies. Brief
reports on Indian participation in the more important of these conferences will be found in the reports of the appropriate Ministries.
(A list of international organizations of which India is a member
is given at Appendix V.)
Asian-African Legal Consultative Committee.-The second session
of the Asian African Legal Consultative Committee was held in
Cairo in October 1958. It was attended by delegations from Burma,
Ceylon, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Japan, Sudan and the United Arab
Republic.
This session had before it several subjects for consideration,
which were referred to it for its opinion by the Governments of the
participating countries. These included diplomatic immunities,
principles of extradition, immunity of States in respect of commercial transactions, dual citizenship, status of aliens, recognition
of foreign decrees in matrimonial matters and free legal aid. The
Committee had also before it for consideration the reports of the
International Law Commission on its ninth and tenth sessions. The
Committee discussed these subjects on the basis of a questionnaire
prepared by the Secretariat and the replies given to there by the
Governments of the participating countries.
The Secretariat of the Asian African Consultative Committee is
now located in New Delhi.
PERU
LEBANON JORDAN USA INDIA CHINA SWITZERLAND YUGOSLAVIA ALGERIA CYPRUS
SOUTH AFRICA GUINEA CAMEROON BURMA EGYPT INDONESIA IRAQ JAPAN SUDAN
Aug 08, 1958

Appendix I INDIAN MISSIONS ABROAD
Jan 01, 1958
APPENDIX I

Embassies

INDIAN MISSIONS ABROAD

1 Afghanistan
2 Argentina
3 Belgium
4 Brazil
5 Burma
6 Cambodia
7 Chile
8 China
9 Czechoslovakia
10 Denmark
11 Ethiopia
12 France
13 Germany
14 Greece
15 Indonesia
16 Iran
17 Iraq
18 Ireland
19 Italy
20 Japan
21 Laos
22 Mexico
23 Mongolia (Ulan Bator)
24 Morocco
25 Nepal
26 Netherlands
27 Norway
28 Philippines
29 Poland
30 Rumania

Ambassador resident in Stockholm

Ambassador resident in Belgrade

Ambassador resident in London

Ambassador resident in Washington
Ambassador resident in Peking

Ambassador resident in Prague
<pg55>
<pg56>

31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41

Saudi Arabia
Spain
Sudan
Sweden
Switzerland
Thailand
Turkey
United Arab Republic
United States of America
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
Yugoslavia

High Commissions
1
2
3
4
5

Australia
Canada
Ceylon
Ghana
Malaya

6 New Zealand

High Commissioner resident in
Canberra

7 Pakistan

Deputy High Commissioner at
Dacca and Assistant High Commissioner at Rajshahi (East
Pakistan)

8 United Kingdom
Legations
1 Albania

Minister resident in Rome

2 Austria

Minister resident

in Berne

3 Bulgaria

Minister resident

in Belgrade

4 Cuba

Minister resident

in Washington

5 Finland

Minister resident

in Stockholm

6 Hungary

Minister resident

in Moscow

<pg57>
7 Jordan
8 Lebanon
9 Libya
10 Luxemburg
11 Vatican

Minister resident in Baghdad
Minister resident in Cairo
Minister resident in Cairo
Minister resident in Brussels
Minister resident in Berne

Special Missions
1 Bhutan
2 Sikkim
3 United Nations
Commissions
1 Aden
2 British East Africa
3 British West Indies and
British Guiana
4 Central African Federation (British)
5 Fiji
6 Hongkong
7 Mauritius
8 Nigeria (Lagos)
9 Singapore
10 Uganda (Kampala)
Consulates-General

Commissioner resident in Nairobi

High Commissioner resident in
Kuala Lumpur

1 Belgian-Congo
(Leopoldville)
2 Copenhagen
3 Damascus
4 Geneva
5 Hamburg
6 Helsinki

Consul General resident in Nairobi

<pg58>
7 Lhasa
8 Madagascar
9 New York
10 Ruanda-Urundi
(Usumbra)
11 Saigon
12 San Francisco
13 Shanghai
14 Surinam (Dutch
Guiana)
15 Vietnam (North)

Consul General resident in Nairobi

Consul General resident in Trinidad

Consulates
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

Basra
Berlin
Khorramshahr
Kobe
Mandalay
Medan
Muscat
Sourabaya

Vice-Consulates
1 Antwerp
2 Jalalabad (Afghanistan)
3 Kandahar (Afghanistan)
4 Zahidan
Agencies
1 Gartok
2 Gyantse (Tibet)
3 Yatung
INDIA
AFGHANISTAN ARGENTINA BELGIUM BRAZIL BURMA CAMBODIA CHILE CHINA
NORWAY SLOVAKIA DENMARK SWEDEN ETHIOPIA FRANCE GERMANY GREECE
YUGOSLAVIA INDONESIA IRAN IRAQ IRELAND UNITED KINGDOM ITALY JAPAN LAOS
MEXICO MONGOLIA MOROCCO NEPAL PHILIPPINES POLAND CZECH REPUBLIC SAUDI
ARABIA SPAIN SUDAN SWITZERLAND THAILAND TURKEY USA AUSTRALIA CANADA
GHANA NEW ZEALAND PAKISTAN BANGLADESH ALBANIA AUSTRIA BULGARIA CUBA
FINLAND RUSSIA HUNGARY JORDAN EGYPT LEBANON LIBYA BHUTAN KENYA FIJI
MAURITIUS NIGER NIGERIA REPUBLIC OF SINGAPORE MALAYSIA UGANDA CONGO
SYRIA CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC MADAGASCAR VIETNAM OMAN

Jan 01, 1958

Appendix II INDIAN INFORMATION UNITS ABROAD

Jan 01, 1958
APPENDIX II
INDIAN INFORMATION UNITS ABROAD
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31

Accra
Addis Ababa
Ankara
Baghdad
Bangkok
Beirut
Belgrade
Berne
Bonn
Brussels
Buenos Aires
Cairo
Colombo
Dacca
Damascus
Djakarta
Fiji
Gangtok
The Hague
Hongkong
Jeddah
Kabul
Karachi
Kathmandu
Khartoum
London
Manila
Moscow
Nairobi
New York (UN)
New York (C.G.)
<pg59>
<pg60>

32
33
34
35
36
37

Ottawa
Paris
Peking
Phnom Penh
Port Louis
Prague

38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49

Rangoon
Rio de Janerio
Rome
San Francisco
Salisbury
Kuala Lumpur
Stockholm
Sydney
Tehran
Tokyo
Trinidad
Washington

INDIA
GHANA ETHIOPIA TURKEY IRAQ LEBANON YUGOSLAVIA SWITZERLAND GERMANY
BELGIUM USA ARGENTINA EGYPT SRI LANKA SYRIA INDONESIA FIJI SAUDI
ARABIA AFGHANISTAN PAKISTAN NEPAL SUDAN UNITED KINGDOM PHILIPPINES
RUSSIA KENYA CANADA FRANCE CAMBODIA MAURITIUS CZECH REPUBLIC ITALY
MALAYSIA SWEDEN AUSTRALIA IRAN JAPAN
Jan 01, 1958

Appendix III FOREIGN MISSIONS IN INDIA

Jan 01, 1958
APPENDIX III
FOREIGN MISSIONS IN INDIA
(1) Embassies
1 Afghanistan
2 Argentina
3 Belgium
4 Brazil
5 Burma
6 Cambodia
7 Chile
8 China
9 Czechoslovakia
10 Denmark
11 Ethiopia
12 France
13 Germany (Federal Republic of)
14 Greece
15 Indonesia
16 Iran
17 Iraq
18 Italy
19 Japan
20 Laos

21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29

Mexico
Mongolia
Morocco
Nepal
Netherlands
Norway
Philippines
Poland
Rumania
<pg61>
<pg62>

30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40

Saudi Arabia
Spain
Sudan
Sweden
Switzerland
Thailand
Turkey
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
United Arab Republic
United States of America
Yugoslavia

(ii) High Commissions
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

Australia
Canada
Ceylon
Ghana
Federation of Malaya
New Zealand
Pakistan
United Kingdom

(iii)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

Legations

Albania
Austria
Bulgaria
Cuba
Finland
Holy See
Hungary
Lebanon

(iv) Foreign Consular Offices in India
-----------------------------------------------------------------Country
Location
Status
-----------------------------------------------------------------1
Afghanistan
Bombay
Consulate General
2
Austria
Bombay
Consulate
3
Austria
Calcutta
Consulate
4
Austria
Madras
Consulate
------------------------------------------------------------------

<pg63>
-----------------------------------------------------------------Country
Location
Status
-----------------------------------------------------------------5 Belgium
Bombay
Consulate General
6 Belgium
Calcutta
Consulate General
7 Belgium
Madras
Consulate
8 Bolivia
Calcutta
Consulate General
9 Brazil
Bombay
Consulate (vacant)
10 Brazil
Calcutta
Consulate
11 Burma
Calcutta
Consulate General
12 Burma
Madras
Vice Consulate
13 China
Bombay
Consulate
General
14 China
Calcutta
Consulate
General
15 Colombia
Calcutta
Consulate
(vacant)
16 Colombia
Madras
Consulate
17 Costa Rica
Bombay
Consulate
General
18 Costa Rica
Madras
Consulate
General
19 Cuba
Calcutta
Consular
Agency
20 Czechoslvakia
Bombay
Consulate
General
21 Denmark
Bombay
Consulate
General
22 Denmark
Calcutta
Consulate
23 Denmark
Cochin
Consulate
24 Denmark
Madras
Consulate
25 Dominican Republic
Bombay
Consulate
General
26 Dominican Republic
Calcutta
Consulate
27 Ecuador
Calcutta
Consulate
28 El Salvador
Calcutta
Consulate
29 Ethiopia
Bombay
Consulate
30 Finland
Bombay
Consulate
31 Finland
Calcutta
Consulate
32 France
Bombay
Consulate
General
33 France
Calcutta
Consulate
General
34 France
Madras
Consulate
35 Germany
Bombay
Consulate
General
36 Germany
Calcutta
Consulate
General
37 Germany
Madras
Consulate
38 Greece
Bombay
Consulate
General
39 Greece
Calcutta
Consulate
General
40 Haiti
Bombay
Consulate
41 Haiti
Calcutta
Consulate
42 Indonesia
Bombay
Consulate
43 Indonesia
Calcutta
Consulate
-----------------------------------------------------------------<pg64>
-----------------------------------------------------------------Country
Location
Status
-----------------------------------------------------------------44
45
46
47
48

Iran
Iran
Israel
Italy
Italy

Bombay
Calcutta
Bombay
Bombay
Calcutta

Consulate
Consulate
Consulate
Consulate
Consulate

General
General
General

49
Japan
Bombay
Consulate
General
50
Japan
Calcutta
Consulate
General
51
Liberia
Calcutta
Consulate
52
Luxemburg
Bombay
Vice Consulate
53
Monaco
New Delhi
Consulate General
54
Monaco
Bombay
Consulate (vacant)
55
Nepal
Calcutta
Consulate
General
56
Netherlands
Bombay
Consulate
General
57
Netherlands
Calcutta
Consulate
58
Netherlands
Cochin
Consulate
59
Netherlands
Madras
Consulate
60
Nicaragua
Bombay
Consulate
61
Nicaragua
Calcutta
Consulate
62
Norway
Bombay
Consulate General
63
Norway
Calcutta
Consulate General
64
Norway
Cochin
Vice Consulate
65
Norway
Madras
Consulate
66
Panama
Bombay
Consulate General
67
Peru
Calcutta
Consulate General
68
Philippines
Bombay
Consulate
69
Spain
Bombay
Consulate General
70
Spain
Calcutta
Vice Consulate
71
Spain
Madras
Vice Consulate
72
Sweden
Bombay
Consulate General
73
Sweden
Calcutta
Consulate
74
Sweden
Madras
Consulate
75
Switzerland
Bombay
Consulate General
76
Switzerland
Calcutta
Consulate
77
Switzerland
Cochin
Consular
Agency
78
Switzerland
Madras
Consular
Agency
79
Thailand
Calcutta
Consulate General
80
Turkey
Bombay
Consulate General
81
Turkey
Calcutta
Consulate
-----------------------------------------------------------------<pg65>
-----------------------------------------------------------------Country
Location
Status
-----------------------------------------------------------------82
83
84

U.S.S.R.
U.S.S.R.
United
Arab Republic

85

United Arab
Republic
U.S.A.
U.S.A.
U.S.A.
Uruguay
Venezuela
Yugoslavia
Democratic
Republic of Viet-Nam

86
87
88
89
90
91
92
93

Republic of VietNam

Bombay
Calcutta

Consulate General
Consulate General

Bombay

Consulate

General

Consulate
Consulate

General
General

Consulate
Consulate
Consulate
Consulate
Consulate

General
General
General
General
General

Calcutta
Bombay
Calcutta
Madras
New Delhi
Calcutta
Bombay
New Delhi
New Delhi

Consulate General
(de facto)
Consulate

General

(de facto)
-----------------------------------------------------------------(v) Foreign Consular
the year 1958

Missions in India which were closed during

1 Consulate General of Egypt at Bombay
2 Consulate General of Syria at Bombay
3 Consulate General of Egypt at Calcutta
(vi) Foreign Consular Missions opened in India during the year
1958
1 Consulate General of the United Arab Republic at Bombay
2 Consulate General of the United Arab Republic at Calcutta
(vii) Foreign Consular Missions in India whose status was changed
during the year 1958
The status of the Consulate of Spain at Bombay was raised to
that of a Consulate General.
INDIA
AFGHANISTAN ARGENTINA BELGIUM BRAZIL BURMA CAMBODIA CHILE CHINA
NORWAY SLOVAKIA DENMARK ETHIOPIA FRANCE GERMANY GREECE INDONESIA IRAN
IRAQ ITALY JAPAN LAOS MEXICO MONGOLIA MOROCCO NEPAL PHILIPPINES
POLAND SAUDI ARABIA SPAIN SUDAN SWEDEN SWITZERLAND THAILAND TURKEY USA
YUGOSLAVIA AUSTRALIA CANADA GHANA NEW ZEALAND PAKISTAN ALBANIA AUSTRIA
BULGARIA CUBA FINLAND HUNGARY LEBANON BOLIVIA COLOMBIA COSTA!!DOMINICA
ECUADOR EL SALVADOR HAITI ISRAEL LIBERIA MONACO CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC
NICARAGUA PANAMA PERU URUGUAY VENEZUELA EGYPT SYRIA
Jan 01, 1958

Appendix IV TREATIES, CONVENTIONS AND AGREEMENTS

APPENDIX IV
TREATIES, CONVENTIONS AND AGREEMENTS CONCLUDED
OR RENEWED BY INDIA WITH OTHER COUNTRIES DURING
1958.
1

Trade Agreement with Afghanistan signed on Jul 10, 1958 at
Kabul.

2

Trade Agreement with Ethiopia signed on 18 April 1958 at
New Delhi.

3

Trade Agreement with Greece signed on 14 February 1958 at
New Delhi.

4

Trade Agreement with Poland signed on 12 March 1958 at

New Delhi.
5

Trade Agreement with East Germany (Supplementary Trade
Agreement) signed on 3 November 1958 at East Berlin.

6

Trade Agreement with U.S.S.R. signed on 16 November 1958
at Moscow.

7

Trade Agreement with Japan signed on 4 February 1958 at
Tokyo.

8

Trade Agreement with Ceylon signed on 13 January 1958 at
New Delhi.

9

Trade Agreement with Austria signed on 6 October 1958 at
Vienna.

10

Trade Agreement with Italy signed on 2 January 1958 at
New Delhi.

11

Trade Agreement with Finland signed on 23 June 1958 at
New Delhi.

12

Trade Agreement with Hungary signed on 15 January 1958 at
New Delhi.

13

Trade Agreements with Rumania signed on 20 January 1958,
18 June 1958 and 11 August 1958 at New Delhi.

14

Trade Agreement with Indonesia signed on 1 July 1958 at
Djakarta.

15

Protocol to Trade Agreement with Poland signed on 15 November 1958 at Warsaw.
<pg66>

<pg67>
16
17

Protocol to Trade Agreement with Burma signed on 25 September 1958 at Rangoon.
Instruments of Ratification of the Indo-Iranian Anti-Locust
Convention signed between the two countries in July 1954were exchanged at Tehran on 24 May 1958.

18

Instruments of Ratification of the Indo-Iranian Cultural
Agreement signed at New Delhi in December 1956 were
exchanged at Tehran on 3 November 1958.
-----------------------------------------------------------------(N.B.-Letters were exchanged in New Delhi on 29 November1958 extending validity of Schedules to Indo-Swedish TradeArrangement upto December 1959.)

INDIA
AFGHANISTAN ETHIOPIA GREECE POLAND GERMANY
ITALY FINLAND HUNGARY INDONESIA BURMA IRAN

USA

RUSSIA

Jul 10, 1958

Appendix V ORGANIZATIONS OF WHICH INDIA IS A MEMBER

Jan 01, 1958
APPENDIX V
INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS OF WHICH INDIA IS A
MEMBER
UNITED NATIONS
1 General Assembly.
2 Committees and Commissions of the

General Assembly: -

(a) Advisory Committee on the peaceful uses of Atomic
Energy.
(b) Committee to consider the question of convening a general
conference to review the UN Charter.
(c) Committee on Information from non-self-governing territories.
(d) Scientific Committee on the effects of Atomic Radiation.
(e) Peace Observation Commission.
(f) Disarmament Commission.
(g) Interim Committee of the General Assembly.
(h) General Committee.
(i) Committee on Contributions.
(j) International Law Commission.
(k) United Nations Administrative Tribunal.
3

Functional Commissions of the Economic and Social Council:-

(a) Human Rights Commission.
(b) Commission on International Commodity Trade (C.I.C.T.).
(c) Narcotic Drugs Commission.

JAPAN

AUSTRIA

4

Economic Commission for Asia and the Far East (ECAFE).

5

Other Subsidiary Bodies of the Economic and Social Council:-

(a) United Nations International Children Emergency Fund
(UNICEF).
(b) Technical Assistance Committee.
6

Trusteeship Council.

7

International Atomic Energy Agency.

8

Specialised Agencies-.(a) Food and Agriculture Organization (F.A.O.).
(b) General Agreement on Trade & Tariffs (G.A.T.T.).
<pg68>

<pg69>
(c) International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
(I.B.R.D.).
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)

International Monetary Fund (I.M.F.).
International Civil Aviation Organization (I.C.A.O.).
International Labour Organization (I.L.O.).
International Telecommunications Union (I.T.U.).
Universal Postal Union (U.P.U.).
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO).
(j) World Health Organization (W.H.O.).
(k) World Meteorological Organization (W.M.O.).
OTHER INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS
9

Asian Broadcasting Conference.

10

Asian-African Legal Consultative Committee, New Delhi.

11

Commonwealth Agricultural Bureau (UK).

12

Commonwealth Air Transport Council.

13

Commonwealth Advisory Aeronautical Research Committee.

14

Commonwealth Broadcasting Conference.

15

International Association for Bridges and Structural Engineering, Zurich.

16

International Commission on Irrigation and Drainage, New

Delhi.
17.

International Commission on Large Dams, Paris.

18

International Committee of the Red Cross, Geneva.

19

International Conference of Social Works, Paris.

20

International Cotton Advisory Committee, Washington.

21

International Council of Archives, Paris.

22

International Council of Building Research Studies and Documentation, Paris.

23

International Council of Scientific Unions, London.

24
25

International Criminal Police Commission Paris.
International Customs Tariffs Bureau, Brussels.

26

International Dairy Federation, Brussels.
<pg70>

27

International Electro-Technical Commission, Geneva.

28

International Federation for Documentation, The Hague.

29

International Federation for Housing and Town. Planning, TheHauge.

30

International

Federation for University Women, London.

31

International
Surrey, U.K.

Hide and Allied Trades Improvement Society,.

32

International

Hydrographic Bureau, Monte Carlo.

33

International

Hospitals Federation, London.

34

International

Institute for Administrative Sciences, Brussels.

35

International
Rome.

Institute for the Unification of Private Law,,

36

International

Organization for Standardisation, Geneva.

37.

International

Tea Committee, London.

38

International

Railway Congress Association, Brussels.

39

International Union of Biological Sciences, Paris.

40

International Union of Crystallography, Cambridge.

41

International

Union

of

Geodesy and Geophysics, Paris.

42

International

Union

of

Geography, New York.

43

International

Union

of

Pure and Applied Chemistry, Paris.

44

International

Union

of Pure and Applied Physics, Paris.

45

International
Delft.

Union

of Theoretical and Applied Mechanics,.

46

Permanent International Association of Road Congress,,
Brussels.

47

Union International Centre le Cancer, Paris.

48
49

World Veterans' Federation, Paris.
World Poultry Science Association, New York.

GMGIPND-DME(NS)-142 M of EA-103-59-2,500

INDIA
USA UNITED KINGDOM SWITZERLAND LATVIA FRANCE BELGIUM CENTRAL AFRICAN
REPUBLIC ITALY
Jan 01, 1958


