1957-58

Content
TABLE

OF

CONTENTS

PART-I
PAGE
Administration:(i) Headquarters
(ii) Reorganisation of the methods of work and
nected matters
(iii) Indian Foreign Service
(iv) Missions abroad
(v) Inspectorate
(vi) Expenditure
(vii) Tribal areas
(viii) Naga Hills-Tuensang Area

con-

1-2
2-3
4-5
5-6
6
7-12
12-13
13-15

PART-II
A.-States in special treaty relations With

India:-

(i) Bhutan
(ii) Sikkim

16
16-17

B.-Foreign Enclaves in India:(i) Goa, Daman and Diu

17-18

(ii) Pondicherry, Karaikal, Yanam and Mahe

18-19

C.-India's neighbours :(i)

Afghanistan

(ii)

Burma

(iii)
(iv)
(v)
(vi)

Ceylon
China (see under East Asia)

Nepal
Pakistan

19-21
21
21
21
21-22
22-28

D.-South East Asia, Australia and New Zealand

28-30

E.-East Asia

30-34

F.-West Asia

34-36

G.-Africa

36-41

H.-Europe

42-49

316 M. of E.A.
(i)
(ii)
I.-The Americas :(i) North America

49-51

(ii) Central America

51-52

(iii) South America

52-53

J.-External Publicity

53-59

K.-Miscellaneous :(i) Central Passport and Emigration Organisation
(ii)

Haj

(iii)

59-60
60

Legal and Treaties Division

60

(iv)

Distinguished visitors from abroad

61-62

(v)

Consular Division,

62-65

(vi)

Diplomatic and Consular Missions in India

65

PART-III
A.-

United Nations

66-69

B.-International Conferences

69
APPENDICES

(i)

Indian Missions Abroad

70-74

(ii) Indian Information Units Abroad

75-76

(iii) Foreign Missions in India

77-81

(iv) Treaties, Conventions and Agreement concluded
or renewed by India with other countries during
1959
(v)

International

Organisations of which India is a

82

member

83-85

(vi) Administration Chart of the Ministry

INDIA
BHUTAN
USA

AFGHANISTAN

BURMA

CHINA

NEPAL

PAKISTAN

Jan 01, 1956

ADMINISTRATION
PART I
ADMINISTRATION
Organisation of the Ministry
(i) Headquarters.-The Ministry of External Affairs is responsible for
the conduct of India's relations with foreign countries. The Ministry is
also responsible for the country's representation in the United Nations
and advises other Ministries and State Governments when the latter have
dealings with foreign governments or institutions. In the domestic sphere
it is responsible for the Administration of the North East Frontier Agency
and the Naga Hills and Tuensang Area and for matters of policy relating
to former French possessions in India. The administration of the Indian
Emigration Act of 1923, the Reciprocity Act of 1943, the Port Haj Committee Act of 1932, the Indian Merchant Shipping Act in so far as it
relates to pilgrim ships, the Indian Pilgrim Shipping Rules of 1933, the
Protection of Pilgrims Act of 1887 (Bombay) and the Protection of the
Mohammedan Pilgrims Act of 1896 (Bengal) are also the special responsibility of the Ministry of External Affairs.
The Ministry is in charge of a Minister of Cabinet rank. At present
the Prime Minister is also the Minister of Foreign Affairs. A Deputy
Minister assists the Foreign Minister in his work.
The Secretary General is the principal official adviser to the Foreign
Minister on matters relating to foreign policy and is responsible for the
supervision and co-ordination of the Ministry as a whole. The Foreign
Secretary is in charge of all territorial Divisions excepting those under
the charge of the Commonwealth Secretary, and the Protocol Division, the
External Publicity Division, the Historical Division and the Legal and
Treaties Division. The Commonwealth Secretary is in charge of the
Pakistan Division, U.K. and Africa Division and the Southern Division.

86

AUSTRALIA

NEW ZEALAND

The Special Secretary is in general charge of the administration in the
Ministry and the Indian Missions and Posts abroad. In matters involving
policy the Special Secretary works in close collaboration with the Foreign
Secretary and the Commonwealth Secretary.
For administration purposes the Ministry is divided into 14 Divisions.
(Please see administration chart at Appendix VI). Six of these Divisions
deal exclusively with India's relations with foreign countries, each Division dealing with a number of countries grouped on geographical or
territorial' basis. There is a Division which deals with Protocol and
Consular matters and one with Passport and, Emigration while a third
Division deals with United Nations and allied conferences. There are
<pg1>
<pg2>
separate Divisions in the Ministry dealing with External Publicity, Historical Research and Legal and Treaties. The Administration Division
is in charge of a joint Secretary; there is also a Division dealing with
Supplies and Services of the Ministry as a whole and of the large number of Indian Missions and Posts abroad.
There is also a Foreign Service Inspector, of the status of a Joint
Secretary, whose function is to visit, from time to time, the Indian Missions and Posts abroad and to advise Government on the fixation of rates.
of foreign and daily allowances and on other administrative and financial,
questions. The post of the Inspector is at present vacant pending reorganisation of the Inspectorate.
(ii) Reorganisation of the methods of work and connected matters.-The new methods of work introduced in some of the Sections of the
Ministry during the previous year with the twin-objectives of improving
efficiency and achieving economy were continued during, the year.
The working of the Regional Passport Office, Delhi, was studied in
accordance with work-study techniques with a view to a rationalisation
of methods of work in that office. The implementation of the recommendations made in this connection is expected to improve efficiency and
reduce delays. Working of 11 Sections in the Ministry was also studied
with a view to simplify prescribed procedures and to assess their staff
requirements. All proposals for additional staff are examined in accordance with standard of work-study methods to ensure that additional staff
is sanctioned only when it is absolutely necessary. This has considerably
helped in keeping a check on the increase of staff. Action has also been
taken to lay down standard procedures and prescribe standard forms for
various repetitive items of work.
During the year under review, a special meeting of the Directors of
Divisions in the Ministry was convened by the Special Secretary to discuss
how the rate of disposal of receipts could be speeded up and to consider
various other Organisation and Methods problems. In addition to the
above, 16 meetings were held by the joint Secretaries in charge of respec-

tive Divisions. Steps were taken to reduce arrears of disposal in primary
receipts by keeping a, special watch over Sections with heavy arrears an
by bringing them to the notice of the concerned joint Secretaries. In
order to maintain efficiency and economy in administration the Economy
Board constituted in April 1958, continued to consider all cases relating
to the creation of posts, continuance of temporary posts and, fixation of
ceiling rentals of residences of officials in Missions abroad. The Special
Secretary is the Chairman of the Board which consists of 3 joint Secretaries and the Deputy Financial Adviser as members and a Deputy Secretary in the Administration Division as Secretary. The Board held 36
meetings during the year and 359 proposals were brought before it for
decision.
<pg3>
Progress was made during the year in clearing up arrears in indexing
work. Compilation of indices for 1954 and 1955 has been completed.
85 quarterly and 24 annual inspections of Sections were conducted
during the year. The defects noticed were brought to the notice of the
Sections concerned for rectification.
The Deputy Secretary in charge of O&M is also in charge of the Vigilance Unit set up in 1955. The Vigilance Unit deals with disciplinary
cases against officers and members of the staff of the Ministry. It also
concerns itself with measures connected with prevention of corruption in
the Ministry and its subordinate offices. The Unit works in close collaboration with the Administrative Vigilance Division of the Ministry of
Home Affairs.
During the year under review, the Unit dealt with 64 cases of complaints, 24 disciplinary cases, 6 cases of Appeal and 3 cases of Reveiw,
and disposed of 43 cases of complaints, 13 disciplinary cases, 6 cases of
Appeal and 2 cases of Review.
Staff Welfare.-A Welfare Officer of the rank of Under Secretary was
appointed in 1958. He is in charge of welfare work in respect of the staff
of the Ministry and their families. The post was continued during the
Current financial year also. During the year a Welfare Sub-Committee of
the Senior Staff Council has been formed to assist the Welfare Officer in
organising sports and other activities, to keep personal contact with the
employees residing in different localities in the city and to assist them
in solving, a variety of personal problems.
A fund known its "Ministry of External Affairs, Staff Benefit Fund"
was set up during the year with Rs. 2,000 as a nucleus. Financial assistance was given from this fund to an Assistant and to the widow of a
deceased employee.
There are two Staff Councils in the Ministry. The Senior Staff
Council consists of joint Secretary Administration (Chairman), representatives of various categories of staff (other than Class IV employees), the
Deputy Secretaries in the Personnel Administration Division, the Welfare

Officer and other official members nominated for the purpose. The
junior Staff Council is presided over by the Deputy Secretary in charge
of Class IV employees and consists of representatives from various categories of Class IV employees, the Welfare Officer, the Under Secretary in
charge of Class IV staff and Section Officers who have to deal with Class
IV employees. During the year, 4 meetings each of the two Councils
were held at which various problems of interest to the staff were discussed.
<pg4>
(iii) Indian Foreign Service.-At present the permanent strength of
the Indian Foreign Service is 211. In addition, there are 10 supernumerary posts and 80 temporary posts in various grades.
Excluding 25 posts of Heads of Missions and Posts which are filled by
non-officials, the net permanent strength of the Indian Foreign Service for
purposes of recruitment is 186 plus 10 supernumerary posts. Apart from
a 10% reservation for promotion of officers of Grade I of the Indian
Foreign Service (B) and of the Information Service, recruitment is made
in the junior Scale of the Service exclusively through the annual open
competitive examination held by the Union Public Service Commission.
Ten candidates, including one from the Scheduled Castes and one from
the Scheduled Tribes were recruited during 1959 as a result of the competitive examination held by the UPSC in 1958. Including these Pro-bationers, the actual strength of the Indian Foreign Service stood at 197Ten more candidates are to be recruited in 1960.
INDIAN FOREIGN SERVICE `B'
The permanent strength of the Indian Foreign Service Branch `B' is
1681; in addition, there are 621 temporary posts in the various sub-cadres.
The sanctioned strength of the ex-Cadre posts of Library Assistants is
4, of Research Assistants 1, of Hindi Translators 1 and of Interpreterscum-Translators 14.
Out of the sanctioned Grade IV posts of the, ITS (B), 50 Posts have
been earmarked for S.A.S. Accountants for better conduct of accounts
work in Indian Missions abroad. S.A.S. Accountants are borrowed from
Audit Offices in India and are treated as on deputation to, the IFS (B)
for the period of their duty in this Ministry or in Missions/Posts abroad.
The initial constitution of the General Cadre and the Stenographers
Sub-Cadre of the Indian Foreign Service (B) has been almost completed
and the Foreign Service (B) Section which was dealing with the formation of the cadre has been wound up.
Recruitment to Grade II of the Cypher Sub-Cadre has been completed54 persons have been appointed to that grade of the sub-cadre.
The formation of the Interpreters Sub-Cadre of the Indian Foreign
Service (B) has been approved and the draft Recruitment Rules for the

Sub-Cadre are under consideration.
Pending finalisation of the Maintenance, Recruitment and Training,
Rules in respect of the Service, 23 Assistants have so far been recruited
through the UPSC after the initial constitution; 36 Stenographers have
similarly been appointed from amongst those declared successful at the
<pg5>
UPSC tests and 64 Clerks have been approved for recruitment through
the UPSC during the year. 133 Clerks have been considered fit for appointment to the Service from among those who are working in the Ministry on a temporary basis and who had not been selected for appointment
to Grade VI of the Indian Foreign Service (B) earlier.
Transfers, postings, confirmations, promotions and extensions in service etc. of the officers of the Indian Foreign Service and of Grade I of IFS
(B) and of Information Service of India officers are decided by a Foreign
Service Board consisting of the Foreign Secretary, Commonwealth Secretary, Special Secretary and the Secretary, Ministry of Commerce and
Industry, with the Joint Secretary (Admn) as Secretary of the Board. The
Board also regulates the programme of training of Indian Foreign Service
probationers. Transfers and postings of Indian Foreign Service (B) officers other than Grade I are similarly decided by a Senior Establishment
Board (consisting of joint Secretary (Admn), Director, External Publicity, one Deputy Secretary of the Minis-try of Commerce and Industry,
and one Under Secretary, with the Deputy Secretary (Admn) acting as
Secretary of the Board) and a Junior Establishment Board (consisting of
three Deputy Secretaries and an Under Secretary, with the Under Secretary
(FSP) acting as Secretary of the Board). Cases of confirmation, promotion
and extension in service etc., of Indian Foreign Service (B) officers are
considered by two Departmental Promotion Committees set up in accordance with the regulations in force. The Senior Departmental Promotion
Committee consists of three joint Secretaries and a Deputy Secretary and
the junior Departmental Promotion Committee consists of four Deputy
Secretaries and two Under Secretaries.
(iv) Missions Abroad.-At the beginning of the year 1959, there were
109 Indian Missions and Posts abroad, as under:Embassies

44 (Six concurrently accredited-no
separate Mission)
High Commissions
10
Legations
10 (Seven concurrently accreditedno separate Mission)
Commissions
10
Trade Commissions
2
Consulates-General
15 (Three concurrently accreditedno separate Posts)
Consulates
8
Vice-Consulates
4
Special Missions
3

Agencies

3

During 1959, a separate Embassy was opened in Rumania under a
resident Charge a Affaires of the status of a Counsellor. The status of
the Mission in Hungary was also raised from a Legation to an Embassy.
The, Ambassadors of India in Prague and Moscow are concurrently accredited to Rumania and Hungary, respectively. During the year, the status
<pg6>
of the Consulates of India at Muscat and Berlin was raised to that of
Consulate-General.
During the year under review, the Chancery building in Karachi
was completed. It has since been occupied by the various offices of the
High, Commission. The construction of the Chancery buildings in
Accra and Tokyo and of the Ambassador's residence in Ankara, is
expected to start in the next financial year.
In Canberra, a plot of land for the construction of our High Commission buildings was allotted by the Government of Australia. The
actual construction work could not be taken up within the stipulated
period due to the shortage of foreign exchange. In Port of Spain, 2
plots of land have been acquired on 99 years lease, but the construction work is not likely to be taken in, hand in the near future for want
of funds.
In Kathmandu, there is a proposal to construct a 10-bed hospital
in 1960. This will serve the needs of our staff in the Mission there as
well as of the local people.
The Government of India and the Government of Ethiopia have
entered into agreement to exchange on reciprocal basis plots of land
in New Delhi and Addis Ababa respectively. But the actual handing
over has not yet taken place in either of the places.
The question of purchase of property for our Chanceries in Hong
Kong and Cairo is under consideration.
In our Trade Agencies at Gartok and Gyantse only nominal progress
in construction work could be made due to the unsettled conditions
there.
(v) Inspectorate.-The Inspection team, during their tour from 14
April to 4 August 1959, visited the Indian Missions/Posts, in Iraq,
Turkey, Switzerland, Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Trinidad, Mexico, the
United States, of, America, Canada, France and the United Kingdom and
made recommendations on various administrative matters including allowances and staff position.
Their recommendations on revision of quantum of local staff and
their terms and conditions, on allowances for India-based staff, daily
allowances etc. have been examined and implemented except in a few

cases which are under, examination. Many administrative problems in
connection with Service and Supply have also been finalized as a result
of the Inspectors' recommendations.
<pg7>
(vi) Expenditure.-The expenditure of this Ministry falls under Five
Demands viz. (i) Tribal Areas, (ii) Naga Hills-Tuensang Area, (iii) External Affairs, (iv) Pondicherry and (v) Miscellaneous.
According to the Revised Estimates, expenditure in 1959-60 is
expected to be Rs. 2,504.76 lakhs. Some of the items included in it are
either fixed or do not relate directly to the normal conduct of External
Affairs proper. These are:Rs.
(in lakhs)
(a) Tribal Areas including Assam Rifles and
provision for development (Rs. 114.27
lakhs) and Community Projects (Rs. 9.91
lakhs).
846.54
(b) Naga Hills-Tuensang Area including provision for development (Rs. 83.67 lakhs)
and Community Projects (Rs. 12.59
lakhs).
336.36
(c) Payments to neighbouring States and expenditure on Pondicherry
376.54
(d) Contribution to United Nations Organisation and expenditure on the Delegation
thereto and the Delegation to International Commission for Supervision
and Control in Indo-China.
67.88
(e) Reimbursement of expenditure on the
Indian contingents in Gaza (UNEF) to
the Ministry of Defence.
102.59
(f) Expenditure on Demarcation of Boundaries
between India and Pakistan.
10.92
(g) Passport and Emigration Establishments.

24.81

(h) Miscellaneous Expenditure e.g. on Pilgrimage, Refugees, including Tibetan Refugees,
(Rs. 49.89 lakhs) and Evacuees, Repatriation of Indians, Loss by Exchange etc.
55.89
----------------Total
1,821.53
------------------

The expenditure on External Affairs Relations proper amounts to
Rs. 683.23 lakhs. This includes Rs. 83.72 lakhs on High Commissioner's
<pg8>
Office in London, Rs. 122.56 lakhs on Pay and Allowances of officers and
staff and other expenses at headquarters, Rs. 21.90 lakhs on account
of the Hospitality Grant of the Government of India and Rs. 11.80 lakhs
on Donations and Relief measures in foreign countries.
The expenditure on Missions and Posts abroad amounts to Rs. 443.25
lakhs and is spread over 84 Missions. This gives an average of Rs. 5.28
lakhs per Mission. Of this, an average of Rs. 1.56 lakhs per Mission is
spent on the Pay and Allowances of the officers and Rs. 1.59 lakhs on
the Pay and Allowances of the staff, Rs. 0.84 lakh on offices and residential accommodation. The balance consists of contingent and other
expenditure.
During, the period ending 30 September 1959, the posts of 6 Section,
Officers (Grade 11), 3 Section Officers (Grade 111), 16 Assistants, 10 U.D.Cs,
8 L.D.Cs and 6 Steno-typists continued to be kept in abeyance in the
Ministry owing to experiments in re-organisation. The economy resulting from this was, however, offset, to some extent, by the creation of 4
posts of Under Secretaries and 11 posts of Stenographers. In our Missions and Posts abroad, as a measure of economy, a decision was taken
during this period to abolish the posts of two clerks and one class IV
official. to reduce the posts of one Assistant and one Stenographer and
to keep unfilled the posts of one Registrar (Grade III), one Assistant
and 4 class IV officials. These are only the fresh economy measures in
respect of the actual budget provision for the financial, year 1959-60
and do not include the posts which continued to be kept vacant from,
the previous year and for which no budget provision was made for the
year 1959-60.
The S.R. Unit of the Ministry of Finance submitted a report recommending the reduction of 237 posts under all Ministries in the High
Commission of India, London. Their report has been implemented with
the exception of a few posts.
GRANTS-IN-AID GIVEN TO QUASI-GOVERNMENT AND PRIVATE
AGENCIES:(a) Indian Council of World Affairs.-The Indian Council of World
Affairs applied for Government help in building up a good library,
possessing a collection of books, periodicals etc. on international affairs
covering all the countries of the world with particular reference to Asia.
Having regard to the limited resources of the Council and appreciating
the Council's target for essential and valuable books and documents for
the library it was decided to grant Rs. 1 lakh for the year 1952-56;
another grant of Rs. 25,000 for 1956-57 and a further grant of Rs. 1 lakh
for the years 1956-60. The grant is paid to the Council on the basis of

<pg9>
the annual report of the audited statement of accounts. Before sanctioning the grant, it is seen that the expenditure on the purchase of books,
maps, periodicals, etc. during the preceding year is not less than the
amount sanctioned from Government funds. The annual report and
audited statement of account's disclose that the amounts sanctioned to
the Council have been well spent.
(b) International Bureau of Permanent Court of Arbitration.-India
is represented on the Administrative Council of the Permanent Court
of Arbitration since 1957. The expenses of the Bureau are borne by
the contracting powers in the proportion fixed for the International
Bureau of the Universal Postal Union. This Ministry had contributed
a sum of Rs. 5,438 in 1957 and another sum of Rs. 5,386 in 1958. As
the object of the Bureau is to provide machinery for arbitration for
international differences and disputes between States which it has not
been possible to settle by diplomacy and as the annual expenditure is
not much, it was considered essential to incur this expenditure in the
public interest.
(c) Asian, and African Legal Consultative Committee.-The Asian
Legal Consultative Committee was constituted by the Governments of
Burma, Ceylon; India, Indonesia; Iraq, Japan and Syria in November
1956 to deal with problems that may-be referred to it and to help in
the exchange of views and information on matters of common concern
between the participating countries. Subsequently, the Governments
of the Sudan, the UAR and Pakistan joined the Committee and it is now
known as the Asian African Legal Consultative Committee. This Ministry
granted/contributed a sum of Rs. 5,000 in 1957, Rs. 15,952 in 1958 and
Rs. 1,102 in 1959. Several important legal problems referred by the
Governments of the participating countries such as Immunity of
diplomatic representatives, Principles of extradition, Immunity of States
in respect of commercial transactions, Dual citizenship and Status of
Aliens were discussed.
(d) Commonwealth Economic Committee.-The Economic Committee,
has been in. existence as an Inter-Commonwealth Organisation since March
1925. The cost of the Committee's services is met from funds contributed
by the Commonwealth Governments in an agreed proportion. The chief.
activity of this Committee is to provide economic information and
statistical service on subjects affecting Commonwealth production and
trade in the context of post-war world conditions. India's share in 1959-60
was (pound) 7,553.
(e) Rama Krishna Mission Hospital, Rangoon.--A sum of Rs. 1 lakh
was granted on an ad hoc basis to the Rama Krishna Mission Hospital,
Rangoon together with a recurring grant of Rs. 35,000. This Hospital
<pg10>
serves the needs of the local community in an admirable manner and

the grants are made after examining the annual report and the statement
of audited accounts.
(f) Rama Krishna Mission Society, Rangoon.-A sum of Rs. 25,000 for
the year 1959-60 was paid as a recurring grant to the Rama Krishna
Mission Society in Rangoon in order to enable them to spread the maniold social and cultural aspects of India. not only among the Indian
population but also among the Burmese in Rangoon.
Review of Standing Charges.-As desired by the Estimates Committee
in para 11 of their 55th Report (2nd Lok Sabha), the position of sanctioned
Grant under 'Standing Charges' and the anticipated requirements for
1959-60 are indicated below. Corresponding figures of Revised Estimates
for 1958-59 are also, given.
Rs.
(in lakhs)
------------------------------------------------------------------------------Revised Original
Revised
Estimates

Grant

Requirement

for
for
for
1958-59 1959-60
1959-60
------------------------------------------------------------------------------Tribal Areas
20.57
124.04
126.77
External Affairs
366.40
348.66
355.21
Miscellaneous Expenditure under the
Ministry of External Affairs
3.01
2.95
2.94
TOTAL

489.98

475.65

484.92

The broad distribution of the figures is given below: Assam Rifles
85.50
84.01
90.15
Political and Administrative charges in
Tribal Areas
5.82
19.96
15.84
Economic Development in Tribal Areas
29.25
20.07
20.78
Ministry of External Affairs(Headquarters) 53.43
73.34
73.12
Missions and Posts abroad
220.39
217.59
224.46
Emigration and Passport Establishments
1.74
7.28
7.07
Special Diplomatic Expenditure
10.00
10.00
10.00
Contributions to United Nations Organisations
79.55
38.54
38.54
Other Miscellaneous Expenditure
1.29
1.91
2.02
Miscellaneous -`Loss by Exchange' and
expendiure on `Pilgrimage beyond India'
3.01
2.95
2.94
The excess of Rs. 9.27 lakhs in the Revised Estimates for 1959-60 as

compared to the sanctioned Grant is mainly due to:(a) The payment of, arrears of dearness and other allowances to the
Assam Rifles personnel and increased expenditure on Travelling
Allowance dire to Operational moves;
<pg11>
(b) Refund of Income-tax levied on salaries drawn by officers
working in Indian Missions abroad, in the form of additional
Foreign Allowance;
(c) Increased expenditure on cost of passages due to turn-over,
programme of officers working in Missions;
(d) More incidence of sickness abroad;
(e) Increase in rents and prices of other commodities in general.
The comparative figures of the Revised Estimates for 1958-59 and 1959-60
show that in, the current year there would be a decrease in expenditure of
Rs. 5 lakhs. This saving is mainly due to lesser expenditure on `Contributions to UNO', bulk of the payment having been made on account, of
the regular contribution during 1958-59 and transfer of provision from,
'Standing Charges', to 'Temporary Establishments' under 'Economic
Development in the Tribal Areas'. The savings thus effected have, to
some extent, been set off against increase in the permanent establishment
of the Assam Rifles, Ministry of External Affairs (headquarters), Indian
Missions and Posts, abroad and the Emigration and Passport Establishments.
The permanent strength of the officers and establishment is as
follows:Officers Establishment
Headquarters
184
1076
Missions
214
446
N.E.F.A. Administrative Wing
33
333
Development Wing
11
699
In the course of the year, out of the temporary posts at the headquarters of the Ministry of External Affairs, Missions abroad and the
North East Frontier Agency, the following posts have been declared
permanent and consequently the requirements under 'Standing Charges'
in 1960-61 would register a corresponding increase:Officers Establishment
Headquarters
12
Nil
Missions
38
Nil
N.E.F.A. Administrative Wing
-111
Development Wing
-94

The additions in the permanent strength of headquarters and Indian
Missions is mainly in respect of Publicity, Officers and staff who were
hitherto all borne on the temporary strength. With a view to stabilise
the Indian Information Service, it was considered necessary to declare
<pg12>
some of the posts as, permanent. In view of the increased administrative
and developmental activities in N.E.F.A., some of the non-gazetted posts,
which were hitherto borne on the temporary establishment, have been
declared permanent.
(vii) Tribal Areas-North, East Frontier Agency.-The Administration
of the North East Frontier Agency continued to make satisfactory progress during the year under report in extending effective administration
into the interior and in providing the basic amenities to the tribal people
living in the Agency. A number of check-posts were established along the
International border. The Administration in the Kameng Frontier
Division was strengthened by opening an Additional Political Officer's
headquarters in Tawang. The law and order-situation has also generally
been satisfactory.
The cadre of the Indian Frontier Administrative Service has been
increased from 52 to 64 to bring the Service to required strength. The
actual strength of the I.F.A.S. was 44, of which 10 officers are serving
in areas other than NEFA and NHTA, viz. 6 in Manipur, 2 in Tripura,
1 in Tibet and 1 in Ladakh. Fresh recruitment to the vacant and additional posts in the Service has been taken up and is. expected to be
finalised by the end of the financial year 1959-60. The number of
posts under deputation reserve has been increased from 4 to 9 it Grade
I and from 2 to 3 in Grade II to cope with the requirements of the Naga
Hills-Tuensang Area.
On the development side, 4 pre-extension blocks were allotted during
the year. The Plan provision for 1959-60 was Rs. 122.90 lakhs under the
following heads:
Rs.
(In lakhs)
(a) Engineering
45.61
(b) Agriculture
9.75
(c) Forests
7.39
(d) Community Development (N.E.S.)
(e) Medical
25.70
(f) Education
14.15
(g) Industries
2.70
(h) Research
2.69
(i) Publicity
0.45
(j) Co-operatives
1.57
(k) Statistics
0.38
<pg13>

12.10

The NEFA Administration has been laying great stress on developing land transport by building roads, tracks, mule paths etc. 1505 acres
of land was developed for permanent cultivation and 147 minor irrigation channels constructed during the year. Further progress was made
plantation and silviculture. About 1,60,000 sleepers were supplied
to the Railways during the period. The total number of cases treated
in Hospitals and Health Units (luring the year was 1,63,802 of which
3,158 were indoor, patients. A wing of the 80 bed General Hospital,
Pasighat, which is nearing completion, was opened on 15 August 1959.
There are at present 136 schools (4 High, 12 Middle and, 120 Lower
Primary) in NEFA of which 29 are residential schools where free education facilities including food and-clothing are provided. 25 Co-operative
Societies of which 9 were Consumer's Societies were registered. Training
in various crafts like weaving, carpet-making, tailoring and smithy
carpentry was provided at 10 training centres and 249 persons completed
their training in various crafts during the period. During the year. a
Regulation was passed to abolish poll tax and to introduce house tax
in lieu.
The Assam Rifles Act 1941 was amended by the issue of Assam Rifles
(Amendment) Act 1958. This confers powers hitherto enjoyed by
Commandants only on Assistant Commandants in regard to award of
punishment for petty offences and maintenance of discipline.
(viii) Naga Hills-Tuensang Area.-The area continued to be administered by the Governor of Assam as the Agent of the President, through
the Commissioner and Deputy Commissioners and under the general
Control of this Ministry.
The Law and Order situation in the Naga Hills-Tuensang Area has
continued to make steady progress. In spite of a few raids and ambushes
resulting in some loss to life and property, there has been marked improvemerit in the general situation in the current year as compared with the
preceding years. This is reflected in the growing confidence of villagers
and their denunciation of hostile activities. The surrender of arms and
hostiles during this year has also shown a remarkable rise.
The Select Committee of the Naga People's Convention met at
Kohima on Dec 11, 1958 and 12 December 1958 to consider the recommendations
of the Liaison Committee and appointed a Drafting Committee of 25
members to prepare a draft for the Naga political settlement within the
decisions previously taken by the Naga People's Convention held at
Kohima in August 1957. The Third Naga People's Convention was held
at Mokokchung from 22 to 26 October 1959. This Convention, which
was attended by 3,374 delegates representing all tribes, unanimously
Passed a 16-point draft with the recommendation that it should form the
basis of negotiations with the. Government of India for the achievement
<pg14>
of Naga political settlement on a permanent basis. The draft envisages
the formation of a separate Naga State within the Indian Union. The
general realisation among the Nagas that the solution of the Naga

problem must be within-the Indian Union is a significant feature of the
improvement in the political field.
With the gradual restoration of peaceful conditions, the administrative
set up in the Districts, Sub-Divisions and Circles was reorganised in April
1959. This now enables the officials to remain in personal, touch with
places in the interior, some of which used to be the strongholds of
the underground hostiles in the past.
In the field of development also considerable progress has been made,
as detailed below:(a) Forests.-Rs. 1,35,000 were sanctioned for new plantations, construction of forest roads, bridges, parks etc. One Forest Ranger and 2
Superior Forest Service Trainees were sent for training in Dehra Dun.
The Forest Department alone fetches a revenue of Rs. 70,000.
(b) Education.-65 Lower Primary Schools and 3 Middle English
Schools were taken over as Plan Schemes and 5 Middle English Schools
were taken over as non-Plan schemes; stipends totalling Rs. 1,50,000 were
sanctioned for L.P., M.E. College and other professional studiesRs. 75,000 were sanctioned for school furniture, laboratory equipment and
sports goods.
(c) Health.-A sum of Rs. 2,23,000 was sanctioned for the purchase,
of medical stores and equipment; Rs. 2 lakhs were sanctioned for Malaria
Eradication Programme and Rs. 8 lakhs were sanctioned for Dispensaries.
and Staff quarters.
(d) Agriculture and Animal Husbandry.-A sum of Rs. 5 lakhs was
sanctioned for the development of 4,520 acres of land, construction of
irrigation channels, supply, of tools and implements and for construction
of three Veterinary Dispensaries. Ten village-level workers, five Veterinary Field Assistants and two Veterinary Assistant Surgeons and two I.Sc.
(Agriculture) students were sent for training.
(e) Community Development.-Two new N.E.S. Blocks were opened
and a sum of Rs. 8 lakhs sanctioned for implementation of schemes like
water supply, village paths, jeepable roads and for the development of
1,350 acres of land.
(f) Public Works Department.-Rs. 9 lakhs were sanctioned for powerschemes. Two other projects, costing Rs. 10,23,000 for electrification of
the existing District and Sub-Divisional towns, except Phek, are under
consideration.
<pg15>
A sum of Rs. 52 lakhs was sanctioned for development of roads.
(g) Social Welfare.-Two new Social Welfare Projects were sanctioned
in the period.

A party of 47 persons from the Naga Hills-Tuensang Area toured the
country on a Bharat Darshan tour in January 1959 and visited Calcutta
Madras, Bangalore, Mysore, Bombay, Aurangabad, Agra and other places
in India. The party also witnessed the Republic Day Celebrations and
the India-1958 Exhibition in January 1959 in New Delhi.
316 M. of E.A.
INDIA
INDONESIA PAKISTAN UNITED KINGDOM USA HUNGARY RUSSIA CZECH REPUBLIC
GERMANY OMAN GHANA JAPAN TURKEY AUSTRALIA SPAIN NEPAL ETHIOPIA EGYPT IRAQ
ARGENTINA BRAZIL CHILE MEXICO SWITZERLAND CANADA FRANCE CHINA BURMA SYRIA
SUDAN LATVIA CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC
Dec 11, 1958

A. STATES IN SPECIAL TREATY RELATIONS WITH INDIA
PART II
A. STATES IN SPECIAL TREATY RELATIONS WITH INDIA
(i) Bhutan.-Agreement has been reached between the Government
of India and the Government of Bhutan for the execution of the Jaldhaka
Hydroelectric Project on the border of West Bengal and Bhutan.
Arrangements are being made for the formal signing of the Agreement.
The supply of power from the Project will assist in establishing fruit
preservation, timber and other industries in the territories of Bhutan
adjacent to the Project.
It has been decided to grant an annual subsidy of Rs. 7,00,000 from
1960 onwards to Bhutan for purposes of development, instead of ad hoc
grants which used to be given hitherto. This will enable the Government
of Bhutan to draw up their development plan on a systematic pattern.
This subsidy will be distinct from the political subsidy of Rs. 5,00,000
being paid to the Bhutan Government under the 1949 Treaty.
A delegation from Bhutan, headed by the Prime Minister of Bhutan,
Shri Jigmie Dorji, visited New Delhi in September 1959 and held discussions with the representatives of the various Ministries of the Government of India. As a result of these discussions it has been decided that
the Government of India will make available funds up to a ceiling of
Rs. 15 crores to the Government of Bhutan for the construction of road
projects benefitting Bhutan.
A delegation of 100 Bhutanese representing various cross-sections of the

community undertook a Bharat Darshan tour at the invitation of the
Government of India. They visited various industrial centres and places
of cultural interest.
Two boys deputed by the Government of Bhutan were sent to the
State of Jammu and Kashmir for training in methods of establishing fruit
orchards.
Concerned at the distress and suffering of the flood-stricken people of
Assam, His Highness Jigmie Dorji Wangchuk of Bhutan contributed a
sum of Rs. 5,000 as donation towards relief measures. The Prime
Minister of India gratefully acknowledged the expression of His Highness'
sympathy for the people of Assam.
(ii) Sikkim.-The schemes under Sikkim's Seven-Year Development
Plan are progressing well and the Plan is now running its sixth year.
<pg16>
<pg17>
A proposal to extend the capacity of the Rongni Chhu Hydro-Electric
Project to 2,100 K.W., involving an additional expenditure of Rs. 14.1
lakhs, is under consideration. A proposal for the exploitation of the
copper mines at Rongpo in Sikkim at a cost of Rs. 30 lakhs is also being
considered in consultation with the Ministry of Steel, Mines and Fuel,
Planning Commission etc.
A sum of Rs. 21,300 was sanctioned for the training of four Sikkimese
as overseers and two as draftsmen over a period of 3 years from 1959-60.
Arrangements were made for the Maharajkumar of Sikkim and the
Chief Medical Officer of Sikkim to proceed on deputation to Istanbul to
attend the 15th International Tuberculosis Conference held from Sep 11, 1959
to 19 September 1959. The Maharajkumar also visited
Germany, France, Poland and Russia on his way back home from Istanbul.
Armed Chinese incursions across the international border and the
build up of Chinese forces along the frontier created a feeling of uneasiness in Bhutan and Sikkim. However, India's general approach to this
problem and the specific announcement of the Prime Minister that
India was responsible for the defence of Bhutan and Sikkim were welcomed by the peoples of the two countries and served to reassure them.
B. FOREIGN ENCLAVES IN INDIA
(i) Goa, Daman and Diu.-In keeping with the policy of the Government of India of not using force for the liberation of these possessions,
Goan political parties are continuing their efforts to liberate these territories by peaceful and non-violent means. A Goan Political Convention,
organized by the National Congress of Goa, the Azad Gomantak Dal, the
Goan Liberation Council and the Goan People's Party, was held in

Bombay in October 1959 and commended the fusion of various political
parties, so that a concerted effort may be made to liberate Goa, Daman
and Diu and integrate them with the rest of India.
Of the three Indian political prisoners in Goa, Shri Madhusudan
Guntak was released early in February and Shrimati Sudha Joshi on 18
May 1959. Shri Mohan Laxman Ranade is now the only Indian political
prisoner in prison in Goa.
All diplomatic and consular officers of the Embassy of the United
Arab Republic in India have been authorised to perform the duties of
Consular Agent for India in relation to these possessions. Authentication
of documents emanating from the Portuguese possessions in India, which
are required to be produced before Indian authorities, is done by the
Embassy of the United Arab Republic in New Delhi.
<pg18>
The oral hearings in the `Right of Passage' case before the International Court of justice at The Hague began on 21 September 1959 and
ended on 6 November 1959. The judgment of the Court is likely to be
delivered early in 1960.
The ban on trade with Goa continued to be in force during the period
under review with some minor modifications: in August 1958, the freeexport of books, magazines etc. to Portuguese possessions in India was
permitted and from 1 June 1959 the export of Indian films to Goa was
also allowed.
Each traveller to Goa is permitted to carry Rs. 50 (Indian currency).
Each traveller from the Portuguese possessions in India was allowed to
bring Rs. 100 in Indian currency but with effect from 10 December 1959
this limit has been reduced to Rs. 75 only. With effect from 1 July 1959,
every adult woman passenger travelling to and from Goa is allowed to,
carry personal jewellery up to the value of Rs. 1,000 while other travellers,
are allowed to carry jewellery up to the value of Rs. 500 each only.
From 1 January 1959, the Portuguese authorities in Goa have introduced the 'Escudo' which is the legal tender in Portugal. The official rate
of exchange is Re. 1-6 Escudos. The Portuguese authorities have also
imposed restrictions by which export or import of Indian currency above
Rs. 5,000 per person is prohibited.
The Pensions Disbursement Officer of the Government of India
Pensions Office, Margoa, has been visiting Goa periodically for disbursement of pensions. Efforts are also being made to clear a backlog of arrears
of pensions. The Life Insurance Corporation of India is servicing
those old policies which it took over at the time of nationalisation.
Portuguese aircraft continued to violate Indian air space near Daman
and Diu as before, There were also several instances of border violations
by the Portuguese. In August 1959, a Portuguese Negro soldier entered

Indian territory and was returned by the Indian authorities.
Another case of a Portuguese soldier entering Indian territory was
reported on 13 January 1960. On interrogation the soldier stated that
grave dissatisfaction with the treatment that he had received inside Goa,
led him to seek refuge in India. His case is under consideration.
(ii) Pondicherry, Karaikal, Yanam and Mahe.-While de facto transfer
of these French establishments to the Government of India has been
made, the Government of France have not as yet found it possible to
ratify the Treaty of Cession of the French Establishments of Pondicherry,
Karaikal, Yanam and Mahe.
<pg19>
During August 1959, General Elections were held in the Pondicherry
State and members to the Representative Assembly of Pondicherry have
been elected from 39 constituencies. The party distribution of the 39
constituencies is: Congress 21, People's Front 13, Independents 4, and
P.S.P. 1. Six Councillors have been elected by the Assembly and appointed to the Government of Pondicherry.
A sum of Rs. 87.9 lakhs is being allotted for Development Works of
the Pondicherry Administration during the year 1960-61. A provision of
Rs. 52.8 lakhs was made in the budget for 1959-60 under the 'Area
Demand' of Pondicherry State for this item. The administration of the
territory for 1960-61 will cost about Rs. 3.38 crores.
The Government of India have decided to convert 50 % of the temporary posts, from amongst those which have been in existence for more
than three years in the Pondicherry Administration, into permanent
Posts.
C. INDIA'S NEIGHBOURS
(i) Afghanistan.-On the invitation from the Government of
Afghanistan, the Prime Minister of India visited Afghanistan from 14 to
18 September 1959. In a joint communique issued in Kabul, the two
Prime Ministers agreed that the cordial relations between India and
Afghanistan should be sustained and enlarged by increased cultural cooperation and promotion of mutual trade. They also noted that the
policy of non-alignment followed by both the countries had played a
great part in bringing them closer.
His Royal Highness Sardar Mohammed Daud Khan, Prime Minister
of Afghanistan, accompanied by H. E. Sardar Ali Dr. Mohammed Yusuf,
Minister of Mines and Industries and other members of his party, visited
India in February 1959.
His Royal Highness Sardar Mohammed Naim Khan, Foreign Minister
and Deputy Prime Minister of Afghanistan, made a brief halt in India
on his way to Peking in August 1959. He was accompanied by Sardar
Ghulam Mohammed Sherazi, the Commerce Minister, and a group of

senior Government officials.
An Afghan Trade Delegation, led by Mr. M. R. Younossi, visited
India in July-August 1959. A fresh Trade Agreement was signed with
Afghanistan on 11 August 1959 which provided for steps to increase IndoAfghan trade.
India participated in the Jashan celebrations held in Kabul in August
1959. Shri Saadat Ali Khan, Parliamentary Secretary to the Prime
<pg20>
Minister, led the Indian group which comprised a Hockey team and a
troupe of musicians. Besides, an Indian Football team also visited Kabul
on this occasion. A group of Indian dancers and musicians, invited
directely by the Afghan authorities, also visited Afghanistan. Indian
participation in the celebrations was greatly appreciated.
His Royal Highness Marshal Shah Mahmud Ghazi, a former Prime
Minister of Afghanistan, national hero and uncle of His Majesty the King,
of Afghanistan died on 24 December 1959. Condolence messages were
sent to H.M. the King of Afghanistan by the President and the Prime
Minister of India.
Aeronautical and meteorological facilities provided by the Government of India at the Kabul and Kandahar air ports were continued
during the year. On the request of the Afghan Government, an Indian
team of 18 officers of various grades was deputed to Afghanistan in 195556 for the installation of aeronautical communication and meteorological
facilities at Kabul and Kandahar and for their operation for a period of
two years. On a further request from the Afghan Government, we
agreed to extend the period of stay there of all these officers till 31
August 1959 and in the case of three of them beyond that date also.,
The Government of India have also given as a gift to the Afghan Government the aeronautical communication equipment installed at Kabul and
Kandahar.
The training of 20 Afghans in the Flight Mechanic Airframe and
Flight Mechanic Engine courses continued during the year, Arrangements have also been made for the training of two Afghan personnel in
the Radio Technicians Course starting in December 1959 at the Civil
Aviation Training Centre, Allahabad.
On the request of the Government of Afghanistan, the services of an
Assistant were placed at the disposal of that Government to help in their
secretariat work.
The Government of India have agreed to send two instructors to
Afghanistan to train Afghan personnel in the working and handling of
Ambar Charkhas presented to the Afghan Government last year.
The four Afghan musicians, who were undergoing training with the
All India Radio under the Cultural Scholarship Scheme of the Govern-

ment of India, returned to Afghanistan after completing their training.
In addition to the three Indian teachers who are already in Afghanistan for the last six years, another batch of five English teachers has been
selected for service there. Three of them have already reached Afghanistan and the remaining two will leave shortly.
<pg21>
Facilities were made available to Afghan nationals for training in
different lines in India under the United Nations Fellowship Schemes.
(ii) Burma.-Our relations with Burma continued to be close and
cordial.
General Ne Win, the Prime Minister of Burma, visited India from 8
to 10 October 1959. During the visit, informal discussions were held
between the Prime Ministers of India and Burma on problems of international significance and on matters of mutual interest.
As in previous years, a number of Burmese personnel received military
and technical training in India.
(iii) Ceylon.-Our relations with Ceylon continued to be friendly and
cordial.
President Rajendra Prasad visited Ceylon from 16 to 22 June 1959.
The President visited various places of historical interest and was accorded
a warm welcome.
Messages of condolence were sent by the President and the Prime
Minister on the tragic loss suffered by Ceylon on 26 September 1959
when Mr. S. W. R. D. Bandaranaike, Prime Minister of Ceylon, lost his
life at the hands of an assassin.
A large number of requests from the Government of Ceylon for the
training in India of Ceylon nationals in the armed services and in various.
other fields were complied with.
(iv) China.-(See under East Asia)
(v) Nepal.-Relations with Nepal continued to remain close and
friendly. The most significant event of the year under review was the
visit of our Prime Minister to Kathmandu from 11 to 14 June 1959, in
response to the King's invitation. This visit, which was greatly acclaimed
by the people of Nepal, further strengthened the manifold ties of friendship and goodwill between the two countries. The Prime Minister of
India referred to the Treaty of Peace and Friendship of 1950 between
the two countries and stated that the two Governments would consult
each other and devise effective counter-measures in the event of a threat.
to the integrity of Nepal. The Prime Minister of Nepal responded by
saying that he regarded Prime Minister Nehru's statement as an expression of friendship towards Nepal.

Manipuri dancers, eminent musicians and poets from India visited
Kathmandu on the occasion of our Republic Day, Independence Day and
Gandhi jayanti. These visits stimulated interest in Indian dancing and
<pg22>
music among the people of Nepal, and highlighted the affinity between
the art and culture of the two countries. Rana Balkrishna Sam, a famous
Nepalese poet and dramatist, who happened to be in Delhi, participated
in our Republic Day Kavi-Sammelan at the Red Fort.
As in the previous year, a Student-cum-Teacher Delegation from Nepal
was invited to attend the Inter-University Youth Festival at Bangalore
on 7 December. The Nepalese Parliamentary, Delegation of 23 members
including the Speaker of the Pratinidhi Sabha came for a three-week
tour of the country commencing from 16 December. The Delegation was
invited on behalf of the Parliament of India.
We continued to provide aid to the Government of Nepal in their
economic development programmes. The foundation of the Kosi Project
Barrage at Hanumannagar was laid by King Mahendra of Nepal on 30
April 1959. Our Prime Minister who attended the function, while thanking the King on the occasion, said that the Kosi Project was a symbol of
the mutual understanding and co-operation between the peoples of India
and Nepal for the progress of both the countries. Assistance was extended to the Nepalese Government during the year in connection with local
development works in some districts of Nepal and the Maternity House
and Child Welfare Centre at Kathmandu. Rs. 30 lakhs were given for
the former and Rs. 6 lakhs for the latter project.
Under India's Aid Programme in Nepal, the Government of India
have sanctioned the following:Rs.
(a) For Village Development

2.5 crores

(b) For construction of building for the Adarsha Mahila
Vidyalaya for advancement of women's education in
Nepal
1,24,000
(c) For running the Tribhuvan Adarsh Vidyalaya on
Public School lines
2,00,000
(d) For supply of 50 Ambar Charkhas as gift to the Charkha
Pracharak Mahaguti, Nepal and for training of personnel etc.
20,000
(e) For microfilming of valuable manuscripts in Nepal

6,50,000

Another important event of the year was the signing of the Gandak
Irrigation and Power Project on 4 December 1959, between India and

Nepal. The Project which will be partly in Nepal and partly in India,
is estimated, to cost Rs. 50.5 crores and will help in irrigating 143,500
acres of land, besides providing a Power House with an installed capacity
of 15,000 KWT in Nepal.
(vi) Pakistan.- (a) Border and other incidents.-The year opened
with increased tension in border areas, particularly in the east owing
to the high rate of border incidents and border firing caused by aggressive
<pg23>
activities of Pakistani local authorities. Five Indian nationals were killed
and over 60 injured in these border incidents, and 48 were kidnapped.
The restraint shown by Indian authorities in dealing with these hostile
activities had little effect in reducing the number of such incidents.
An Indian Air Force Canberra aircraft, which had strayed into Pakistan air space owing to a navigational error, was shot down on 10 April
1959 by Pakistan Government's fighter aircraft without any kind of
warning, as a result of which two members of the crew sustained serious
injuries and the aircraft was totally destroyed. In spite of prolonged
correspondence with the Government of Pakistan they have not agreed
to make amends for this unfriendly and hostile action.
(b) Palam meeting of President of Pakistan and Prime Minister of
India.-President Ayub Khan of Pakistan made a brief halt at Palam airport on his way from Karachi to Dacca on 1 September 1959. Our
Prime Minister met him at Palam airport. The two leaders had friendly
and informal talks during the hour's halt at Palam during which it was
decided that a Conference at Ministerial level should be held to consider
the territorial disputes on the eastern border and to devise arrangements.
to prevent and control border incidents. It was also decided that, in
regard to the India Office Library and such buildings and properties
abroad as had been financed from the revenues of undivided India but
have continued to be in the possession of the British Government, a joint
approach should be made by the Government of India and the Government of Pakistan to the British Government. Necessary follow up action
has been taken since.
(c) Indo-Pakistan Border Conferences.-In pursuance of the decisions of the Nehru-Noon Conference in New Delhi in September 1958,
the Commonwealth Secretary of the Government of India met the
Foreign Secretary of the Government of Pakistan in February 1959 in
Karachi, in order to consider the disputes at Hussainiwala and Suleimanke Headworks. At this meeting the Government of Pakistan defined,
for the first time, their 'specific territorial claims in respect of these disputes. No settlement was, however, reached in regard to these disputes.
After a lapse of three years, the institution of the Conferences of
Chief Secretaries of the eastern border States was revived in August 1959,
when the Chief Secretaries of West Bengal and Assam, the Chief Com-

missioner of Tripura and the Chief Secretary of East Pakistan met in
Calcutta. The meeting reached certain useful conclusions regarding
periodic meetings between local officials of both sides of the border and
procedures for seasonal demarcation in areas where this was necessary.
<pg24>
An Indo-Pakistan Eastern Border Conference at the level of Ministers
was held in Delhi and Dacca from 15 to 22 October 1959 in accordance
with the decision in this regard reached between the Prime Minister of
India and the President of Pakistan during their informal talks at Palam
on 1 September 1959. Sardar Swaran Singh, Minister of Steel, Mines and
Fuel, represented India, and Lt.-General K. M. Shaikh, Minister of the
Interior, represented Pakistan. The Conference resulted in:(1) Dropping by Pakistan of their claim to the Kushiyara villages;
(2) Withdrawal by Pakistan from the portion of Tukergram village
which Pakistani forces had occupied in August 1958;
(3) Agreement by India to the establishment of a rational
boundary in the Patharia Forest area; and
(4) Formulation of detailed "Ground Rules" for the eastern border
to ensure that local officials, civil and military, on both sides
prevent, or when unavoidable control, border incidents.
The Conference also decided that a similar conference to discuss disputes on the Indo-West Pakistan border also should be held as early as
practicable.
The implementation of the decisions arrived at during the Conference
has restored peaceful conditions along the border of India and East
Pakistan.
(d) Nehru-Noon Agreement of September 1958.-The President of
India made a reference to the Supreme Court for an Advisory Opinion
on the legal and Constitutional measures necessary for the implementation
of the settlement on the Berubari Union No. 12, and the exchange of the
Cooch-Behar enclaves envisaged in the Nehru-Noon Agreement. The
Supreme Court concluded their hearings on 11 December 1959. The
opinion of the Court is awaited.
(e) Demarcation of the boundary.-Ground demarcation in the
Punjab-West Pakistan sector was completed on 31 March 1959, except
for disputed areas totalling 72 miles. Demarcation in the Rajasthan-West
Pakistan sector commenced in October 1959. On the eastern border of
a total of 2,481 miles, demarcation on the ground has been completed in
respect of 1,698 miles, of which 314 miles have been completed during the
year under report.
(i) Kashmir.-There have been no further developments on the settlement of the Kashmir question. Our Permanent Representative at the

UN found it necessary to address seven letters to the President of the
Security Council in respect of certain developments which had taken
place during the year so that the stand of the Government of India
<pg25>
on the Kashmir situation may be clear to members of the Security
Council. Some of these letters related to the false and misleading statements, circulated by the Government of Pakistan through their Permanent Representative, on normal democratic, legal and administrative
processes in the territory of the Indian Union. Others dealt with the
new violations by Pakistan of the Security Council resolution of 13 August
1948 and 5 January 1949 about which we learnt from the official
announcements made by the Government of Pakistan.
Attempts at subversion and sabotage by Pakistan agents continued
during the year. Up to the end of October, 71 cases of bomb explosions.
had been reported. Despite this, thanks to the protective measures taken
by the Jammu and Kashmir police and the whole-hearted co-operation
between the people and the Government of Jammu and Kashmir in
dealing with this nefarious activity of Pakistani agents, the casualties
were not high; 4 persons having been killed and 5 injured. 221 infiltraters
from Pakistan and Pakistan-occupied territory of Kashmir were intercepted during the year.
(g) Canal Waters.-Discussions between India and Pakistan under the
aegis of the World Bank to find a mutually satisfactory settlement of the
Indus Basin Waters question continued during the year.
The Indian representative at the meeting held in Washington from
December 1958 to April 1959, gave his comments to the World Bank on
the Pakistan plan and also presented an alternative plan of replacement
works. The Bank later put up its own plan as the Indian and Pakistan
representatives could not reach any agreement on a Common Plan of
Engineering Works.
An inter-Governmental agreement for an ad hoc transitional arrangement for the period from 1 April 1959 to 31 March 1960 was signed at
Washington on 17 April 1959.
In May 1959, Mr. Eugene Black, President of the World Bank, visited
India and Pakistan for further discussions with the two Governments, for
settlement of the Indus Basin Waters question on the basis of the Bank
Plan. Certain agreements in principle were reached between the Bank
and the Government of India and also between the Bank and the Government of Pakistan. Discussions between the representatives of India and
Pakistan to settle Heads of Agreement in pursuance of these agreements
in principle started in London in August 1959. Several Heads of Agreement, for an international water treaty were worked out. These discussions are continuing in Washington from 19 October 1959.
(h) Financial matters.-Negotiations to settle various monetary and
financial issues outstanding between the two countries, particularly the-

<pg26>
Partition debt, were resumed during the year, after a break of about 3
years. The Finance Ministers of India and Pakistan, assisted by the
Finance Secretaries and other officials of the two Governments, met in
New Delhi from 31 July to 2 August 1959. It was decided that the
Secretaries should go into the details of the debts of the two sides. During
the meeting of the Secretaries some minor items were settled. It was
agreed that in respect of persons who migrated from one country to
another after 30 June 1955, but before 30 June 1959, arrangements should
be made for the payment of their pensions. It was also agreed that provident fund monies of such government servants and employees of Local
Funds and semi-government institutions, should be allowed to be transferred likewise. These arrangements would also apply to migrants who
belong to the partitioned Provinces.
The Finance Secretaries again met at Karachi from 15 to 18 October
1959. During this meeting the assets and liabilities of the two Central
Governments were examined in detail. These discussions were followed
up by another round of talks at official level in New Delhi from 8 to 13
December 1959, to complete the drawing up of the balance sheets of the
partitioned Provinces and the Centre. Some items still remain to be
settled and there wil be a further meeting of the officials from 31 December 1959, when they expect to complete their work and report the results
to their respective Ministers.
(i) Trade.-Indo-Pakistan trade is governed by the Indo-Pakistan
Trade Agreement of 1957-60. This Agreement provides for six-monthly
reviews, but no review had been held since January 1958. On the invitation of the Government of India, the second review was held in New
Delhi in July 1959. During the review, it was noted that Indo-Pakistan
trade had dwindled to insignificant proportions as the figures below, would
show:-

Year
1948-49
1949-50
1950-51
1951-52
1952-53
1953-54
1954-55
1955-56
1956-57
1957-58
1958-59
1959 (Jan.-Mar.)

Main ex- Main imports to ports from
Pakistan Pakistan
(in lakhs of rupees)
7,700
4,330
3,058
4,530
3,114
800
979
840
790
668
712
115

10,929
4,406
4,387
8,750
2,188
1,930
1,938
2,711
1,580
1,340
628
137

<pg27>
The review offered to the two sides an opportunity to get a better
appreciation of each others' attitude, which might facilitate the negotiation of another Trade Agreement in early 1960.
In November 1959, an Indian Delegation visited Karachi to negotiate
a Limited Payments Agreement between the two countries. As a result
of this visit it was agreed to exchange certain commodities on a selfbalancing basis up to a value of Rs. 2 crores of goods on either side in
addition to the normal trade under the existing Trade Agreement.
(j) Evacuee Property.-Little progress was made in the implementation
of the various measures agreed to between the Government of India and
the Government of Pakistan in previous years towards settling this question. No progress was achieved in respect of important items like lockers
and safe deposits of evacuees lying with banks, assets of joint Stock Companies and status of displaced banks.
On 14 April 1959, the Pakistan Government promulgated an Ordinance which repealed the Pakistan Administration of Evacuee Property
(Amendment) Act, 1958. Cases in which a person or property was,
declared non-evacuee after 1 January 1953, can still be re-opened under
this Act and such a person or property will be declared as an evacuee or
evacuee property by a Tribunal set up under the Ordinance. The effects.
of the Ordinance on the minority community are being closely watched.
(k) Steering Committees.-No meeting of the Indo-Pakistan Steering
Committees could take place during the year as the Government of
Pakistan did not show interest in holding such a meeting. The Ministries
concerned, however, made some progress with regard to the items of
disputes remitted to them for settlement by direct negotiations.
(l) Export of Sugarcane.-With a view to helping the East Pakistan
cultivator, the Government of India agreed, in response to a request from
the Pakistan High Commission in India, to permit export of 25,000
maunds of B.O. varieties of sugarcane seeds from Bihar for experimental
Cultivation in East Pakistan.
(m) Minorities in East Pakistan.-The Inter-Dominion Agreement of
1948 and the Agreement of April 1950 between the Prime Ministers of
India and Pakistan guarantee certain fundamental rights such as equality
of citizenship, freedom of movement and worship, subject to law of the
country, a full sense of security of persons and property and equal opportunity of employment in the Services, civil and armed forces, to the members of the minority community of the two countries. In so far as India
is concerned, these rights are guaranteed by its Constitution to all minorities irrespective of religion.
<pg28>
A number of cases of offences against the property and persons belong-

ing to members of the minority community in East Pakistan came to the
notice of the Government of India. This resulted in a further lowering
of the morale of the minorities.
From the beginning of the year to the end of November 1959, 5,642
Hindus migrated from East Pakistan to India. There has been a slight
increase in the rate of migration from May 1959.
(n) Shrines and Holy places.-No progress was made during the year
towards holding a second meeting of the Indo-Pakistan joint Committee
on Shrines and Holy Places. An indication of Pakistan's readiness to,
hold such talks is still awaited.
D. SOUTH EAST ASIA, AUSTRALIA AND NEW ZEALAND
Relations between India and the countries in the South-East Asia
region and Australia and New Zealand continued to be cordial and
friendly.
(i) Indo-China States.-On the invitation of His Majesty the King of
Cambodia, the President of the Republic of Vietnam, the President of
the Democratic Republic of Vietnam and His Majesty the King of Laos,
our President visited Cambodia, the Republic of Vietnam, the Democratic
Republic of Vietnam and Laos from 15 to 27 March 1959. The President
was accorded a very warm welcome in all these countries. Prince
Narodom Sihanouk, Prime Minister of Cambodia, paid an informal visit
to India from 27 to 29 December 1959.
As part of the Cultural Activities Programme of the Ministry of
Scientific Research and Cultural Affairs, a scholar each from Laos, Cambodia, the Republic of Vietnam and the Democratic Republic of Vietnam
was invited to India on a four-week study-cum-lecture tour of the country.
In response to this invitation, Professor Nguyen Khanh Toan, Vice Minister of Education of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam and Mr. Le-Van,
Dean of the Faculty of Pedagogy of the University of Hue, Republic of
Vietnam, visited India.
The Government of India decided, as a token of goodwill, to make
a gift of 366 rain gauges and 549 measuring glasses to assist in the surveys
now in progress for the development of the Mekong River Basin for the
joint benefit of Thailand, Laos, Cambodia and the Republic of Vietnam.
Diplomatic relations between Camobdia and Thailand, which were
severed temporarily last year, were restored with effect from 20 February
1959.
<pg29>
International Commissions.-The International Commission for
Supervision and Control in Vietnam and Cambodia continued their
activities during the year. The stalemate in Vietnam continues.
The strength of the Indian Delegation to the I.C.S.C., in Cambodia

and its Secretariat has been substantially reduced in view of the decrease
in the work of the Commission.
As reported last year, the I.C.S.C. in Laos was adjourned sine die in
July 1958 with the provision to reconvene when necessary. Internal
dissensions in Laos started soon after the adjournment, developing into
a crisis. Fighting broke out between Laotian dissidents supporting the
Neo Lao Haksat party and the troops of the Royal Laotian Government.
Relations between Laos and the neighbouring Democratic Republic of
Vietnam became strained due to boundary disputes.
The Laos Commission could not be reconvened to deal with these
developments because the Laotian Government declined to co-operate
with the Commission and the Canadian Government failed to appoint
a delegate on the three-member Commission. During the period under
review, the Government of India kept in touch with the Co-Chairman of
the Geneva Conference, the Secretary-General of the United Nations and
the Prime Ministers of Laos and Canada with a view to having the tension and conflict eased by dealing with the situation within the framework of the Geneva Agreements and with the consent of the parties
concerned.
In September, the Royal Laotian Government referred the Laotian
question to the Secretary-General of the United Nations. The situation
has since eased to some extent but the basic tensions still remain to be
dealt with.
(ii) Indonesia.-Our relations with Indonesia continued to be friendly
and cordial. Further measures for co-operation between India and
Indonesia were taken during the year.
A gift of textiles worth Rs. 20,000 was given to the Government of
Indonesia for relief of flood victims in Java.
A supplementary Air Agreement was concluded between India and
Indonesia to provide for training and equipment of the Indonesian Air
Force.
A Naval Agreement was signed between India and Indonesia to
provide for the training and equipment of the Indonesian Navy.
An Indian delegation led by Shri Gopala Reddi, Minister of Revenue
and Expenditure, attended the Eleventh Meeting of the Consultative
Committee of the Colombo Plan held at Jogjakarta, Indonesia, in October<pg30>
November 1959. India also participated in the Colombo Plan exhibition
held on that occasion in Jogjakarta.
(iii) Malaya.-Our relations with the Government and people of
Malaya continued to be friendly. His-Majesty the Paramount Ruler of
was scheduled to pay a State visit to India but the programme

had to be postponed due to ill-health.
The first General Election in Malaya took place on 19 August 1959.
The ruling Alliance Party, headed by Tunku Abdul Rahman, returned
to power with 73 seats out of the total of 104.
As in previous years, a number of Malayan military personnel were
trained in India and several Malayan students were admitted to medical
and other colleges in India.
(iv) Singapore.-Singapore held her first General Election on 30 May
1959. The People's Action Party having secured 43 seats out of 51,
formed the Government, headed by Mr. Lee Kuan Yew, on 3 June 1959.
(v) Philippines.-The Vice-President, Dr. Radhakrishnan, visited the
Philippines on 6 and 7 July 1959. He was accorded a warm welcome.
(vi) Thailand.-A sum of Rs. 2,19,150, belonging to Thailand and
frozen by the Custodian of Enemy Property, Bombay, during World War
II, was released and the Government of Thailand were permitted to
repatriate the entire sum to Thailand.
(vii) Australia.-The Hon'ble R. G. Menzies, Prime Minister of
Australia, visited Delhi in July 1959.
E. EAST ASIA
(i) China.-During the year under review, our relations with China
suffered a serious setback. It will be recalled that in the middle of March
1959 there was a sudden uprising in Lhasa leading to the outbreak of
hostilities between the Tibetans and the Chinese forces and, as a consequence, the Dalai Lama, with a small entourage, left Lhasa on 17
March 1959. In view of the age-old cultural and religious relationship
between Tibet and India, there was a spontaneous outburst of sympathy
with the Tibetan people when the news of the disturbances was published
in India. The Government of India made it clear that while they sympathised with the Tibetans in their aspirations for autonomy, they fully
recognized the suzerainty of China and could not, in any way, intervene
in the developments inside Tibet. When, however, the Dalai Lama
sought refuge in India, the Government of India, in exercise of their
sovereign right, agreed to grant asylum to him and to afford to the Dalai
Lama the courtesy which befitted his recognized spiritual position. But
<pg31>
even while evincing natural concern at the developments in Tibet, the
Government of India categorically repudiated the Chinese suggestion
that Indian territory was used by the Tibetan rebels as the directing
centre for the uprising against the Chinese or indeed for any purpose
prejudicial to Chinese interests.
During the month following the Tibetan disturbances, it was noted
with surprise and concern that normal facilities and courtesies expected

in international relations and specifically embodied in the 1954 Agreement between India and China were being denied to the Indian Representatives and Indian nationals in Tibet. Trade was adversely affected
because of new currency regulations and restrictions imposed by the
Chinese authorities on border type of trade. Chinese official propaganda challenged the bona fides of India's policies. The Government
of India, in various notes, protested to the Chinese Government against
their unfriendly attitude and against the manifold difficulties of her
representatives and her nationals, but continued to affirm her faith in the
importance of continuing friendly relations between the two countries.
In the wake of the Dalai Lama, nearly 14,000 Tibetan refugees entered
into India through passes in NEFA, Bhutan, Sikkim and the U.P. The
Government of India, on humanitarian considerations, made arrangements, in co-operation with the Governments of West Bengal, Punjab
and Uttar Pradesh, for the reception and relief of the refugees who had
come into Indian territory. Camps were opened in Massamari (Assam),
Buxa (West Bengal) and later in Dalhousie (Punjab) for the Tibetan
refugees. Later, with the co-operation of the Sikkim Darbar, nearly 4,000
of them were put on gainful work in Sikkim. The Government of India
established machinery for liaison and co-operation with a non-party
Central Relief Committee to utilize the generous contributions in cash
and kind received from India and abroad.
The anxiety of the Indian people over the developments in Tibet had
hardly abated when a number of incidents occurred, which clearly indicated that Chinese troops in considerable strength had spread themselves
along the common border and at some points even intruded into
Indian territory. In July, an Indian Police party, which was proceeding
on a reconnaissance tour towards Khurnak, was taken into custody by
Chinese troops in Indian territory in the Spanggur area, Ladakh. In
August, a strong detachment of Chinese forces pushed back our defence
pickets in Khinzemane area of the Kameng Frontier Division. At the end,
of August, a large Chinese detachment actually attacked and overwhelmed the Indian border post at Longju resulting in the death of 3 Indian
personnel and the withdrawal of the picket further south. The Government of India strongly protested against these border violations. In
Khinzemane, the Indian picket reestablished itself on the McMahon
Line, but in the case of Longju the Government of India asked, through
normal diplomatic channel, for the immediate withdrawal of the Chinese
detachment.
316 M. of E.A.
<pg32>
There was natural indignation in the country against these violations'
of India's territorial integrity. This was magnified all the more when, in
his letter of 8 September, Premier Chou En-lai for the first time asserted
Chinese claims to NEFA and large parts of Ladakh and other small
pockets inside India's traditional borders. This claim came as a surprise
as, in earlier years, the Chinese had always endeavoured to explain away

their maps as being merely reprints of old maps, and Premier Chou Enlai, in his conversation with our Prime Minister, had virtually accepted
the McMahon Line as the boundary between India and China in the eastern sector. In response to the anxiety expressed in Parliament at these
developments, the Government of India released in three White Papers
all notes, memoranda and letters exchanged between the two Governments since the conclusion of the Sino-Indian Agreement of 1954.
Public indignation at the action of China' was further intensified by
the attack on an Indian Police rescue party in the Chang Chenmo Valley
in Ladakh on 21 October 1959. Nine members of the Police party were
killed and 10 unlawfully taken into custody by the Chinese troops at a
point which is 40 miles within Indian territory. The Prime Minister, in
a speech on the conclusion of a three-day debate in the Lok Sabha in
November, affirmed that while India will always be prepared for peaceful
negotiations, she could not accept any challenge to her territorial integrity and, if need be, would defend her borders land her honour with all
means at her disposal.
Premier Chou En-lai, in his letter dated 8 November, suggested that
as a prelude to discussions regarding the border, the two Prime Ministers
should agree that the forces of both the countries might be withdrawn
20 kilometers from their existing lines of occupation and, at the same
time, the two Prime Ministers should meet to discuss the border question.
While welcoming in principle the suggestion of such a meeting, the Prime
Minister of India, in his reply of 16 November, suggested that both the
countries should agree not to send forward patrols and thus avoid the
risk of further border incidents. In Ladakh, however, where the actual
extent of occupation is itself in doubt, it was suggested that the Chinese
forces should withdraw east of the frontier as demarcated in the Indian
maps, and India, on her part, would undertake to withdraw west of the
Chinese frontier as indicated in the latest-Chinese maps of 1956. On 17
December Premier Chou En-lai wrote another letter to our Prime Minister suggesting immediate talks between- the two Prime Ministers in
China or in Rangoon. He suggested 26 December as the date for such a
meeting. This was followed up later by detailed exposition of the Chinese standpoint in a note given by the Chinese Foreign Office to our
Embassy in Peking on 26 December.
Early in the year, India had sent 4 students to China under the Students Exchange Scheme. China, however, sent only one student. Two
<pg33>
official delegations, one for studying Chinese Minor Irrigation Projects,
and one for studying Chinese Small-Scale Industries, visited China during
the early part of 1959. China also sent a last-minute invitation to
India to participate in, her Decennial Celebrations on the Chinese National
Day. This invitation was declined. In supersession of an earlier decision, however, China decided to participate in the World Agricultural
Fair in New Delhi which is being organised by a non-official body called
the Farmers Forum.

(ii) Japan.-During the year, our relations with Japan became closer
and our contacts more numerous. There was a steady exchange of delegations in economic as well as cultural fields.
The Finance Minister visited Japan at the end of his tour to Europe
and America and India participated in the GATT Conference held in
Tokyo. In October India signed a treaty with Japan for the avoidance of
double taxation. Japan has extended her co-operation in exploring iron
ore mines in Bihar, in developing our fisheries and in organising our
small-scale industries. Some Japanese technicians have already been invited for this purpose and they spent about a month touring the country
and holding exploratory discussions.
As last year, India was offered two scholarships for Indian students for
education in Japan. A team of eminent Japanese Archaeologists and
later a delegation of Professors from Tokyo and Kyoto Universities came
to tour our country and visited many of our ancient monuments. A team
under Professer Kihara came to study the origin of rice in Sikkim. Two
Japanese mountaineering teams also came during the year in an attempt
to climb O Chuya and Gaurishankar. A cultural team, including an
expedition of tiger hunters sponsored by Yominri Shinebun, visited India
in December.
The President donated a sum of Rs. 14,000 towards the construction
of library buildings of the Otani University, which is world renowned for
its Buddhist studies.
As a token of sympathy for the sufferers from the typhoon which
wrought unprecedented havoc in Japan, the Government of India,
through our Embassy in Tokyo, donated 3,000 lbs. of tea to the Japanese
people.
A delegation of Japanese Parliamentarians visited India with a view,
to familiarise themselves with the Indian political picture. Facilities were
provided to Japanese and North-Korean Delegations to come to India and
sign a pact for repatriation of Korean nationals in Japan. At an election
of the United Nations Economic and Social Council, we withdrew in
favour of the Japanese candidate.
<pg34>
(iii) Mongolia.-Friendship between India and Mongolia was further
cemented by the visit to India of Prime Minister Tsedenbal, accompanied
by Vice-Premier Lubsan and Foreign Minister Puntsagyn Shakdarsuren.
The Mongolian Prime Minister and party stayed in India from 9 to 16
September 1959, visiting Agra, Bangalore, Bombay and Delhi. The Mongolian Prime Minister had talks with our Prime Minister.
F. WEST ASIA
The year witnessed the continuation and indeed the strengthening of

friendly relations between India and the countries of West Asia and
North Africa.
Under the Cultural Activities Programme, several measures were
adopted to foster better cultural understanding between the peoples of
West Asian countries and the people of India. Grants-in-aid were given
to the India Union, Cairo, and the Indo-Arab Society, Bombay, which are
engaged in promoting cultural relations between India and the Arab
countries. Books were sent for presentation to some of the institutes and
libraries in these. countries and their students were provided scholarships
to study in India. Facilities were also extended to private students who
had come to India either for working in educational institutions or undertaking study tours to various Agricultural and Scientific centres.
(i) Iran.-General Batamanghlich, Iranian Minister of Interior, visited
India in April 1959.
Dr. Shariyat, an Iranian journalist and editor of the Tehran Economist, visited India in December 1958-January 1959. He saw the India1958 Exhibition and also visited various industrial and economic projects.
On the invitation of the Tea Organisation of Iran, a Tea Delegation,
headed by Shri A. B. Chatterji, Chairman, Tea Board of India, visited
Iran.
A contingent of five Indian athletes participated in the Athletic meet
in Tehran on 27 October 19.59 which was arranged on the occasion of the
birthday of the Shah of Iran.
During the year under review, Professor Indu Shekhar continued to
work as the Professor of Sanskrit and Indology at the University of Iran.
On the request of the Government of Iran, the term of Dr. S. Mahmud,
who is working as an Indian forest expert under arrangements with the
Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations, was extended
for a further period of one year.
Four Indian nationals were sent for training in the National Iranian
Oil Company.
<pg35>
Arrangements were made for tours in India of Iranian officials who
visited this country to study community development and other projects
in India.
On the invitation of the Government of Iran, our Prime Minister
visited Iran from 18 to 22 September 1959. He had cordial and friendly
discussions with His Imperial Majesty the Shah as well as the Prime
Minister of Iran about problems of mutual interest and in particular, cooperation between India and Iran in the economic and cultural fields.

The Government of India continued to look after Iranian interests in
China through the Indian Missions in that country.
The Government of India have been negotiating an Air Agreement
with the Government of Iran for some years. Certain points of detail
are under examination.
Prince Ghulam Reza Pahlavi (brother of His Imperial Majesty the
Shah of Iran) arrived in India on 25 December 1959 for a shoot and
sight-seeing for a period of two weeks.
On the occasion of the marriage of His Imperial Majesty the Shah of
Iran to Miss Farah Diba on 21 December 1959, messages of good wishes
were sent to the Shah from the President and the Prime Minister. Gifts
were also presented on the occasion by our Ambassador on behalf of the
Government of India.
Two Railway officials of Iran, Mr. Ali Naghi Zolriasatain, Director,
Railway institutions and training centres of Iran and Engineer Reza
Varnous, Director, Department of Diesel, Iranian State Railways, came
to India in December 1959 to study the net-work and training centres of,
the Indian railways.
After protracted correspondence extending over nearly 17 years, the
Government of Iran made an ex-gratia payment of approximately
Rs. 12,000 to Shri Narain Singh Sahni, who suffered heavy losses in the
disturbances in 1942 in Tehran, against his claim for about Rs. 68,000.
(ii) Iraq.-Various categories of technical personnel were recruited
in India for service under the Government of the Republic of Iraq. A
number of delegations also came from Iraq to discuss technical subjects
of mutual interest. An exhibition of Indian manufactures was held in
Baghdad and attracted wide interest.
In response to an official invitation, the Government of India
deputed Shri Sadat Ali Khan, Parliamentary Secretary, to attend the
celebrations of the first anniversary of the Iraqi Revolution.
<pg36>
(iii) Muscat and Oman.-The status of the Government of India's
Mission in Muscat was raised from that of a Consultate to a ConsultateGeneral.
(iv) Palestine Refugees.-As in previous years, India is contributing
to the relief of Palestine Refugees by arranging to donate goods to the
UNWRA.
(v) Saudi Arabia.-An Indian Anti-Locust Team visited Saudi Arabia
early in the year and carried out anti-locust operations in the Arabian
Peninsula.
(vi) Turkey.-Dr. Manilal Patel, an Indian Professor of Sanskrit and

Indology, who had been working with the , University of Istanbul
(Turkey), returned to India after completion of his term there.
Efforts are being made to secure the services of a Turkish Professor
for the Aligarh University in India.
After protracted negotiations, the Government of Turkey agreed to
release the dues of Indian business men, which had been blocked up in
Turkey for some years due to her difficult foreign exchange position.
Nearly 60% of the dues have been recovered by Indian traders.
During the year under review, Shri J. K. Atal, formerly joint Secretary
in the Ministry, took over as Ambassador of India in Turkey.
G. AFRICA
Our relations with the independent African States continued to be
close and friendly and several measures of bilateral co-operation for
mutual benefits were undertaken during the year. The developments
during the year promised the early termination of colonial rule and the
emergence of several independent African States. Our differences with
the Government of South Africa over the latter's policies of racial discrimination continued.
(i) Morocco.-Shri P. S. Subramanian, the Deputy Chief Election Commissioner of India, visited Morocco to assist in devising a suitable procedure for the elections to the Moroccan local assemblies.
(ii) Sudan.-Indian technical experts who had gone to the Sudan to
serve in various capacities under the Sudanese Government, continued
in office there.
(iii) United Arab Republic.-The Cultural Agreement concluded with
the UAR was ratified by both the Governments and the instruments of
ratification were exchanged in New Delhi.
<pg37>
A consignment of medicines was presented to the Red Crescent Society
for relief work among the victims of the Suez crisis.
The Government of India continued to look after the interests of the
UAR in the United Kingdom and France and their territories.
An Indian contingent continued to participate in the United Nations
Emergency Force in Gaza.
(iv) British East Africa.Kenya.-A Constitutional Conference is to be held in London in
January 1960 to review the Constitution of Kenya.
The Government of Kenya have published a Sessional Paper on Land

Tenure and Control outside "Native Lands", which proposes some liberalisation of the Land Rules relating to the White Highlands.
The Governor of Kenya announced in the Legislative Council on 10
November 1959 that the state of emergency imposed in Kenya seven years
ago to quell the Mau Mau insurrection would be lifted early in 1960.
Uganda.-The Report of the Constitutional Committee of 15 Members,
out of whom 11 were Africans, 2 Asians and 2 Europeans, was published
on 23 December 1959. The Committee has recommended that the present
Legislative Council should be renamed as the National Assembly with
77 seats and an overwhelmingly African directly-elected membership. It
has also recommended that direct elections, with universal adult suffrage,
should be held not later than early 1961.
Tanganyika.-In the second round of elections, held in February 1959,
the Tanganyika African National Union swept the polls as in the first
elections in September 1958.
A Council of Ministers consisting of five unofficials-three Africans,
one Asian and one European and seven officials was formed with effect
from 1 July 1959.
On 15 December 1959, the Governor announced further reforms for
Tanganyika, which will take effect after the elections in September 1960.
These elections will enable the extended electorate to return 71 unofficial
members from 50 constituencies. Of these, 11 seats will be
reserved for Asians and 10 for Europeans. In addition, there will be a
small number of nominated seats to represent special interests.
The Council of Ministers will be reconstituted to provide for unofficial
majority. The ratio of unofficial and official members and the allocation
of portfolios are to be settled at a Conference in London in the spring
of 1960 to which representatives of unofficials will be invited.
<pg38>
PAFMECA.-A session of the Pan African Freedom Movement of East
and Central Africa, which was formed last year, was held at Moshi in
September 1959. The principal resolutions adopted at the Conference
related to a demand for responsible government in the East and Central
African countries in 1960, a protest against the French proposal for a
nuclear test in the Sahara, a symbolic ban on certain South African products to be followed by a complete ban from 1 January 1960, and a desire
that the African Elected Members of the Kenya Legislative Council
should withdraw from the two contending political parties set up recently
and revive the African Elected Members Organisation. It was for the
first time that two Asians (represented by the Uganda Action Group)
were admitted to this exclusively African Conference as "fraternal
members".
Zanzibar.-The British Resident announced in the Zanzibar Legislative

Council that it was the desire of the Sultan and Her Majesty's Government
that Zanzibar should, in time, attain self-government within the British
Commonwealth.
Belgian Congo.-The Minister for Belgian Congo announced on 16
October 1959 the following time table for political reforms in the Belgian
Congo:(a) Election by universal suffrage in December 1959 for Territorial
and Communal Councils;
(b) Creation in March 1960 of Provincial Councils for each of the
Congo's six provinces, which will enjoy a large measure of
autonomy and extensive powers in the provincial field; and
(c) Constitution in 1960 of two Legislative Assemblies and an
Executive i.e. a Central Government for the entire Congo.
(v) Central Africa.-Soon after the all-African Peoples Conference
held at Accra in December 1958, riots broke out in Nyasaland in February
1959. A state of emergency was declared in Southern Rhodesia on
26 February 1959. Some 500 members of the African National Congress
were arrested and the African National Congresses of all the three territories were declared unlawful organisations. Following the pattern set
by Southern Rhodesia, on the midnight of 2/3 March 1959, a state of
emergency was declared in Nyasaland also and several hundred Congress
leaders, including its President Dr. Hastings Banda, were arrested and
the Nyasaland African Congress was banned.
In the 3rd week of March 1959, the British Government appointed
a Commission to enquire into the state of affairs in Nyasaland under the
leadership of Mr. justice Devlin. The Commission did not find sufficient
<pg39>
material to substantiate the Government's allegation that the African
National Congress had planned massacre of Europeans, Asians and `loyal'
Africans. It described Nyasaland as a "Police State" and held that
`Federation' is universally opposed in the Territory.
The state of emergency in Southern Rhodesia ended on 20 May 1959.
In July 1959, the British Prime Minister announced a plan to appoint
a Commission consisting of 26 members to prepare the ground for the 1960
Constitutional review talks.
Madagascar.-In April 1959, the National Constituent Assembly of
Madagascar passed the Constitution and elected its President. The
Constitution is of a President-cum-Prime Minister type with a unitary
form of Government.
The Fourth Session of the Executive Council of the (French) Community was held at Tananarive in July 1959. The first three sessions of

the Community were held in Paris in February, March and May 1959.
Madagascar, therefore, felt elated at being the first State after France to
be chosen as the venue of the meeting of the Community.
Mauritius.-The first General Election of the Colony oil the basis of
universal suffrage was held in March 1959. The Labour Party won 24
out of the 40 seats and formed the Government.
(vi) West Africa.Ghana.-A meeting of the Steering Committee of the All African
Peoples Conference was held at Accra in October 1959. The Conference
passed a general Resolution reviewing the movements for independence
in various parts of Africa and calling upon all African organisations to
intensify the struggle in the cause of African independence and unity.
It adopted resolutions on the Belgian Congo, Central, East and South
Africa, the Cameroons, Algeria, nuclear tests in the Sahara and Trade
Unions.
The requisitions received from the Government of Ghana during
1958 for technicians from India were processed in consultation with the
concerned Ministries and selection of over 20 officers was finalised. Some
of the officers have already left for Ghana, while-others are-expected to
leave shortly.
Liberia.-The President of Liberia and the Prime Ministers of Guinea
and Ghana met at Sanniquellie in July 1959 to deal with questions of
African unity. They deplored the situation in the Cameroons, deprecated France's insistence on carrying out nuclear tests in the Sahara,
<pg40>
supported the Algerian cause and condemned racial discrimination in any
form anywhere and the policy of apartheid practised in South Africa.
Close on the heels of the meeting at Sanniquellie, a Conference of
Independent African States, at the level of Foreign Ministers, was convened at Monrovia in August 1959 to discuss in particular, the Algerian
question.
The Government of India deputed Shri B. K. Kapur, our High Commissioner in Ghana, as a special envoy to attend the inaugural ceremonies of President Tubman and of Vice-President Tolbert of Liberia.
Nigeria.-The Northern region attained self-government on 15 March
1959, thus achieving constitutional uniformity with the other two regions,
Eastern and Western.
Chief Festus Sam Okotie-Eboh, the Federal Finance Minister of
Nigeria, visited India from 12 to 17 July 1959.
Cameroons (British).-A plebiscite was held in the Northern
Cameroons to ascertain if the people wished to join Nigeria after her

independence in October 1960 or to remain under Trusteeship and
decide their future later. The people expressed their desire to delay a
decision on the territory's future and to continue under British administration in the meanwhile.
The U.N. Trusteeship Committee has decided that a plebiscite will be
held in the Southern Cameroons not later than March 1961 and the
electorate will be required to choose between independence by joining
Nigeria or by joining the French Cameroons.
Cameroons (French).-The U.N. General Assembly, during its
Thirteenth Session, adopted a Resolution to the effect that, in accordance
with the declaration of the Administering Authority and the recommendation of the Trusteeship Council-the Trusteeship Agreement on the
Cameroons under French Administration should terminate on 1 January
1960, when this Territory will attain independence.
The Government of India deputed Shri Goburdhan as a special envoy
to attend the Independence Celebrations of the Cameroons.
Togoland.-The Trust Territory of Togoland under French Adminiswill attain independence on 27 April 1960.
(vii) South Africa.-The South Africa Governments continued to
pursue their policy of apartheid and carried this further into the educational and Church spheres. Further proclamations under the Group
Areas Act were issued to declare the municipal areas of Capetown, dis<pg41>
tricts of Knysna, Strand, Brits and Kimberley and certain areas of
Kraaifontein, Blanco and the Selverglen township as group areas for
different racial communities.
In April 1959, the South African Government introduced a Bill in
their Parliament called "Promotion of Bantu Self-Government Bill". The
Bill is intended to provide for the abolition of the existing representation
of Africans in Parliament and in the Cape Provincial Councils on the
expiry of the existing terms of office of the representatives. By virtue of
three proclamations made on 16 October 1959, the Ministers of Bantu
Education and of Education, Arts and Science will have complete control
over Bantu, Coloured and Asiatic students. From the beginning of 1960,
no Bantu, not registered as a student of an established university, may
register or attend a university without the written consent of the Minister.
Similarly, Coloured and Asiatic students would require the written
consent of the Minister of Education, Arts and Science to attend established universities other than the University of South Africa and the
Natal non-European Medical School. The University at Fort Hare,
where there are Coloured and Indian-students, will hereafter be open
only to the Bantus.
The Government of South Africa have announced their readiness to

negotiate settlements of differences with the United Nations over the
future of South West Africa. For the last thirteen years, the United
Nations have been trying to negotiate with South Africa about the future
of this ex-German colony, which was placed under South African administration by the defunct League of Nations after the First World War.
(iv) Ethiopia.-Their Imperial Highnesses Meridazmach Asfa Wossen,
Crown Prince of Ethiopia, and Princess Medferiash Worq paid a State
visit to India from 13 to 27 November 1959. Apart from places of historical interest, they visited some of India's development projects including
Community Development Blocks.
A team of seven Indian Experts will be proceeding to Ethiopia to
assist the Government of Ethiopia in implementing their Community
Development Scheme. Simultaneously, Ethiopian Officers, who would
eventually replace the Indian Experts, will come to India to receive training in their respective fields.
During- 1959, two Ethiopian Army officers, who had come for training
in our Defence Establishments, completed their training and returned
to Ethiopia. A further batch of two Army officers arrived to receive
training in India. At present, two Army officers and five Naval Cadets
from Ethiopia are receiving training in India.
<pg42>
H. EUROPE
Our relations with European countries continued to be cordial and
friendly and were further strengthened by various cultural, trade and economic exchanges. Shri Morarji Desai, the Finance Minister, visited Paris
from 16 to 18 September 1959, and held talks with the French Minister
of Finance and others prominent in the field of banking and finance.
Shri Ananthasayanam Ayyangar, the Speaker of the Lok Sabha, visited
Yugoslavia and led a Parliamentary Delegation to Czechoslovakia,
Rumania, Bulgaria and Poland in July 1959. Shri S. K. Patil, Minister
of Food and Agriculture, also visited different countries in Europe while
on his way to and from the FAO Conference in Rome. During his visit
to the Federal German Republic and to Yugoslavia, where he was received
by President Tito, he held discussions on matters relating to agricultural
development. It may be mentioned that the Federal German Republic
has recently shown considerable interest in our plans for such development.
A Trade Delegation, led by Shri K. B. Lall, toured several countries
of West Europe including France, Switzerland, Belgium and the Federal
German, Republic. The principal aim of the Delegation was to explore
ways and means of increasing trade with these countries and of studying
the effect of recent economic and financial trends, in Europe in relation
to India's economy. The Delegation also held discussions with the executives of some industrial enterprises and banking institutions in the
countries it visited.

Among the visits of cultural groups to Europe may be mentioned a
tour by Kumari Vijayantimala's dance troupe which toured France,
Czechoslovakia and Hungary, giving several performances in each country. Shrimati Mrinalini Sarabhai "Darpan" conducted an extended tour
of Western and Eastern Europe from the month of September onwards.
Shrimati Indrani Rahman gave three very successful dance recitals in Rome,
two of which were co-sponsored by the Indian Ambassador and the President of the ISMEO; the third was held under the auspices of Air India
International. Government partially subsidized the visits of these cultural
groups.
Visits to India by cultural delegations from Europe marked the close
relations between India and those countries. The Czech Philharmonic
Orchestra, with a group of 115 musicians, toured Calcutta, Bombay and
New Delhi in November-December 1959. The Czechoslavakia State Circus
also visited India during the year. The Vienna Philharmonic Orchestra
performed in Delhi in arrangement with the Delhi Music Society, and the
French Embassy sponsored a festival of French films in collaboration with
the Bhartya Natiya Sangh.
<pg43>
Some changes were effected in our diplomatic Missions abroad. Shri
Khub Chand, who succeeded the Late Shri J. A. Thivy as Indian Ambassador in Rome and was concurrently accredited to Albania, visited Tirana in
May 1959. Shri Arthur S. Lall presented his credentials as Ambassador to
Austria in June 1959. He is the first Indian Ambassador to be accredited
specifically to Austria and to reside in Vienna. Shri N. Raghavan succeeded Sardar K. M. Panikkar as Ambassador to France and presented his
credentials to President De Gaulle in June 1959. Shri B. K. Acharya succeeded Dr. J. N. Khosla as our Ambassador to Czechoslovakia.
A new Mission was opened at the level of a Legation in Bucharest
under a Charge d' Affaires ad. Shri D. K. Acharya, our Ambassador in
Prague, however, continued to be accredited as Minister to Rumania.
The Vice-President, Dr. S. Radhakrishnan, paid brief official visits at
the end of January 1960 to the four Scandinavian countries-Denmark,
Finland Norway and Sweden.
Certain special features relating to individual countries are detailed
below:(i) Bulgaria.-The Bulgarian Government offered scholarships to Indian
students and made certain proposals on behalf of the Bulgarian Committee for Friendship and Cultural Relations with Foreign Countries for a
Programme of cultural exchanges with the Lalit Kala Akademi of India.
(ii) Czechoslovakia.-The Government of India granted a sum of
Rs. 1,000 to the Indo-Czech Cultural Society established in Czechoslovakia
with a view to further developing cultural exchanges between the two,
countries.

A delegation led by Mr. F. Krajcir, the Czechoslovak Minister of Foreign Trade, negotiated and signed a Trade and Commercial Agreement
on 24 Nov/ember with the Government of India in the Ministry of Commerce and Industry. Within the terms of this Agreement the
Czechoslovak Government will extend a special credit of Rs. 23.1 crores
for the purpose of certain industrial installations in India.
A regular weekly air service between Prague and Bombay was
inaugurated in August 1959, by the Czechoslovak Airlines.
A Parliamentary delegation led by Mr. Zdenek Fierlinger, President of
the National Assembly of Czechoslovakia, were the guests of the Government of India from 3 to 13 January 1960.
(iii) Finland.-H. E. Dr. V. J. Sukselainen, Prime Minister of Finland,
visited India on the invitation of the Government of India from 13 to 24
February 1960.
<pg44>
(iv) France.-The Government of India have decided to construct a
hostel for Indian students in the Cite Universitarie in Paris. In the first
stage of construction, accommodation for 50 students would be provided;
ultimately the proposed hostel would provide residential facilities for 100
students.
Ambassador Roger Seydous, Director General of the Technical and
Cultural Division of the Quay d'Orsay visited India and discussed with
the Ministries of S.R. and C.A. and, of Education various questions concerning collaboration in technial and cultural fields between India and
France. Ambassador Seydous also paid a brief visit to Pondicherry.
(v) Austria.-The Austrian Vice-Chancellor, Dr. B. Pittermann, was the
guest of Government during his visit to India in connection with the inauguration of the Rourkela Steel Project. Following his visit to Rourkela
Dr. Pittermann toured various centres of cultural and historic interest and
was thereafter in Delhi for a period of two days. Dr. Pittermann met the
Prime Minister during his stay in Delhi.
At the time of Dr. Pittermann's visit, Dr. R. Kamitz, Minister of Finance
of the Austrian Government, was also invited by the Government for a
visit to New Delhi from 17 to 21 January 1960. An offer of Austrian
credit to assist India in the Third Five-Year Plan Was discussed by Dr.
Kamitz with Shri Nityanand Kanungo, Minister of Commerce, and separately with the Ministries of Commerce and Industry and of Finance.
(vi) Federal Republic of Germany.-The Government of India have
agreed to release assets frozen during World War II belonging to West
German owners. All assets below Rs. 5,000 will be released unconditionally and those in excess of that figure will be subject to reinvestment
in India. Profits on investments would be allowed to be remitted to
West Germany in accordance with the existing foreign exchange control

regulations.
An Indian Exhibition entitled "5000 years-Art from India" organized
at Villa Hugel received both praise and publicity. The Exhibition will
be shown at other European centres including Paris, Rome. Vienna and
Zurich.
It is proposed to appoint honorary Consuls in Munich and Stuttgart
in the Federal German Republic.
(vii) German Democratic Republic.-Mr. Otto Grotewohl, the Prime
Minister of the German Democratic Republic, visited India from 12 to
17 January 1959. Mr. Heinrich Rau, Deputy Chairman of the Council of
Ministers and Minister of Foreign and Inner German Trade of the
G.D.R., visited India from 1 to 10 February 1960, while returning to East
<pg45>
Germany from Indonesia. India has no diplomatic relations with the
German Democratic Republic but the interests of Indian students in that
country are being looked after informally by an officer froth the Indian
Embassy in Prague.
(viii) Greece.-A proposal for the appointment of an Honorary Consul
in Athens has been approved in principle.
(ix) Hungary.-The Hungarian Government opened a Trade Commission in Calcutta in February 1959. The Governments of both countries
have raised the status of their respective Missions from Legation to that
of an Embassy with effect from 1 December 1959.
(x) Italy.-An Exhibition of Rebindranath Tagore's paintings was held
in Rome under the auspices of the Rome-New York Foundation.
H. H. The Maharaja of Patiala, the President of the Indian Olympic
Federation, visited Rome for consultations with the Internation Olympic
authorities in connection with India's participation in the Olympiad
which will be held in Rome next year.
The Government of India have extended the temporary authorisation granted to Alitalia to operate air services twice a week on the route
Rome-Karachi-Bombay for a period of six months front 24 September
(xi) The Netherlands.-A Photographic Exhibition of India's Five
Year Plan was successfully organized by the Information Service of India
in the Institute of Social Studies. At a ceremony field in the Paulusky
Theature, Amsterdam, in June 1959, at which more than 1,500 children
participated, Dr. Roos Aldaman, Minister of Education, presented the
Indian Charge d' Affaires with a cheque for 27,000 guilders which the
Amsterdam children had collected through the efforts of the Director of
the UNESCO for a wing of the Children's Hospital in Bombay to be
named as the 'Amsterdam Ward' in memory of the late Shri John A.
Thivy, Indian Ambassador to the Netherlands from December 1957 to

June 1959.
(xii) Poland.-Mr. W. Trampozynski, the Polish Minister for Foreign
Trade., visited India in April 1959 to explore the possibilities of furthering trade between the two countries. His visit was followed by an official
Polish Trade Delegation, led by Mr. J. Burakiewicz, the Vice-Minister
of Foreign Trade. A Trade Agreement, effective for a period of three
years, has been concluded between India and Poland.
The Polish Government have decided, with the approval of the Government of India, to change their Missions at Calcutta and Bombay from
Trade Representations to Consulates.
<pg46>
A Polish Delegation comprising H.E. Mr. Marian Rybicki, Minister
of justice and four senior representatives of the Polish Ministry of Law
arrived on a visit to India on 16 January 1960 as guests of the Government of India. A programme including visits to Bombay, Madras,
Calcutta and other places of historical and cultural interests was drawn
up by the Ministry of Law.
(xiii) Rumania.-Under the Agreement between the Governments of
India and Rumania, which governs the installation of an Oil Refinery
in Assam by Rumanian experts, facilities are being provided for the
training of Indian engineers in the petroleum industry in Rumania.
(xiv) Switzerland.-An Indian Handicrafts Week was successfully organized at Berne, Zurich and Basel by leading Department Stores in collaboration with the commercial wing of our Embassy.
(xv) Scandinavian countries.-Two Exhibitions entitled "India To-day"
and "All India Handicraft Sales Exhibition" were organized in Copenhagen. The profits from the sales of the latter Exhibition will go to the
Danish Institute for International Co-operation, which is currently organizing a scheme of assistance to Mysore by sending out agricultural experts to the Vidya Peetha (schools modelled on the pattern of Danish
Folk High Schools).
On the invitation of the Government of India, Mr. Tage Erlander,
the Swedish Prime Minister, paid an official visit to India from 18 to
30 December 1959.
(xvi) United Kingdom.-The close co-operation between India and
the United Kingdom on matters of mutual and Commonwealth interests
continued during the year. Consequent on the Commonwealth Trade and
Economic Conference, held in Montreal in September 1958, the British
Government invited the Governments of the Commonwealth countries to
attend the Commonwealth Education Conference held in Oxford from
15 to 29 July 1959, to review the existing arrangements for co-operation
between the Commonwealth countries on all aspects of education and
the exchange of other types of aid to further this co-operation and to
make recommendations for any improvement or expansion that may be

possible. The Government of India accepted this invitation and an Indian,
delegation, attended the Conference. The Indian High Commission,
London, were also associated with the delegation.
A joint approach was made to the British Government by the representatives of India and Pakistan for the restoration of the India Office
Library.
<pg47>
A Conference of the Commonwealth Finance Ministers was held in
London in September 1959. Shri Morarji Desai, India's Finance Minister,
attended.
(xvii) U.S.S.R.-Owing to the inability, caused by illness, of President
Voroshilov to respond to India's official invitation to him to visit India
early in 1959, the U.S.S.R. Government sent it goodwill delegation led by
Mr. A. A. Andreyev, Member of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet.
They visited India during February and March 1959 and were present
at the ceremony of the laying of the foundation-stone of the Indian
Institute of Technology which is being established partly through Soviet
assistance in the form of equipment.
In October 1959, Mr. Mukhitdinov, the Chairman of the Foreign
Affairs Comission of the Council of Nationalities of the Supreme Soviet,
halted briefly in India on his way to Indonesia. Mr. P. Ya Antropov,
Soviet Minister of Geology and Protection of Minerals, also visited India
in May 1959 on the invitation of the Government of India.
Sardar Swaran Singh, Minister of Steel, Mines and Fuel visited the
Soviet Union to explore the possibility of increase of Soviet assistance and
credit in our industrial projects under the Third Five-Year Plan. Shri
B. K. Nehru, India's Commissioner General for Economic Affairs, and
Shri K. B. Lall conducted negotiations which resulted in an Agreement
between the two Governments under the terms of which the U.S.S.R.
would extend to India credit facilities to the extent of 1500 million
roubles.
Mr. Skachkov, Chairman of the State Committee for Economic Relations of the U.S.S.R., was on a brief visit to India on the invitation of
Sardar Swaran Singh, Minister of Steel Mines and Fuel to continue discussions earlier held in the Soviet Union on increased Soviet assistance and
credit in respect of our industrial projects under the Third Five-Year
Plan. Considerable progress has been registered in formulating concrete
plans and drawing up a list of projects for utilisation of the Soviet credit
of 1500 million roubles.
Other Indian visitors to the U.S.S.R., on the invitation of that Government, included Yuvraj Karan Singh, Sadr-i-Riyasat of Jammu and Kashmir State and Professor Humayun Kabir, Minister of Scientific Research
and Cultural Affairs.

His Excellency Mr. K. E. Voroshilov, Chairman of the Presidium of
the Supreme Soviet, U.S.S.R., visited India on an official invitation from
the President of India and was accompanied during the visit by H.E.
Mr. F. R. Kozlov, First Deputy Chairman of the Council of Ministers,
H.E. Madame Ye. Furtseva, Deputy of the Supreme Soviet, U.S.S.R. and
Mr. V. V. Kuznetsov, First Deputy Foreign Minister and a team of
316 M. of E.A.
<pg48>
senior officials and newspapermen. President Voroshilov and his distinguished colleagues who were in India from 20 January to 6 February
participated in the 10th Anniversary Celebrations of the Republic of
India. They also visited various centres of developmental, cultural and
community activity. At the conclusion of President Voroshilov's visit a
joint declaration was issued.
On the invitation of the Government of India, His Excellency Mr.
Nikita S. Khrushchev, Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the
U.S.S.R., visited India from 11 to 16 February. During his visit discussions were held between him and the Prime Minister on matters of mutual
interest including developments both at home and abroad. Mr. Khrushchev visited the Suratgarh Farm and the Bhilai Steel Project, both of
which are being established with Soviet technical and financial assistance.
H.E. Mr. A. F. Gorkin, Chairman of the Supreme Court of the
U.S.S.R., accompanied by five delegates representing the judiciary and the
legal profession, were on an official visit to India from 5 to 20 January
1960, at the invitation of Shri A. K. Sen, Minister of Law.
Increased collaboration between the two Governments in the industrial
field was in evidence. An Agreement was concluded for the establishment of State enterprises for the manufacture of drugs, medicines and
surgical instruments in India. Negotiations for the establishment of an
oil refinery, in Bihar are reaching a satisfactory conclusion.
(xviii) Yugoslavia.-On the invitation of the. Government of India,
Marshal Tito, the President of Yugoslavia, visited India in January 1959.
Towards the end of the year, Mr. Ljubo Babic, Chairman of the Committee for Foreign Trade and a Member of the Federal Executive Council
of Yugoslavia, also visited India to discuss questions of economic and
commercial collaboration between the two countries. Mr. Milentije
Popovic, Member of the Federal Executive Council, of Yugoslavia, also
spent a few days in New Delhi as the guest of the Government of India.
A Folk Dance Ensemble from Yugoslavia-the KOLO group-gave a
series of performances in New Delhi.
India participated in the International Autumn Trade Fair held in
Zagreb in September 1959. A delegation, of the All India Women Conference visited Yugoslavia in June 1959. Shri Gulzarilal Nanda, Minister
of Labour and Employment, also visited Yugoslavia. Towards the end

of the year, two Indian Study Teams on Co-operation and Local SelfGovernment undertook a detailed study of parallel problems and institutions in Yugoslavia.
<pg49>
His Excellency Mr. Nikola Mincov, Minister of Finance of the
Yugoslav Government, visited India from 3 to 7 February 1960, at the
invitation of Shri Morarji Desai, Minister of Finance.
I. THE AMERICAS
India's relations with countries in the Americas continued to be
friendly throughout 1959.
NORTH AMERICA
(i) Canada.-In 1959 there were significant cultural exchanges between
Canada and India. Dr. (Miss) Rosette Renshaw, a music critic of Canada,
arrived in India in November 1958 for a comparative study of Western
and Eastern music. Her visit was arranged jointly by the Government
of India and the UNESCO, the Government of India contributing
partly towards her stay in India.
As in the previous year, the Canada Council for the Encouragement
of the Arts, Humanities and Social Sciences offered scholarships to Indians
for the academic year 1959-60.
A group of students from the National Defence. College of Canada
visited India in April 1959 as part of their Annual Overseas Tour Pro,
gramme.
In March 1959, the Government of Canada offered to the Government
of India a gift of wheat of the value of $10 million. The offer was
accepted. This acceptance provided for an undertaking to establish
counterpart funds.
(ii) U.S.A.-On the invitation of the Government of India, Mr. Dwight
D. Eisenhower, the President of the USA, visited India from 9 to 14
December 1959 as part of his trip to 11 European and Asian countries.
The President received a very cordial welcome from the people of Delhi
and its neighbourhood and his public appearances were marked by the
popular enthusiasm and goodwill which they aroused.
President Eisenhower had discussions with the President and the
Prime Minister of India on matters of mutual interest and on India's
efforts through her Five-Year Plans to develop the country both in regard
to agriculture and industry. The President and the Prime Minister
expressed their deep satisfaction at the friendly and cordial relations
existing between the two countries and their peoples and with their
common ideals and objectives and hoped that their quest for peace will
ensure the maintenance and development of strong ties of friendship
between the two countries.

<pg50>
Important speeches were delivered during the year by Shri M. C.
Chagla, Indian Ambassador to the U.S. presenting India's viewpoint on
national and international issues. Among the institutions addressed were
the India League of America, the Economic Club of New York, the
Special Convocation of the University of Boston and the National Press
Club at Washington. Subjects discussed included aspects of military assistance to economically backward countries, with reference also to U.S.
military aid to Pakistan and its effect on India.
In October 1959, Shri Morarji Desai, India's Finance Minister, visited
the United States to attend the annual meetings of the International
Monetary Fund, the World Bank and the International Finance Corporation, which were inaugurated by President Eisenhower. During his
visit, the Finance Minister addressed important American organisations
and held discussions with individual business men on Indo-U.S. collaboration in the commercial and economic fields. India's development pro.
grammes and her need for foreign investment during the Third FiveYear Plan were discussed with specific reference to the possibility of
long-term loans at reasonable rates of interest. During his visit Shri Desai
also inaugurated the discussions of the Consultative Group of American
Investment in India.
Dr. S. Radhakrishnan the Vice-President, paid an official visit in July
1959 to the United States.
During the year, several U.S. Naval ships visited Indian ports
informally, and were extended necessary facilities and courtesies. In
August, a U.S. ship S. S. National Peace went aground on Kilton Island
and, on the request of the U.S. Embassy, its officers and crew were rescued
by INS Rana.
A party of officers from the National War College, Washington, led
by Lt.-General Thomas L. Harrold, visited India in May 1959. The
group was addressed by the Defence Minister.
It was decided to present a concrete cast of the Eastern Gateway of the
Sanchi Stupa to Salt City, Utah, U.S. for the city's International
Peace Garden, as India's contribution towards establishing closer cultural
relations between the two countries.
It may be recalled that at the talks held in Geneva in 1955 between
the Government of the U.S. and the Government of China, a settlement
had been reached on the measures to be taken by the two Governments
in regard to the repatriation of civilians to their respective countries.
India had then accepted the invitation to assist those Chinese in the
<pg51>
U.S. who desired to return to China. During the year 1959, India

continued to perform such functions as were expected of her under the
arrangements. In all, 113 Chinese nationals have so far been repatriated
from the U.S. to China with the assistance of our Mission in the U.S.
During the year, India received several prominent visitors from the
United States [See item (iv) under K. Miscellaneous]. Personal Messages
were sent by the Prime Minister to Mrs. Eleanor Roosevelt and Mr.
Norman Thomas on their 75th birthdays. Mr. Norman Thomas had been
associated with the India League in America from its inception. The
Prime Minister also presented to the Eleanor Roosevelt Institute for
Cancer Research, Denver, Colorado, on the occasion of Mrs. Roosevelt's
75th birthday, two Moghul paintings and a Steatite Mohenjodaro seal.
The Indian Ambassador, to the United States signed the following
Agreements during 1959:(a) The Koyna Project Loan Agreement with the International
Bank.
(b) The Railway Loan Agreement under which the International
Bank made available a sum of $50 million to India for
a programme of modernization and expansion of the Indian
Railways within the scope of the Second Five-Year Plan.
(c) A Loan Agreement under which a sum of $10 million was
made available to the Industrial Credit and Investment
Corporation of India.
In 1959, India participated in important commercial exhibitions in
Canada and the United States, among which were the Canadian National
Exhibition at Toronto, inaugurated by Lord Mountbatten who also
visited the Indian Pavilion, and the Chicago International Fair and
Exposition.
An Indian Delegation, led by Shri Gopala Reddi, Minister of Revenue
and Expenditure, attended the Eleventh Meeting of the Consultative
Committee of the Colombo Plan held at Jogjakarta, Indonesia, in October-November 1959. India also participated in the Colombo Plan
Exhibition held on that occasion in Jogjakarta.
CENTRAL AMERICA
(i) Cuba.-In January 1959, the Government of India extended recognition to the new Cuban Government. Major Ernesto Guevera of Cuba,
accompained by five other Cubans, visited India on an unofficial and
goodwill mission from 30 June to 4 July 1959.
<pg52>
On the invitation of St. Fidel Catro's party in Cuba, Shri D. N.
Chatterjee, Minister at, the Indian Embassy at Washington, visited
Havana to attend the 26 July celebrations of the Anniversary of the Cuban
Revolution.

Shri M.C. Chagla presented his credentials as Minister to Cuba.
(ii) Mexico.-Shri M. C. Chagla presented his credentials as Ambassador
of India to Mexico on 23 March 1959.
An Indian Exhibition of Arts and Handicrafts was held in Mexico
City in collaboration with a local commercial concern, from 19 to 31
October 1959. The public response was good.
Shri H. V. R. Iengar, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, attended
a conference on "India-U.S.A. 1959" held in Washington and sponsored
by the Committee for International Growth. On the conclusion of the
conference Shri Iengar also visited Brazil and Mexico on a study-tour.
As a result of his recommendations the Reserve Bank of India sent an
expert to Mexico to study Banking;
SOUTH AMERICA
(i) Argentina.-Shri P. A. Menon assumed charge as Ambassador of
India in Argentina on 21 November 1959.
The Indian Steam Ship Company has started a shipping service between Calcutta and Buenos Aires.
India will present a replica of the Sanchi Gateway to the Garden of
Peace at La Plata.
An India Exhibition was held in Buenos Aires in May 1959. It was
opened by the Argentine Minister of Economy, who expressed sentiments
of friendship and his profound admiration for India's progress. The
Exhibition was open for a fortnight and attracted numerous visitors.
(ii) Brazil.-A model of a statue of Mahatma Gandhi under sculpture
by Shri Sankho Chaudhuri for presentation to the City of Rio de Janeiro
has been approved by the Prime Minister. The Bronze sculpture will, it
is expected, be despatched in a year's time. The pedestal of the statute,
of solid mass and weighing several tons, will be prepared in Rio de
Janeiro.
An India Exhibition was held at Mosbla Stores, Rio de Janeiro, from
4 to 14 August 1959. It was inaugurated by the Brazilian Minister of
Foreign Affairs. The Exhibition received considerable publicity and
was well attended.
<pg53>
Shri M. K. Kripalani, Ambassador of India, Brazil, attended on behalf
of the Auditor General of India the 3rd International Congress of
Supreme Audit Institutions held in Rio de Janeiro from 4 to 10 May 1959.
(iii) Chile.-On the recommendation of this Ministry, the Indian
Council of Cultural Relations have awarded a scholarship for a period

of three months to Mr. Julio Excamez, Director of the School of Fine
Arts, University of Conception, Chile, for visits to art centres in India.
The Little Ballet Troupe of Bombay will visit South America in
1960. It has been decided to give the troupe, a grant-in-aid towards
subsidizing their travel expenses from India to South America and back.
(iv) Colombia.-India and Colombia have established diplomatic
relations at the Embassy level.
Dr. Leopoldo Borda Roldan the first Ambassador of Colombia to
India, presented his credentials on. 2 July 1959.
On the special invitation of the President of Colombia, Shri Arthur
Lall, paid a goodwill visit to Bogota from 7 to 11 June 1959.
(v) Peru.-Three members of Peru's Commission for Agricultural
Reform visited India in June 1959 for the study of Community Development, including the organisation of credits to farmers and co-operatives.
During their stay in Delhi they held discussions with the officials of the
Planning Commission, the Ministry of Community Development and the
Ministry of Food and Agriculture.
(vi) Venezuela.-The Government of India and the Government of
Venezuela have decided to establish diplomatic relations at the Legation
level.
Shri M. K. Kripalani, Indian Ambassador in Rio de Janeiro, paid a
goodwill visit to Venezuela in July 1959.
J. EXTERNAL PUBLICITY
(i) General.-The year under review witnessed the completion of the
re-organisation and expansion of the External Publicity Division both in
regard to personnel and publicity services. Despite the limitation imposed
by financial stringency, our overseas Information Posts continued to make
headway in their efforts to project India. A more concentrated activity
was noticeable in the field of contacts with the journalistic world and
cultural organisations abroad. The taking over of the Press Relations
work and, the entire handling of foreign Press correspondents stationed
in Delhi led to a considerable expansion of the work of the External
<pg54>
Publicity Division. The regular briefing of Indian and international
press on foreign policy matters assumed special importance in the light
of developments connected with Sino-Indian relations during the period
under review.
The Scheme for the re-organisation of the cadre of the Information
Service of India and its gradual integration with the Indian Foreign
Service was announced and finalised during the year. It provides for
the grant of long-term contracts (up to the age of superannuation) to

some of the existing personnel of ISI cadre and in other cases the grant
of five years contracts. Provision has also been made for the absorption
into the Indian Foreign Service of members of the cadre considered
suitable for such promotion. No further recruitment is to be made hereafter to the Information Cadre from the open market at any level. As
and when vacancies arise in the senior grade, they are to be filled, to the
extent of 50 per cent, by promotion from the junior grade. The remaining 50 per cent of the vacancies are to be carried over to the senior scale
of the IFS(A) in which fresh posts will be created. Regular IFS officers
will also be appointed to these posts. At the initial stage three posts in
IFS(A) have been filled from amongst Public Relations Officers and
Information Officers.
(ii) Organisation and Staff.-The External Publicity Division at headquarters and in our overseas Information Posts employ a total staff of
542, which includes 8 Public Relations Officers, 1 Deputy Director
Information Services, 37 Information Officers, 6 Attaches (Information),
20 Assistant Information Officers, 10 Information Assistants, 45 Indiabased Assistants and 310 locally recruited personnel in various Missions.
Proposals to establish Information Units at Mexico, Santiago,
Madrid, Rabat, Addis Ababa and Kampala were considered but owing
to financial stringency these set-ups could not be sanctioned. Two new
Information Posts were.- however, opened during the year-one at Prague
and another at Kalimpong.
(iii) Budget and Expenditure.-The total budgetary provision for
the External Publicity Division, including Indian Information Units
abroad, for the year 1959-60 amounted to about Rs. 93.5 lakhs. Of this,
Rs. 22.5 lakhs represented expenditure at headquarters while Rs. 71
lakhs were spent on the Information Posts abroad. This expenditure
includes the salaries of officers and staff (India-based and local), costs
of passages, foreign allowance, rents and taxes for premises, the cost
of furniture and other equipment, postage, telegrams, telephone charges,
etc. Expenditure on these items leaves only a small proportion of the
total financial outlay for purely Information and Publicity work.
<pg55>
With the present budget, the External Publicity Division runs 49
separate Information Units and provides information services to about
94 Indian Posts abroad.
(iv) Information and Publicity Media.-In order to make the various
information and publicity media more effective, greater emphasis was
placed on the regional approach during the period and their scope and
contents were adapted-and enlarged to meet the new requirements of
our Posts abroad. The Daily Wireless Transmissions (in morse-casts),
issued thrice a day, which is the main channel of dissemination of
authentic news and background to news relating to India, was expanded
during the year to include certain additional features. These transmissions from headquarters are at present received by 36 Posts and arrangements are contemplated to extend this service to some more Posts also.

This is supplemented by ad hoc cable service which transmits the highlights of important developments to some Posts that do not pick up our
transmissions or may encounter difficulty in monitoring them from time
to time.
In addition, our Posts abroad were regularly supplied, by airmail,
with many feature articles, background notes and special write-upsWell over 100 specially prepared feature articles were distributed to our
Posts, which covered a wide range of social, economic and cultural
subjects on India. In addition, large collections of official texts and
statements were also made available. The most important of these
documents were the three White Papers on Sino-Indian relations and the
letters, exchanged by our Prime Minister with the Prime Minister of
China. Widespread distribution, both in India and abroad, was arranged
for these publications.
For publicity campaigns on important occasions, like the Republic
Day, Independence Day, Children's Day, Mahatma Gandhi's Birthday,
the visits abroad of the President and the Prime Minister and President
Eisenhower's visit to our country, specially prepared material was supplied to our Posts.
A regular flow of news and feature photographs was maintained
throughout the year; about 18,000 prints on various subjects were distributed to our Missions, in addition to 44,500 Prints supplied on
request. About 1,800 enlargements and collections of colour transparencies and blocks were also supplied to certain Missions.
During the period, the libraries attached to Indian Missions were
expanded by the additions of large number of books at an estimated
cost of Rs. 1,25,000, that is, Rs. 25,000 more than last year. This
includes books in Indian languages and of children's interest.
316 M. of E.A.
<pg56>
In accordance with their requirements and our own assessment, our
Missions abroad were supplied with selected Indian newspapers and
periodicals (at an estimated cost of Rs. 1,20,000) and a number of
Government Publications, produced by Central and State Governments
(at an estimated cost of Rs. 5,00,000), besides bulk quantities of maps,
posters and pamphlets brought out or obtained by us, for free distribution in foreign countries.
Based on the-material supplied from headquarters, the overseas
Information Posts publish daily, periodical and special bulletins in
English and, in many cases, in local languages for wide circulation in the
areas. Our major Posts also bring out quarterly, half-yearly or annual
reviews and special pamphlets. Important publications are also translated and issued in local languages.
The Information Posts keep the Division informed, through regular

reports, of the trends of public opinion abroad. These reports were
studied and appropriate action was taken on the points raised in them.
As in previous years, a daily review of international Press comments
entitled the "World Press Review" was prepared from the day-to-day
news cables and airmail reports received.
Over 500 requests from our Missions abroad for information of
various kinds were met by the Research and Reference Section of the
Division, which regularly scrutinises 52 Indian and 17 foreign newspapers and journals. During the period, about 8,000 Indian clippings
and 52,500 foreign clippings, in addition to, a vast collection of other
material, were scrutinised and indexed by the Section for providing
background information.
(v) Film Publicity.-As indicated by their growing popularity and
demand, Indian films have proved to be one of the most effective media
for the projection of India abroad. Regular supplies of Indian documentaries are at present being sent to 73 Missions. 30 new documentaries were distributed during the year, bringing the total in stock with
each Mission to about 300. A regional approach to the distribution
was introduced during the year and an inter-departmental committee
was formed to ensure that supplies correspond to local requirements.
Prints of 18 Indian feature films purchased by the Division have
remained under constant circulation amongst our Missions abroad.
Besides, certain feature films were supplied to our Posts to meet
specific requirements.
The Division assisted in India's participation in 32 international
film festivals in Australia, Canada, France, Germany, Ireland, Italy,
Japan, Malaya, Pakistan, Spain, Sweden, U.K., USA, USSR and
Yugoslavia.
<pg57>
(vi) Cultural Activities.-The main cultural activity undertaken by
this Division consists in (a) organisation of, or participation in, exhibitions, festivals, fairs and cultural events abroad and (b) projection of
India's culture through the media of broadcasting by the supply of
gramophone records or tape-recordings of Indian music, plays, radio
features, etc. During the period, more than 600 gramophone records
were supplied to various Missions in addition to a large selection of
tape-recordings.
Cultural publicity is also centred around the observance of certain
important days, such as Gandhi Jayanti, Tagore Jayanti, Kalidas Jayanti
and the Children's Day. On these occasions an attempt is made to
provide to our Missions related cultural-material, such as music, paintings, toys and costumes.
During the year, our Missions organised or participated in 50
exhibitions abroad. Several of them also organised "India Weeks" for
co-ordinated and integrated cultural presentations. Mobile exhibitions
showing current trends of progress in India have been prepared at head-

quarters and circulated to several of our Posts in each region, by rotation.
(vii) Press Relations.-The main functions of the Press Relations
Section of this Division, which came into existence in July 1958, are
as follows:(a) Issue of all types of Press releases and parliamentary proceedings relating to the Ministry of External Affairs;
(b) Day-to-day briefing of, and answering enquiries from, Press
correspondents on questions relating to external affairs;
(c) Maintaining, liaison between the Ministry of External Affairs
and newspaper correspondents, both accredited and visiting;
(d) Securing accreditation and providing logistic and other
facilities to foreign correspondents, resident or visiting
India;
(e) Arranging visits of, foreign Press Delegations, fixing up their
itineraries, interviews, etc., and generally looking after
them throughout their stay in India.
The developments in Tibet, the Dalai Lama's flight to India and
President Eisenhower's visit to India attracted a very large number of
foreign correspondents, photographers and radio and TV units to India.
Many journalists also came to cover news about Chinese incursions on
India's borders. These visiting and resident correspondents were given
<pg58>
background information every day and also at bi-weekly briefings.
Widest possible publicity was also given to all statements made by the
Prime Minister and the Deputy Minister in Parliament and at Press
conferences on questions of foreign policy.
During the year, the Section provided various kinds of assistance
and facilities to a large number of foreign journalists visiting India.
Interviews with the Prime Minister were arranged for a large number
of foreign journalists and radio and television units. Among those
who interviewed the Prime Minister were the members of the six Press
Delegations from abroad, nearly 50 other individual foreign journalists and 12 foreign television units. Interviews were also arranged for
the visiting journalists with the President, the Vice-President, Union,
Ministers, Members of the Planning Commission and senior officials of
the Ministry of External Affairs and other Ministries of the Government of India. During the period under review, six Press Delegations
were invited to visit India. These were a four-member Radio Delegation from West Germany, a five-member Press Delegation from
Malaya, a three-member Press Delegation from Burma, a twelve-member Press Delegation from Iraq, a three-member Press Delegation from
the Sudan and a five-member Press Delegation from Yugoslavia. In

addition to these delegations tweleve individual foreign journalists
were also treated as guests of the Government. All arrangements for
their tour of India and for their interviews with leading Indian personalities were made by the Press Relations Section.
On the occasion of President Eisenhower's visit, this Division was
called, upon to handle the largest group of foreign journalists who
have ever visited India. The Press Relations Section maintained a
separate booth at the Press Room specially set up to facilitate the work
of the foreign journalists. An officer was posted on duty throughout
the period to, attend to enquiries from foreign correspondents and to
provide them the necessary facilities. Our Missions abroad were kept
promptly posted with the reports relating to the various activities of
the US President and his party. For this purpose a special service was
arranged in our wireless transmissions. About, 100,000 words were
carried through our transmissions as coverage of the visit.
For pictorial coverage about 5,000 photographs covering various
aspects of the visit were supplied to all our Posts abroad. In film
coverage almost a record was established. By well coordinated action
with the Films Division of the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting
a colour film compilation of the US President's visit was released before
25 December 1959. A print of the film was airmailed to Washington for
presentation to the US President. Earlier two newsreels on the US
President's arrival and drive to Rashtrapati Bhavan and his activities
<pg59>
during the visit were released. These were combined into a special black
and white film record for distribution, to our Posts abroad, in addition
to supplies of colour film to selected Missions.
K. MISCELLANEOUS
(i) Central Passport and Emigration Organisation.-The Central
Passport Organisation and the Emigration Organisation, which had
functioned until recently as separate bodies, were amalgamated on 1
January 1959 and re-designated as the Central Passport and Emigration Organisation. Employees of both organisations have been
incorporated into the C.P.E.O. which is now governed by rules approved
by the Union Public Service Commission and promulgated on 11 May
1959. All Regional Passport Officers are now in charge of emigration
work also and have been notified as Protectors of Emigrants for the
purpose.
The amalgamation has- resulted in greater cohesion between
emigration and passport work, in more expeditious disposal of applications for passports by persons attracting the provisions of the Indian
Emigration Act and in economy of staff.
Passport.-A comprehensive and revised Passport Manual with
detailed notes A various subjects in the form of appendices was
prepared and issued to all Indian passport-issuing, authorities, both in

the country and abroad, during January 1959. This Manual contains
full information about every aspect of passport and emigration work
and has delegated more authority than in the past to our passport-issuing
authorities in India and abroad. This will lead to greater dispatch in
dealing with applications for passports.
It has been observed that, during the year, the time schedules laid
down in respect of disposal of applications for passports are generally
being observed.
Toward the end of October 1959, it was discovered that a large
number, hundreds in fact, of Indian citizens had proceeded to the U. K.
from the port of Cochin carrying forged passports. Some of these persons were stopped by local authorities in Italy and France and others
by those in the U.K. Many have been repatriated on planes chartered
by the British Government.
Strict measures have been taken by the Government of India to
circumscribe and eliminate the possibility of persons travelling abroad
on forged passports in future. A Joint Secretary in the Ministry of
External Affairs has been coordinating this work and has issued a
number of directives to all Regional Passport Officers and to police
check-posts.
<pg60>
Emigration.-Unskilled labourers continue to be, banned from proceeding to Burma, Ceylon, Malaya and Singapore; but their dependents.
viz., wives and minor children, are allowed to join them when
employed in any of these countries.
The Government of Burma have finally agreed to the general, conditions of service laid down by the Government, of India in respect of
the Engineers employed in Burma, who went there in 1954 and were
serving originally the Government of Madras.
Signs were noticed throughout the year of an increase in the volume
of illicit emigration from the coastal areas of Madras to Ceylon, but
immediate steps taken in collaboration with the State Government to
prevent this appear to have considerably brought down the volume of
such emigration.
(ii) Haj.-About 19,000 Indian pilgrims went to Saudi Arabia for
Haj in 1959. Arrangements for medical assistance to pilgrims were
made at Mecca, Medina and Jedda. A special medical team consisting
of three doctors and two compounders equipped with necessary
medicines was also sent by the Government of India to render medical
aid to the pilgrims.
The term of the Central Haj Committee, set up to advise the Government of India on matters relating to Haj, was extended by another year.
The existing Port Haj Committees Act of 1932 has been revised to

bring it in line with, the present requirements of the Haj pilgrimage.
The Revised Port Haj Committees Bill has since been passed and
received the President's assent on 17 December 1959.
(iii) Legal and Treaties Division.-This Division is concerned with
international legal problems arising in the Ministry and those relating to
the international organisations in which India may be interested, such
as the International Court of justice, the sixth Committee of the General
Assembly and its subsidiary organs, the Administrative Tribunal of the
United Nations, International Conferences for codification and
progressive development of international law and the law of treaties etc.
Ratification of treaties and agreements to which India is a party and
their publication are also the duty of this Division.
In pursuance of this, copies of treaties, conventions and agreements
are being collected from various Ministries and separate treaty volumes
for each year are in the process of being published. The work relating
to the collection of materials for post-independence period has been
taken in hand and the first compilation that is to be published shortly
is for the year 1957. After this, similar volumes for other years of the postindependence period will be taken up.
<pg61>
(iv) Distinguished Visitors from Abroad.-Among the distinguished
visitors to India since last year's report were Their Majesties the King
and Queen of Nepal (18th August to 9th September, 1959): Their
Imperial Highnesses The Crown Prince of Ethiopia and Princess
Medferiash Worq (13th November to 27th November 1959); H.R.H.
Princess Alexandra of Kent (5th to 6th October 1959); H. E. Dwight D.
Eisenhower, President of the United States of America (9th to 14th
December 1959); Prince Ghulam Reza of Iran (25th December 1959 to 7th
January 1960); Mr. Jigmie Dorji, Prime Minister of Bhutan (2nd to 11th
March and 7th to 13th September, 1959); the Rt. Hon'ble R. G. Menzies,
Prime Minister of Australia and Dame Pattie Menzies (3rd to 6th July
1959); H. E. Mr. Yumjagiin Tsedenbal, Chairman of the Council of
Ministers, Mongolian People's Republic (9th to 16th September 1959);
General Ne Win, Prime Minister of Burma (8th to 10th October 1959);
Dr. Tage Erlander, Prime Minister of Sweden (18th to 30th December
1959); Prince Sihanouk, Prime Minister of Cambodia (27th to 29th
December 1959); Mr. Farhat Abbas, the Head of the Provisional Government of Algeria (8th to 13th April 1959); the Hon'ble Mr. V. T. Sambanathan, Health Minister of Malaya (21st to 23rd March and 6th, to 9th
April 1959); the Rt. Hon'ble Mr. Aubrey Jones, Minister of Supply, U.K.
(22nd March to 2nd April 1959); the Hon'ble Mr. A. K. Kironde, Minister
of Works, Uganda (29th March to 5th April 1959); the Hon'ble
Mr. C. A. S. Marikkar, Minister of Posts, Broadcasting and Information,
Ceylon (22nd to 29th April 1959); H. E. Mr. W. Trampczynski, Minister
of Foreign Trade of the Polish People's Republic (23rd April to 3rd May
1959); H. E. Mr. Mordekhal Bentov, Minister of Development, Israel
(30th April to 9th May 1959); H.E. Mr. P. Y. Antropov, Minister of
Geology and Mineral Resources of U.S.S.R. (12th to 21st May 1959);

Chief The Hon'ble F. S. Okotie Eboh, Federal Minister of Finance,
Nigeria (12th to 17th July 1959); Hon'ble Mr. M. Shoaib, Finance Minister of Pakistan, as Head of the Pakistan Finance Delegation (27th July
to 3rd August 1959); H.E. Dr. Faizal al-Samir, Minister of National
Guidance, Iraq (18th to 25th August 1959); Lt.-Gen. K. M. Shaikh,
Minister of Interior, Pakistan (15th to 23rd October 1959); Mr. H. Kling,
Member of the Swedish Cabinet (5th November to 9th November 1959);
Mr. C. J. M. Alport, T.D., M.P., Minister of State for Commonwealth
Relations in the British Government (28th December 1959 to 12th
January 1960); H.E. Mr. Chang Han Fu, Vice-Foreign Minister of the
People's Republic of China (18th to 28th February 1959); H.E. Mr. N. A.
Mukhitdinov, Chairman of the Foreign Affairs Commission of the Council
of the Nationalities of the Supreme Soviet, U.S.S.R. (8th to 9th October
and 22nd October 1959); H.E. Mr, Dag Hammarskjold, Secretary-General,
U.N. (20th to 25th March 1959); Mr. Die-Anang, permanent Secretary,
Ministry of External Affairs, Ghana (31st August to 14th September
1959); the Most Hon'ble The Marquess of Lansdowne, Parliamentary
<pg62>
Under Secretary of State in the United Kingdom Foreign Office (23rd to
25th November 1959); Mr. Mehdi Ben Barka, ex-President of the
National Consultative Assembly of Morocco (19th to 26th October 1959);
the Hon'ble U Nu, ex-Prime Minister of Burma (9th to 10th April 1959);
Mr. Ahmed Balafrej, ex-Prime Minister of Morocco (1st November to
7th November 1959); the Hon'ble U Kyaw Nyein, former Deputy Prime
Minister of Burma (18th to 21st August 1959); Major Ernesto Guevera
of Cuba (30th June to 4th July 1959); the Hon'ble Mr. James Callaghan,
Member of Parliament, U.K. (11th to 19th February 1959); Dr. Morandi,
Bridge Expert of Italy (25th February to 7th March 1959); Mr. Willy
Brandt, Ruling Burgomaster of Berlin (2nd to 5th March 1959); the
Government Delegation of the Soviet Union (24th February to 19th
March 1959); the ten-member Delegation of Thai Engineers (26th July
to 19th August 1959) and the Yugoslav Goodwill Delegation, headed by
H.E. Mr. Milentiji Popovic, Member of the Federal Executive Council
of Yugoslavia (31st October to 1st December 1959).
Other Important visitors to India during the year were General
Batamanghlich, Iranian Minister of Interior (April 1959); His Royal
Highness Sardar Mohammed Naim Khan, Foreign Minister and Deputy
Prime Minister of Afghanistan (August 1959); former U.S. Senator
Alexander Smith; Mr. John Rockefeller III; Mr. Malcolm McIntyre,
Under Secretary of the U.S. Department of Air and Mr. Walter Lippmann
of the U.S.A. (13th November to 27th November 1959).
(v) Consular Division.-There was no change in the type of work
handled by the Consular Division during the period under review except
that the work relating to the Extradition Bill and preparation of Chapters
on Foreign Service Instructions was taken over from this Division.
In view of several audit objections and certain shortcomings in the
system of keeping accounts relating to consular transactions, the question
of devising suitable procedure for accounting of consular fees was under

consideration for some-time past. The revised instructions in this behalf
were finalised and forwarded to all the Missions.
62 documents consisting of Letters of Request, Commissions and other
processes were received through various State, Governments for service
in Burma, Ceylon, Indonesia, Malaya, the Persian Gulf Area, Singaporeand the U.K. These documents, after proper scrutiny, were forwarded
to the authorities concerned through our Missions abroad. 50 Letters
of Request, Commissions etc. were received from abroad for service in
India and were transmitted to the appropriate authorities for execution.
The cases relating to the conclusion of reciprocal arrangements under
section 29(c) of the Code of Civil Procedure 1908, with the Governments
of Burma, France, Spain, Belgium, Russia, Iraq, Kenya, the United Arab
<pg63>
Republic, Japan and Iran, which could not be finalised last year, were
pursued with those Governments through our Missions. The Government of Iraq did not agree to our proposal for eliminating the diplomatic
channel for transmission of such documents while the Government of
Iran, instead of finalising these arrangements by exchange of letters as is
usual in such cases, proposed a treaty to be entered into for the purpose,
which was not acceptable to us. The cases in respect of these two
countries have therefore been dropped. The replies from the remaining
countries are still awaited.
It was also decided to negotiate arrangements of the type described
above with some other countries viz., Thailand, the Colony of Borneo
and Brunei, Indonesia, the Philippines, Fiji, Australia, New Zealand and
Hong Kong and the Missions concerned were accordingly addressed in
the matter. Enquiries made from the Governments of Fiji and the
Philippines revealed that their laws did not permit such an arrangement
being made and further negotiations with these countries were therefore
stopped. Replies from other Governments are awaited.
442 judicial documents, such as Power of Attorney, Affidavits, Certificates etc. for use in foreign countries were attested during the period under
review.
In pursuance of the decision taken by the Ministry of Home Affairs
to enter into reciprocal arrangement's under Section 14 of the Notaries
Act, 1952 with all foreign countries for recognition, of notarial acts performed by 'Notaries' in India, the Missions were addressed in the matter.
The proposals for the conclusion of such agreements with the U.S.A.,
the Philippines, Vietnam, Ethiopia, Nepal, Sweden, Chile and Japan
were dropped either because the laws of these countries did not provide
for, or the Governments concerned were not agreeable to enter into,
such agreements. The final replies from the remaining countries are
awaited.
54 cases relating to the disposal of estates of the deceased Indians

abroad were received and dealt with during the period under review.
It was decided to continue the existing reciprocal arrangements with
Poland under section 57 of the Administrator General's Act, 1913 in
regard to the estate of deceased Indian nationals dying intestate in that
country. The cases regarding revision of such arrangements with
Denmark, Afghanistan, Iraq, Argentina, Costa Rica. the Netherlands,
Sweden and Thailand, which could not be finalised last year, were pursued further. The examination of Danish laws revealed that sufficient
reciprocity was afforded in the matter and it was decided to continue the
existing arrangement with that country. The Afghan laws, on the other
hand, however, did not allow any reciprocity but in view of our friendly
relations with that country and the fact that their consular officers in
India were already enjoying the privileges conferred by the notification
316 M. of EA.
<pg64>
under section 57 ibid for the last 20 years or so, it was decided to continue
the existing arrangements with that country unilaterally as a special case.
Although the Home Ministry are primarily concerned with the work
relating to Indian citizenship, they solicit our views in several cases.
Such cases are studied in the Consular Division and, after consulting
other Sections wherever necessary, comments are offered. The number,
Of such cases referred by the Ministry of Home Affairs during the year
was 444.
Several enquiries were received from our Missions abroad in regard
to the interpretation of the Indian laws, specially the Marriage and
Inheritance Laws and suitable replies were sent to them after consultation
with the Ministry of Law and other Ministries concerned.
The number of evacuee orphans under the scheme for their longterm maintenance, care and education is decreasing on account of their
attaining majority, getting married, securing employment etc. The
expenditure incurred in this regard is shared equally between the State
Governments concerned and the Government of India.
The recovery of advances made to the evacuees from the War-Zones
has not been encouraging. This work has been entrusted to the State
Governments, except West Bengal, on an agency basis. All the State
Governments, except Madras were allowed to retain 50 per cent of the
amount recovered. The Government of Madras were allowed to retain
80 per cent of the amount recovered. Recently, to meet the increased
cost on staff etc., the Government of U.P. were also allowed to retain
80 per cent of the amount recovered. In West Bengal, this work is
handled by the Burma Loan Recovery Section (consisting of one Superintendent, one U.D.C. and one L.D.C.), under the control of the Regional
Passport Officer, Calcutta. Our Missions in Burma, Malaya and Singapore
are effecting recoveries from the evacuees residing there. To expedite

the disposal of these long-pending cases the process of recovery is being
rationalised, writing off the small amounts due from poor evcuees and
retaining only those cases of evacuees who have got sufficient income and
can, without being put to undue hardship, afford to repay the advances.
In accordance with an agreement reached long ago, the Government
of Burma had to reimburse the Government of India with the expenditure incurred by the latter during 1942-47 on certain categories of wartime evacuees such as Burmans, Anglo-Burmans and Anglo-Indians.
During the year under review several representations were made to the
Government of Burma to accept debits in respect of such evacuees. The
Government of Burma have now agreed in principle to accept debits of
about Rs. 1,20,000 in respect of evacuees from U.P. and Assam and have
promised to consider favourably our claims emanating from other States
in India.
<pg65>
Intimation regarding deaths of foreigners was conveyed to the
concerned foreign Missions in India, in 40 cases. In 115 cases the death
reports were sent to the foreign Missions concerned direct by the State
Governments.
12 requests for remittance facilities from abroad were received and
dealt with in the Division. About 185 miscellaneous enquiries about
welfare and whereabouts of Indians abroad were also disposed of. In
addition, 42 Extradition cases were also dealt with.
During the period under review, there were 69 cases of relief and
repatriation of destitute Indian citizens from countries like Burma,
Ceylon, France, Iran, Iraq, Mexico, Thailand, Turkey, the UAR and
West Germany at a cost of Rs. 17,695 as against 124 cases, at a cost of
Rs. 12,760 in the previous year. The recoveries effected from the
repatriates after their arrival in India have, as usual, been negligible in
view of the policy, of the Government of India not to subject the
repatriates to undue hardship. There were also 47 cases of deportation/
banishment of Indians from abroad.
(vi) Diplomatic and Consular Missions in India.-At the end of the
period under review, there were 43 Embassies, 8 High Commissions and
6 Legations, including the Apostolic Internunciature. Diplomatic relations were estblished at Embassy level with Colombia and the status
of the Austrian Legation was raised to that of an Embassy. A list of
Foreign and Commonwealth Diplomatic Missions in India is given in
Appendix III.
At the beginning of the year, there were 97 Foreign Consular Posts.
During the year, the Consulate of Colombia at Madras and the Consulate-General of Venezuela at Bombay were closed down and the
Consulate-General of the Sudan at Bombay and the Consulate of Japan
at Madras were established. The Ministry agreed to the raising of the
status of the Consulate of Philippines at Bombay to that of a ConsulateGeneral and to the opening of a British Consular and Information

Office at Patna. The Government of Ceylon were permitted to establish
an Assistant High Commission at Madras and a Visa Office at
Thiruchirapalli. The Government of the Federation of Malaya. have
been permitted to open a Passport Office at Madras which is likely to
start functioning with effect from the beginning, of 1960. The Ministry
has also agreed to the conversion of the Polish Trade Representations
at Bombay and Calcutta into Consular Posts.
The Consular Posts of Ethiopia at Bombay, of Italy at Madras, of
the Netherlands at Cochin and of Saudi Arabia at Bombay were
temporarily closed by their respective Governments.
A list of Foreign Consular Posts is given in appendix III.
INDIA
BHUTAN BANGLADESH USA UNITED KINGDOM TURKEY RUSSIA FRANCE GERMANY
POLAND OMAN SUDAN CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC PORTUGAL AFGHANISTAN BURMA
CHINA NEPAL LATVIA PAKISTAN AUSTRALIA NEW ZEALAND CAMBODIA VIETNAM LAOS
THAILAND SWITZERLAND CANADA INDONESIA SRI LANKA REPUBLIC OF SINGAPORE
PHILIPPINES TOTO JAPAN KOREA MONGOLIA EGYPT IRAN IRAQ SAUDI ARABIA SOUTH
AFRICA MOROCCO KENYA UGANDA CONGO GHANA MADAGASCAR MAURITIUS ALGERIA
CAMEROON GUINEA LIBERIA NIGER NIGERIA ETHIOPIA NORWAY SLOVAKIA YUGOSLAVIA
BULGARIA ITALY BELGIUM HUNGARY AUSTRIA ALBANIA ROMANIA CZECH REPUBLIC
DENMARK FINLAND SWEDEN GREECE THE NETHERLANDS CROATIA CUBA MEXICO BRAZIL
ARGENTINA CHILE COLOMBIA PERU VENEZUELA SPAIN IRELAND ISRAEL BRUNEI FIJI HONG
KONG
Sep 11, 1959

A. UNITED NATIONS
PART III
A. UNITED NATIONS
(i) General Assembly.-The 14th Session of the General Assembly of
the United Nations was held at U.N. Headquarters, New York, from
Sep 15, 1959 to 13 December 1959. Shri V. K. Krishna Menon, Minister
of Defence, was the Chairman of the Indian delegation.
(ii) Representation of China.-India again proposed during the
year under review, that the question of the representation of China in
the United Nations be included in the agenda of the 14th Session of the
General Assembly. As in previous years, the U.S. moved a resolution
by which the Assembly would decide to reject the Indian proposal, and,

further, not to consider at its 14th Session any proposal to exclude the
representatives of the Government of the Republic of China or to seat
representatives of the Central People's Government of the People's
Republic of China. The Assembly rejected the Indian proposal and
adopted the U.S. resolution.
(iii) Disarmament.-During its 13th Session, in 1958, the General
Assembly had enlarged the Disarmament Commission so as to include
all the 82 member States, but no progress was made by the Commission
in finding a solution to the problem. It was outside the U.N. that the
question of resuming discussions on disarmament was discussed; and the
U.K., France, the U.S. and the U.S.S.R. agreed to establish a 10-nation
committee to deal with the problem, consisting of these four countries
and Canada, Italy, Poland, Czechoslovakia, Rumania and Bulgaria. The
General Assembly, at its 14th Session in 1959, unanimously adopted the
Indo-Yugoslav proposal to continue the Disarmament Commission as
composed last year.
At the 14th session of the General Assembly, the disarmament
problem was discussed as four separate items. On India's proposal, the
question of suspension of nuclear and thermonuclear tests was included
in the agenda and an Indian resolution, jointly sponsored by 23 other
members, was adopted by the Assembly by 60 votes to 1 with 20
abstentions. The resolution appeals to the States concerned in the
Geneva discussions to continue their present voluntary-suspension of
tests and to other States to desist from such tests. The Irish proposal for
prevention of wider dissemination of nuclear weapons was also considered by the Assembly and a resolution was passed, which was supported
by India. It suggests that the 10-nation Disarmament Committee should
consider appropriate means whereby the Powers producing nuclear
<pg66>
<pg67>
weapons would refrain from handing over the control of such weapons to
any nation not possessing them and the Powers not possessing such
weapons would refrain from manufacturing them.
An item regarding the question of French nuclear tests in the Sahara
was proposed by Morocco. The General Assembly adopted a resolution, jointly moved by India and 20 other members, urging Fiance to
refrain from such tests.
Russia and Britain separately presented plans for general and complete disarmament. India welcomed the Russian plan. Both the plans,
were, however, referred by the General Assembly to the Disarmament
Commission and the details will be worked out by the 10-nation Disarmament Committee.
(iv) Outer Space.-The 18-member Ad hoc Committee on the Peaceful
Uses of Outer Space, established by the General Assembly at its 13th
session in 1958, met in May 1959 at New York. India, the U.A.R., the

U.S.S.R., Poland and Czechoslovakia did not participate in the meeting.
The Indian attitude was that it would be of little use to consider the
problem of outer space without the co-operation and participation of
the U.S.S.R., the country most advanced in this field and without whose
co-operation no action by the U.N. would be effective. At its 14th session,
the General Assembly again considered this problem and adopted a
resolution, moved by. India and others, establishing a 24-member
Committee for this purpose on which Russia and the Western Powers
had reached agreement.
(v) Algeria.-India co-sponsored the proposal to the General Assembly
to include the question of Algeria on its agenda and was also one of the
sponsors of the draft resolution moved by 22 Asian and African States
during the course of, the debate in the First Committee. This resolution recognised the right of the Algerian people to self-determination and
urged the two parties concerned to enter into pourparlers to determine
the conditions necessary for the implementation as early as possible of the
right of self-determination of the Algerian people, including conditions
for a cease-fire. The resolution was adopted in the Committee by only, a
simple majority. As this resolution was not expected to obtain the
required two-thirds majority for its adoption in the plenary session of the
Assembly, the Asian and African States drew up and sponsored another
draft resolution, which was milder in character. When votes were taken
paragraph by paragraph, all paragraphs individually obtained the
required majority but the resolution as a whole failed by two votes to get
the two-thirds majority and was, therefore, not adopted.
(vi) Treatment of People of Indian Origin in the Union of South
Africa.-On a proposal made by India and Pakistan, the General Assembly
<pg68>
considered the question of treatment of the people of Indian origin in the
Union of South Africa, and appealed to the South African Government
to begin negotiations with India and Pakistan to settle their dispute. The
resolution also expressed deep regret that South Africa has not replied
to previous Indian and Pakistani requests for negotiations on this subject.
(vii) Apartheid.-The question of race conflict in South Africa,
resulting from the policies of apartheid of the Government of the
Union of South Africa, was included in the agenda of the 14th session
of the General Assembly at the request of India and 12 other members.
The General Assembly discussed the situation and adopted a resolution
expressing its deep regret and concern that the Union of South Africa
had not yet responded to the appeals of the General Assembly and that
she reconsider governmental policies which impair the right of all
racial groups to enjoy the same fundamental rights and freedoms. It
appealed to all member-States to use their best endeavours as appropriate
to achieve the purposes of the resolution.
(viii) Trusteeship Matters.-The United Nations, was informed that
the Governments. of France and of the Republic of Togoland had agreed
that Togoland should become independent, on 27 April 1960. The

General Assembly expressed its satisfaction over this agreement and
decided that on the (late of independence of Togoland, the Trusteeship
Agreement for the territory should cease to be in force.
Several important decisions were taken in respect of other trust
territories. In the case of the French Cameroons, the General Assembly,
in a resolution adopted on 13 March 1959, resolved that on 1 January
1960, when. the French Cameroons become independent, the Trusteeship
Agreement for the territory should cease to be in force; and recommended that, upon attainment of independence on 1 January 1960, the French
Cameroons should be admitted to membership of the United Nations.
In the case of the British Cameroons, both the Northern and the
Southern parts of the territory will be given an opportunity to decide, in
plebiscites to be held separately in the two parts between September
1960 and March 1961, whether they wish to achieve independence by
joining the independent Federation of Nigeria or by joining the independent Republic of the Cameroons.
According to the Trusteeship Agreement for Somaliland under
Italian administration, this territory was scheduled, to become independent on 2 December 1960. Italy and Somalia announced their agreement
during the 14th session of the General Assembly that Somalia would
become independent on 1 July 1960. The Assembly approved this date
for the independence of the territory and recommended that Somalia
<pg69>
should be admitted to membership of the, United Nations upon attainment of independence.
Political progress achieved in recent years by the trust territory of
Western Somoa, under New Zealand administration, led the Trusteeship Council to despatch in March-April 1959 a separate visiting Mission
to the territory, under the chairmanship of Shri Arthur S. Lall of India,
to examine the extent to which the objectives of trusteeship had been
attained by the territory and to suggest further steps necessary for their
attainment. The Mission, in its report, endorsed a provisional time-table
proposed by the Administering Authority which would lead to the
emergence of Western Somoa as an independent, State at the end of 1961.
India has again been re-elected to the Trusteeship Council for a period
of three years.
(ix) All-India UN Day Committee.-The All-India UN Day Committee, of which the Deputy Minister for External Affairs is the Chairman,
celebrated United Nations Day on 24 October 1959. The Vice-President
was the Chief guest at a reception in New Delhi, attended by a large and
distinguished gathering, after which the film "Power Among Men" was
shown for the first time in India.
B. INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCES

India participated in a large number of conferences held under the
auspices, of the United Nations and its Specialised Agencies. Brief accounts on India's participation in the more important of these conferences
will be found in the reports of the appropriate Ministries.

USA
INDIA CHINA FRANCE UNITED KINGDOM BULGARIA CANADA ITALY NORWAY POLAND
SLOVAKIA SWITZERLAND RUSSIA MOROCCO ALGERIA PAKISTAN SOUTH AFRICA
CAMEROON NIGER NIGERIA MALI SOMALIA NEW ZEALAND
Sep 15, 1959

APPENDIX I INDIAN MISSIONS ABROAD
Jan 01, 1957
APPENDIX I
INDIAN MISSIONS

ABROAD

Embassies

Location

1
2
3
4

(Kabul)
(Buenos Aires)
(Vienna)
(Brussels)

Afghanistan
Argentina
Austria
Belgium

5
Bolivia
Santiago
6

Brazil

(Rio-de-Janeiro)

7
8
9

Burma
Cambodia
Chile

(Rangoon)
(Phnom-Penh)
(Santiago)

10

China

11

Czechoslovakia

12

Denmark

13
14

Ethiopia
France

(Peking)
(Prague)

(Addis-Ababa)
(Paris)

Concurrently accredited
Luxemburg as Minister
Ambassador resident in

to

(Chile)
Concurrently accredited to Venezuela as Minister
Concurrently accredited to Bolivia, as Ambassador
Concurrently accredited to Mon
golia as Ambassador
Concurrently accredited to
Rumania as Ambassador
Ambassador resident in Stock
holm (Sweden)

15
16

Germany
Greece

(Bonn)

17

Hungary

(Budapest)

18
19
20

Indonesia
Iran
Iraq

(Djakarta)
(Tehran)
(Baghdad)

21

Ireland

(Dublin)

22

Italy

(Rome)

23
24

Japan
Laos

(Tokyo)
(Vientiane)

Ambassador resident in Belgrade (Yugoslavia)
Ambassador resident in Moscow
(U.S.S.R.)
Concurrently accredited as
Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary to the
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan
Ambassador resident in London
(U.K.)
Concurrently accredited
Albania as Minister

to

<pg70>
<pg71>
25 Libya
26 Mexico

Ambassador resident in Cairo
(U.A.R.)
(Mexico City)

27 Mongolia

Ambassador resident in Washington (U.S.A.)
Ambassador resident in Peking
(China)

28 Morocco

(Rabat)

29

Nepal

(Kathmandu)

30

Netherlands

(The Hague)

Concurrently accredited
Tunisia as Ambassador

to

31 Norway

(Oslo)

32

Philippines

(Manila)

33

Poland

(Warsaw)

Ambassador resident in Moscow
(U.S.S.R.)

34

Rumania

(Bucharest)

Ambassador resident in Prague
(Czechoslovakia)

35

Saudi Arabia

(Jedda)

36

Spain

(Madrid)

37

Sudan

(Khartoum)

38

Sweden

(Stockholm)

Ambassador resident in London
(U.K.)

Concurrently accredited to Denmark as Ambassador and to

Finland as Minister
39

Switzerland

(Berne)

Concurrently accredited to the
Vatican as Minister

40

Thailand

(Bangkok)

41

Tunisia

42

Turkey

43

United

Ambassador resident in Rabat
(Morocco)
(Ankara)
Arab Re-

(Cairo)

Concurrently accredited to Libya

public

44

United States of
America

as Ambassador and to the
Republic of Lebanon as
Minister
(Washington)

Concurrently accredited to Mexico as Ambassador and to
Cuba as Minister

45 Union of Soviet
Socialist Republic

(Moscow)

Concurrently accredited to Hungary and Poland as Ambassador

46 Yugoslavia

(Belgrade)

Concurrently accredited to Greece
as Ambassador and to Bulgaria
as Minister

316 M. of E.A.
<pg72>
High Commissions

Location

1 Australia

(Canberra)

2 Canada
3 Ceylon
4 Ghana

(Ottawa)
(Colombo)
(Accra)

Concurrently accredited to Ni-

5 Malaya
Sing
a-

(Kuala Lumpur)

geria as Commissioner
Concurrently accredited to

6 New Zealand

(Wellington)

pore as Commissioner
High Commissioner resident in

(a) Karachi
(b) Dacca (East
Pakistan)

Deputy High Commissioner

(c) Rajshahi (East
Pakistan)

Assistant High Commissioner

(London)

Concurrently accredited to

Canberra
7 Pakistan

8 United Kingdom
Ire-

Concurrently accredited to New
Zealand

land and Spain as Ambassador
Legations
1 Albania

Minister resident in Rome
(Italy)
Minister resident in Belgrade

2 Bulgaria

(Yugoslavia)
Minister resident in

3 Cuba
Washington

(U.S.A.)
Minister resident in Stockholm

4 Finland
5 Jordon
6 Lebanon

(Beirut)

(Sweden)
Minister resident in Baghdad
(Iraq)
Minister resident in Cairo
(U.A.R.)
Minister resident in Brussels

7 Luxemburg

(Belgium)
Minister resident in Berne
(Switzerland)
Minister resident in Rio-deJaneiro (Brazil)

8 Vatican
9 Venezuela
Special Missions
1 Bhutan

Political

2 Sikkim

(Gangtok)

3 United Nations

(New York)

Officer resident in

Gangtok (Sikkim)

<pg73>
Commissions
1
2
3

Aden
West Indies and
British Guiana
Central African

Federation (North
and South Rhodesia and Nyasaland)
4(a) East Africa
(Kenya, Tanganyika, and Zanzibar
(b) Uganda
5 Fiji
6 Hong Kong

Location
(Aden)
(Trinidad)
(Salisbury)

(a) Kenya (Nairobi)
(b) Kampala
(Suva)
(Hong Kong)

Accredited to Surinam as Consul
General
Commissioner resident in Nairobi

Accredited to Central A can
Federation as Commissioner
and to Belgian Congo and
Ruanda Urundi as Consul
General

7 Mauritius
8 Nigeria

(Port Louis)
(Lagos)

9 Singapore

(Singapore)

Commissioner resident in Accra
(Ghana)
Commissioner resident in Kuala
Lumpur (Malaya)

Trade Commissions
1 Australia
2 East Africa

(Sydney)
(Mombasa)

Consulates General
1 Belgian-Congo

Consul General resident
Nairobi

2

China

(Shanghai)

3

Denmark

(Copenhagen)

Honorary Consul General

4
5

Finland
Germany

Honorary Consul General

6
7
8

Madagascar
Muscat
Ruanda-Urundi

(Helsinki)
(a) Hamburg
(b) Berlin
(Tananarive)
(Muscat)

9 Switzerland
10 Surinam

(Geneva)

11 Tibet
12 United Arab Republic
13 United States of
America

(Lhasa)
(Damascus)
(a) New York
(b) San Francisco
<pg74>

14 Vietnam North
15 Vietnam South

(Hanoi)
(Saigon)

Consulates
1
2
3
4
5

Burma
Iraq
Indonesia
Iran
Japan

(Mandalay)
(Basrah)
(Sourabaya)
(Khorramshahr)
(Kobe)

Vice-Consulates
1 Afghanistan
2 Belgium
3 Indonesia
4 Iran

(a) Jalalabad
(b) Kandhar
(Antwerp)
(Medan)
(Zahidan)

Trade Agencies
1 Tibet

(a) Gyantse
(b) Gartok

in

Consul General resident in
Nairobi
Consul General
Trinidad

resident in

(c) Yatung
INDIA
AFGHANISTAN ARGENTINA AUSTRIA USA BELGIUM BOLIVIA CHILE BRAZIL BURMA
CAMBODIA CHINA CZECH REPUBLIC NORWAY SLOVAKIA DENMARK SWEDEN ETHIOPIA
FRANCE GERMANY GREECE YUGOSLAVIA RUSSIA HUNGARY INDONESIA IRAN IRAQ
JORDAN IRELAND UNITED KINGDOM ITALY ALBANIA JAPAN LAOS EGYPT LIBYA
MEXICO MONGOLIA MOROCCO TUNISIA NEPAL PHILIPPINES POLAND ROMANIA SAUDI
ARABIA SPAIN SUDAN FINLAND SWITZERLAND THAILAND TURKEY LEBANON CUBA
BULGARIA AUSTRALIA CANADA SRI LANKA GHANA MALAYSIA NEW ZEALAND PAKISTAN
BANGLADESH VENEZUELA BHUTAN KENYA CONGO UGANDA FIJI HONG KONG
MAURITIUS NIGER NIGERIA REPUBLIC OF SINGAPORE CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC
MADAGASCAR OMAN SYRIA VIETNAM
Jan 01, 1957

APPENDIX II INDIAN INFORMATION UNITS ABROAD

Jan 01, 1957

APPENDIX II
INDIAN INFORMATION UNITS ABROAD
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26

Accra
Addis Ababa
Ankara
Baghdad
Bangkok
Beirut
Belgrade
Berne
Bonn
Brussels
Buenos Aires
Cairo
Colombo
Dacca
Damascus
Djakarta
Fiji
Gangtok
The Hague
Hongkong
Jeddab
Kabul
Karachi
Kathmandu
Khartoum
Kuala Lumpur

27
28
29
30

London
Manila
Moscow
Nairobi
<pg75>
<pg76>

31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49

New York (UN)
New York (CG)
Ottawa
Paris
Peking
Phnom Penh
Port Louis.
Prague
Rangoon
Rio de Janeiro
Rome
Salisbury
San Francisco
Stockholm
Sydney
Tehran
Tokyo
Trinidad
Washington

INDIA
GHANA ETHIOPIA TURKEY IRAQ LEBANON YUGOSLAVIA SWITZERLAND GERMANY
BELGIUM USA EGYPT SRI LANKA SYRIA INDONESIA FIJI AFGHANISTAN PAKISTAN
NEPAL SUDAN MALAYSIA UNITED KINGDOM PHILIPPINES RUSSIA KENYA CANADA
FRANCE CAMBODIA MAURITIUS CZECH REPUBLIC ITALY SWEDEN AUSTRALIA IRAN
JAPAN
Jan 01, 1957

APPENDIX III FOREIGN MISSIONS IN INDIA

Jan 01, 1957

APPENDIX III
FOREIGN MISSIONS IN INDIA
(i) Embassies
1
2

Afghanistan
Argentina

3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29

Austria
Belgium
Brazil
Burma
Cambodia
Chile
China
Colombia
Czechoslovakia
Denmark
Ethiopia
France
Federal Republic of Germany
Greece
Hungary
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Italy
Japan
Laos
Mexico
Mongolia
Morocco
Nepal
Netherlands
Norway
<pg77>
<pg78>

30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43

Philippines
Poland
Rumania
Saudi Arabia
Spain
Sudan
Sweden
Switzerland
Thailand
Turkey
United Arab Republic
United States of America
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
Yugoslavia

(ii) High Commissions
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

Australia
Canada
Ceylon
Ghana
Federation of Malaya
New Zealand
Pakistan
United Kingdom

(iii)

Legations

1
2
3
4
5
6

Albania
Bulgaria
Cuba.
Finland
Holy See
Lebanon
<pg79>

(iv) Foreign Consular Offices in India
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------Country
Location
Status
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------1 Afghanistan
Bombay
Consulate General
2 Austria
Bombay
Consulate
3 Austria
Calcutta
Consulate
4 Austria
Madras
Consulate
5 Belgium
Bombay
Consulate General
6 Belgium
Calcutta
Consulate General
7 Belgium
Madras
Consulate
8 Bolivia
Calcutta
Consulate General
9 Bolivia
Bombay
Consulate (vacant)
10 Brazil
Calcutta
Consulate
11 Burma
Calcutta
Consulate General
12 Burma
Madras
Vice-Consulate
13 China
Bombay
Consulate General
14 China
Calcutta
Consulate General
15 Colombia
Calcutta
Consulate (vacant)
16 Costa Rica
Bombay
Consulate General
17 Costa Rica
Madras
Consulate General
18 Cuba
Calcutta
Consular. Agency (vacant)
19 Czechoslovakia
Bombay
Consulate General
20 Denmark
Bombay
Consulate General
21 Denmark
Calcutta
Consulate
22 Denmark
Cochin
Consulate
23 Denmark
Madras
Consulate
24 Dominican Republic
Bombay
Consulate General
25 Dominican Republic
Calcutta
Consulate
26 Ecuador
Calcutta
Consulate
27 El Salvador
Calcutta
Consulate
28 Ethiopia
Bombay
Consulate (closed down
temporarily)
29 Finland
Bombay
Consulate
30 Finland
Calcutta
Consulate
31 France
Bombay
Consulate General
32 France
Calcutta
Consulate General
33 France
Cochin
Consular Agency
34 France
Madras
Consulate
35 Germany
Bombay
Consulate General
36 Germany
Calcutta
Consulate General
37 Germany
Madras
Consulate
38 Greece
Bombay
Consulate General
316 M. of E.A.
<pg80>

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------Country
Location
Status
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50

Greece
Haiti
Haiti
Indonesia
Indonesia
Iran
Iran
Iraq
Israel
Italy
Italy
Italy

Calcutta
Bombay
Calcutta
Bombay
Calcutta
Bombay
Calcutta
Bombay
Bombay
Bombay
Calcutta
Madras

51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61

Japan
Japan
Japan
Liberia
Luxemburg
Monaco
Monaco
Nepal
Netherlands
Netherlands
Netherlands

Bombay
Calcutta
Madras
Calcutta
Bombay
New Delhi
Bombay
Calcutta
Bombay
Calcutta
Cochin

62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73
74

Netherlands
Nicaragua
Nicaragua
Norway
Norway
Norway
Norway
Panama
Peru
Philippines
Saudi Arabia
Spain
Spain

Madras
Bombay
Calcutta
Bombay
Calcutta
Cochin
Madras
Bombay
Calcutta
Bombay
Bombay
Bombay
Calcutta

Consulate General
Consulate
Consulate
Consulate
Consulate
Consulate General
Consulate General
Consulate General
Consulate
Consulate
Consulate General
Consular Agency(temporarily closed)
Consulate General
Consulate General
Consulate
Consulate
Vice-Consulate
Consulate General
Consulate (vacant)
Consulate General
Consulate General
Consulate
Consulate (closed temporarily)
Consulate
Consulate
Consulate
Consulate General
Consulate General
Vice-Consulate
Consulate
Consulate General
Consulate General
Consulate
Consulate General
Consulate General
Vice-Consulate

<pg81>
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------Country
Location
Status
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------75
76

Spain
Sudan

Madras
Bombay

Vice-Consulate
Consulate General

77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
89
90
91
92
93
94
95
96

Sweden
Sweden
Sweden
Switzerland
Switzerland
Switzerland
Switzerland
Thailand
Turkey
Turkey
U.S.S.R.
U.S.S.R.
U.A.R.
U.A.R.
U.S.A.
U.S.A.
U.S.A.
Uruguay
Yugoslavia
Democratic Republic of
Vietnam
97 Republic of Vietnam
facto)

Bombay
Calcutta
Madras
Bombay
Calcutta
Cochin
Madras
Calcutta
Bombay
Calcutta
Bombay
Calcutta
Bombay
Calcutta
Bombay
Calcutta
Madras
New Delhi
Bombay
New Delhi
New Delhi

Consulate General
Consulate
Consulate
Consulate General
Consulate
Consular Agency
Consular Agency
Consulate General
Consulate General
Consulate
Consulate General
Consulate General
Consulate General
Consulate General
Consulate General
Consulate General
Consulate General
Consulate General
Consulate General
Consulate General (defacto)
Consulate General (de

INDIA
AFGHANISTAN ARGENTINA AUSTRIA USA BELGIUM BRAZIL BURMA CAMBODIA CHILE
CHINA COLOMBIA NORWAY SLOVAKIA DENMARK ETHIOPIA FRANCE GERMANY GREECE
HUNGARY INDONESIA IRAN IRAQ ITALY JAPAN LAOS MEXICO MONGOLIA MOROCCO
NEPAL PHILIPPINES POLAND SAUDI ARABIA SPAIN SUDAN SWEDEN SWITZERLAND
THAILAND TURKEY YUGOSLAVIA AUSTRALIA CANADA GHANA NEW ZEALAND PAKISTAN
ALBANIA BULGARIA CUBA FINLAND LEBANON BOLIVIA COSTA!!DOMINICA ECUADOR
EL SALVADOR HAITI ISRAEL LIBERIA MONACO CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC
NICARAGUA PANAMA PERU URUGUAY VIETNAM
Jan 01, 1957

APPENDIX IV TREATIES, CONVENTIONS AND AGREEMENTS

APPENDIX IV
TREATIES, CONVENTIONS AND AGREEMENTS CONCLUDED
OR RENEWED BY INDIA WITH OTHER COUNTRIES
DURING 1959
1
2
3

Trade Agreement with Rumania signed on Jun 14, 1959 at
Bucharest.
Trade Agreement with Italy signed on 6 October 1959 at Rome.
Trade Agreement with Switzerland signed on 6 October 1959
at Berne.

4

Trade Agreement with France signed on 19 October 1959
at Paris.
5
Trade Agreement with Poland signed on 2 November 1959
at New Delhi.
6
Limited Payments Agreement with Pakistan signed on 3 December 1959 at Karachi.
7
Trade Agreement with China signed, on 25 May 1959 at New
Delhi (renewal).
8
Trade Agreement with Indonesia signed on 13/15 July 1959 at
Dajkarta (renewal).
9
Letters exchanged on 13 October 1959 in New Delhi extending
validity of the Trade Arrangement with Iraq.
10 Letters exchanged on 11 August 1959 in New Delhi renewing
the Trade Arrangement with Afghanistan.
11 Protocol to Trade Agreement with Bulgaria signed on 18
May 1959 at Sofia.
12 Protocol to Trade Agreement with Yugoslavia, signed on 25
May 1959 at Belgrade.
13 Protocol to Trade Agreement with Czechoslovakia signed on
30 May 1959 at Prague.
14 Protocol to Trade Agreement with Hungary signed on 15
June 1959 at Budapest.
15 Protocol on Indo-German Economic and Commercial Relations,
in the context of the Trade Agreement with the Federal
Republic of Germany signed on 30 October 1959 at Bonn.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------N.B.- (India's Trade Arrangements with Austria and Finland expired
in 1958. Negotiations for their renewal are in progress).
<pg82>

INDIA
ROMANIA ITALY SWITZERLAND FRANCE POLAND PAKISTAN CHINA INDONESIA
USA AFGHANISTAN BULGARIA YUGOSLAVIA NORWAY SLOVAKIA CZECH REPUBLIC
HUNGARY GERMANY AUSTRIA FINLAND
Jun 14, 1959

APPENDIX V INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATIONS OF WHICH INDIA IS A MEMBER

Jan 01, 1957

APPENDIX V
INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATIONS OF WHICH
INDIA IS A MEMBER
UNITED NATIONS

IRAQ

1

General Assembly.

2

Committees and Commissions of the General Assembly:(a)

Advisory Committee on the peaceful uses of Atomic Energy.

(b)

Committee to consider the question of convening a general
conference to review the U.N. Charter.

(c)

Committee on Information from non-self-governing territories.

(d) Scientific Committee on the effects of Atomic Radiation.
(e)

Peace Observation Commission.

(f)

Disarmament Commission.

(g)

International Law Commission.

(h)

Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions.

3 Functional Commissions of the Economic and Social Council:(a) Human Rights Commission.
(b) Commission on International Commodity Trade (C.I.C.T.).
(c) Narcotic Drugs Commission.
(d) Statistical Commission.
4 Economic Commission for Asia and the Far East (ECAFE).
5 Other Subsidiary Bodies of the Economic and Social Council:(a) United Nations Children's Emergency Fund (UNICEF).
(b) Technical Assistance Committee.
6

Trusteeship Council.

7

International Atomic Energy Agency.

8

Specialised Agencies:(a) Food and Agriculture Organisation (F.A.O.)
<pg83>
<pg84>
(b) General Agreement on Trade and Tariffs (G.A.T.T.)
(c) International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
(I.B.R.D.).
(d) International Monetary Fund (I.M.F.)
(e) International Civil Aviation Organisation (I.C.A.O.)

(f) International Labour Organisation (I.L.O.).
(g) International Telecommunications Union (I.T.U.).
(h) Universal Postal Union (U.P.U.)
(i) United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation (UNESCO).
(j) World Health Organisation (W.H.O.).
(k) World Meteorological Organisation (W.M.O.)
OTHER INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATIONS
9

Asian Broadcasting Conference.

10 Asian African Legal Consultative Committee.
11 Commonwealth Agricultural Bureau (U.K.).
12 Commonwealth Air Transport Council.
13 Commonwealth Advisory Aeronautical Research Committee.
14 Commonwealth Broadcasting Conference.
15 International Association for Bridges and Structural Engineering, Zurich.
16 International Commission on Irrigation and Drainage.
Delhi.

New

17 International Commission on Large Dams, Paris.
18 International Committee of the Red Cross, Geneva.
19 International Conference of Social Works, Paris.
20 International Cotton Advisory Committee, Washington.
21 International Council of Archives, Paris.
22 International Council of Building Research Studies and Documentation, Paris.
23 International Council of Scientific Unions, London.
<pg85>
24

International Criminal Police Commission, Paris.

25

International Customs Tariffs Bureau, Brussels.

26

International Electro-Technical Commission, Geneva.

27

International Federation for Documentation, The Hague.

28

International Federation for Housing and Town Planning, The

Hague.
29

International Federation for University Women, London.

30

International Hide and Allied Trades Improvement Society
Surrey, U.K.

31

International Hydrographic Bureau, Monte Carlo.

32

International Hospitals Federation, London.

33

International Institute for Administrative Sciences, Brussels.

34

International Institute for the Unification of Private Law, Rome,

35

International Organisation for Standardisation, Geneva,

36

International Organisation of Legal Meteorology, Paris,

37

International Railway Congress Association, Brussels.

38

International Scientific Radio Union, Brussels.

39

International Tea Committee, London.

40

International Union of Biological Sciences, Paris.

41

International Union of Crystallography, Cambridge.

42

International Union of Geodesy and Geophysics, Paris.

43

International Union of Geography, New York.

44

International Union of Official Travel Organisation, Geneva.

45

International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry, Paris.

46

International Union of Pure and Applied Physics, Paris.

47

International Union of Theoretical and Applied Mechanics,
Delft.

48

Permanent International Association of
Brussels.

49

Union International Centre le Cancer, Paris.

50

World Veterans Federation,

51

World Poultry Science Association, New York.

Road

Paris.

GIPND-S. M. (N.S.)-316 M of EA-6-3-60-2,000

Congress,

INDIA
USA UNITED KINGDOM SWITZERLAND LATVIA FRANCE BELGIUM CENTRAL AFRICAN
REPUBLIC ITALY
Jan 01, 1957


