   java script is required for this page java script is required for this
   page java script is required for this page java script is required for
   this page java script is required for this page java script is required
   for this page

   Fri, February 06, 2015 at 05:15:26 IST Indian Flag
   Ministry of                      Print Content Small Font Medium Font      
    External       MEA Library      Large Font                                
    Affairs,   Ministry of External   * Sitemap                               
   Government  Affairs, Government    * Contact Us                            
    of India         of India         * Feedback                              
                                      * _____________________           [  ]  

     * Home
     * Director's Office
          * Director Lib & Info
          * Library Officers & Staff
     * Journals
          * Current Journals
          * Online Journals
          * CD-ROMs Databases
     * Online Services
          * Business Monitor Online
          * EIU
          * JSTOR
          * Janes Online Services
          * Kessing World News Archive
          * Marketline MDIC
          * Online Service Links
     * Newspapers
          * E-Newspapers
          * Subscribed Print Newspapers
     * Library Bulletins
          * Foreign Affairs Documentation Bulletin
          * Recent Additions
          * Chronicle of Events
     * Alert
          * Book Alert
          * Article Alerts
     * Important Abbrevations

 Annual Reports Prior to 1999                                                                          
   * Home >   Annual Reports Prior to 1999 >   Annual Report 1976-77                   * Home          
 Annual Report 1976-77                                                                 * Director's    
                                                                                         Office        
                                      Contents                                         * Journals      
 CHAPTERS  Introduction                                                       PAGES    * Online        
 I.        India's Neighbours                                                 9          Services      
 II.       South-East Asia                                                    20       * Newspapers    
 III.      East Asia                                                          24       * Alert         
 IV.       West Asia and North Africa                                         30       * Important     
 V.        Africa (South of the Sahara)                                       37         Abbrevations  
 VI.       Europe                                                             43       * Back          
 VII       The Americas                                                       53                       
 VIII.     United Nations and International Conferences                       57                       
 IX.       Technical and Economic Cooperation                                 77                       
 X.        External Publicity                                                 91                       
 XI.       Cultural Relations                                                 96                       
 XII.      Protocol Matters                                                   100                      
 XIII.     Passport, Visa and Consular Services                               101                      
 XIV.      Administration and Organisation                                    104                      
 (i)                                                                                                   
 APPENDICES                                                                                            
                                                                                                       
 NUMBER                                             PAGE                                               
                                                                                                       
 I.    Major International Conferences/Meetings/Seminars etc.                                          
       organised by Inter-Governmental Organisations at which                                          
       Government of India was represented in 1976-77     109                                          
                                                                                                       
 II.   Major International Conferences/Meetings/Seminars                                               
       organised by Non-Governmental Organisations, at                                                 
       which India was represented with Government                                                     
       assistance in 1976-77    119                                                                    
                                                                                                       
 III.  Miscellaneous International Conferences etc. in 1976-77                                         
       at which Government of India was represented or at which                                        
       India was represented with Government of India's                                                
       assistance.    120                                                                              
                                                                                                       
 IV.   International organisations of which India became                                               
       a member or ceased to be a member during the year 1976-77                122                    
                                                                                                       
 V.    Treaties/Conventions/Agreements concluded or renewed by                                         
       India with other countries in 1976              123                                             
                                                                                                       
 VI.   Statement showing the number of Indian experts deputed to                                       
       various countries under ITEC Programme (1976); and                                              
       Trainees from developing countries receiving training                                           
       in India (1976-77) under ITEC Programme             136                                         
                                                                                                       
 VII.  Distribution of Reserved Medical/Engineering seats during                                       
       1976-77                                           138                                           
                                                                                                       
 VIII. Expenditure on Headquarters and Missions/Posts abroad                                           
       during 1976-77                                   139                                            
                                                                                                       
 IX.   List of Indian Missions/Posts opened in the year 1976-77                                        
                                                      141                                              
                                                                                                       
                               (iii)                                                                   
                                                                                                       
 Jan 01, 1976                                                                                          
 Introduction                                                                                          
 Jan 01, 1976                                                                                          
                                                                                                       
 Against the background of an international situation relatively free from tension,                    
 India was able to take during the year some purposeful initiatives in improving                       
 relations with its neighbours, with the developing world and with the developed                       
 countries. Some longstanding problems were resolved and others contained. India's                     
 constructive approach was acclaimed by the international community and considered a                   
 positive contribution towards pro- moting peace and furthering international                          
 cooperation. The initiatives taken by India, (without a feeling of insecurity or                      
 diffi- dence,) were made possible because of the dynamism and resilience the                          
 economy and the foundations of technological and scientific infrastructure laid in                    
 the decades since indepen- dence. The peaceful change of government in March 1977,                    
 following free and fair elections, had a favourable international impact by                           
 projecting an image of strength and stability based on sound democratic traditions.                   
 The substance of the country's foreign policy, however, was not an issue during the                   
 elections. The decision of the new government to hold the meeting of the                              
 Coordinating Bureau of the Non-Aligned Conference, sche- duled for April, was a                       
 demonstration of the essential continuity of India's foreign policy. The new                          
 Government reaffirmed its commitment to the policy of non-alignment. The Prime                        
 Minister made it clear that India would try to maintain cordial and good relations                    
 with all countries and relations with any one country would not be allowed to come                    
 in the way of another.                                                                                
                                                                                                       
 Though there were a number of important developments, there was no dramatic change                    
 in the international situation. The United States and the Soviet Union, despite                       
 their differences, continued to reiterate their adherence to the spirit of detente.                   
 Talks between them regarding the Strategic Arms Limitation did not yield any                          
 fruitful results but there was no emergence of a situation resulting in a                             
 confrontation. Political transition in                                                                
                                                                                                       
 pg1                                                                                                   
                                                                                                       
 some other important countries inhibited any major initiative by them affecting                       
 international relations. At the same time, there was no extension of detente and                      
 conflicts continued to smoulder in some parts of the world. While there was a                         
 definite improve- ment in the situation in South-East Asia since the termination of                   
 the conflict in Indo-China, the region was still not free from tension. The                           
 littoral States did not succeed in their efforts to remove external influence and                     
 rivalries from the Indian Ocean area. In West Asia, the Arab-Israeli problem defied                   
 solution and a precarious status quo continued between Israel and its neighbouring                    
 Arab States. The unhappy and infructuous civil war in Lebanon threatened to add a                     
 new and dangerous dimen- sion to the already unstable situation in the region. In                     
 Cyprus, the constitutional problem remained unsolved despite an inter- communal                       
 dialogue, initiated under the auspices of the United Nations, to bring about a                        
 settlement. In Africa, a major develop- ment was the intensification of the                           
 liberation struggle by the African people against white minority regimes in                           
 Southern Africa. The killing of African children by the police in Soweto in June                      
 1976 focussed world attention on the repressive and discrimi- natory policies of                      
 the South African Government. The white- dominated governments in Southern Africa                     
 found them- selves under increasing international pressure to come to terms with                      
 the African majority to avoid military con- frontation and self-destruction.                          
 Economic dimensions of diplo- macy focussed attention on the quest for a new                          
 economic inter- national order. Efforts continued to find ways and means to bridge                    
 the gap between the rich and the poor countries and to reach a consensus among the                    
 developed and developing countries for mutual cooperation on the basis of equality                    
 and justice to solve economic problems that confronted and affected all of them.                      
                                                                                                       
 Taking into account the various aspects of the international situation, India                         
 played an active role towards promoting the cause of peace, freedom and security.                     
 Convinced that detente should not be limited to any region and its scope should                       
 extend                                                                                                
                                                                                                       
 pg2                                                                                                   
                                                                                                       
 to all parts of the world, it opposed the escalation of foreign military presence                     
 and the establishment of bases in the Indian Ocean. It supported the stand that the                   
 Indian Ocean should be a zone of peace as agreed to by most of the littoral States                    
 and according to the resolution adopted by the United Nations General Assembly.                       
 Further, it considered the de-escalation of the arms race, the convening of a World                   
 Disarmament Conference to consider measures towards universal disarmament and the                     
 non-use of force in international relations as vital steps to lessen international                    
 tension. It further stressed that cooperative rela- tions among nations should be                     
 established on the basis of non- interference, equality and peaceful co-existence.                    
                                                                                                       
 India worked for the extension of detente in its own region by trying to normalise                    
 and improve relations with all the neigh- bours. A number of issues were settled                      
 through bilateral nego- tiations. The entire maritime boundary with Sri Lanka was                     
 delimited on the basis of agreement signed with that country. An agreement was                        
 concluded with the Maldives for delimitation of the maritime boundary between the                     
 two countries. Friendly ties were maintained with Afghanistan and Nepal. Exchange                     
 of visits with Afghanistan and Nepal, at the ministerial and offi- cial levels, and                   
 the discussions held during these visits reflected a spirit of goodwill and                           
 understanding. Initiative was taken to normalise relations with China and                             
 diplomatic ties were re-estab- lished with that country at the level of Ambassador.                   
 This step, it was hoped, would lead to the development of improved bilateral                          
 relations.                                                                                            
                                                                                                       
 Another significant development was the change achieved in India's relations with                     
 Pakistan. The steps toward normalisation envisaged in the Simla Agreement of 1972,                    
 which had been delayed due to one reason or the other, were carried out in a single                   
 diplomatic operation, during the middle of the year, in which both countries                          
 cooperated fully. Diplomatic relations were resumed at the level of Ambassador in                     
 July 1976. This was accompanied by restoration of railway links and resumption of                     
 private trade between the two countries.                                                              
                                                                                                       
 pg3                                                                                                   
                                                                                                       
 Friendly exchanges were made between the leaders of India and Pakistan after the                      
 formation of the new government in India. The new government was hopeful of                           
 maintaining and promoting friendly relations with Pakistan.                                           
                                                                                                       
 With Bangladesh also, India continued its efforts to normalise and improve                            
 relations and some progress was registered in econo- mic and commercial matters.                      
 There was almost a continuous exchange of visits between the two countries to                         
 identity the basic questions relating to the allocation of the waters of the Ganga                    
 at Farakka in order to resolve the problem. It was India's hope that, through a                       
 spirit of shared sacrifice and mutual goodwill and friendship, this problem would                     
 lend itself to an acceptable and lasting solution.                                                    
                                                                                                       
 Besides its immediate neighbours, India continued to work for strengthening                           
 bilateral ties and explore avenues of economic cooperation with the countries of                      
 South-East Asia and West Asia. An agreement regarding the maritime boundary was                       
 con- cluded with Indonesia. The visit of the Deputy Minister of Ex- ternal Affairs                    
 to Thailand, Malaysia, Singapore and the Philip- pines aimed at promoting friendly                    
 ties with these countries by exploring avenues of economic and cultural                               
 cooperation. India welcomed the efforts of the countries of the region towards re-                    
 gional cooperation through ASEAN and supported the concept of making South-East                       
 Asia a zone of peace, freedom and neutra- lity.                                                       
                                                                                                       
 The visit of the President of Laos to India opened up prospects of closer economic                    
 cooperation. India welcomed the reunification of the two zones of Vietnam and                         
 affirmed its sup- port for the admission of Vietnam into the United Nations. The                      
 visits of the Special Envoy of the Prime Minister and of the Foreign Minister of                      
 Vietnam to India, could lead to greater cooperation in many fields.                                   
                                                                                                       
 In East Asia close business and diplomatic ties were main- tained with Japan                          
 through the meetings of the Indo-Japan                                                                
                                                                                                       
 pg4                                                                                                   
                                                                                                       
 Business Cooperation Committee and the Consultative Committee of the officials of                     
 the Foreign Affairs Ministries of the two countries. Friendly relations were                          
 maintained with the Republic of Korea and the Democratic Republic of Korea. During                    
 the visit of the Minister of External Affairs to Mongolia, both sides agreed to                       
 further strengthen political, economic and cultural ties between the two countries.                   
                                                                                                       
 As regards West Asia, India reaffirmed its support for the Arab cause and worked                      
 for closer ties with all countries of the region. It was India's firm belief that a                   
 just settlement of the Arab-Israel problem could be reached on the basis of Israeli                   
 withdrawal from Arab territories under its illegal occupation and the restoration                     
 of the legitimate rights of the people of Palestine. There was increase in economic                   
 and commercial ties between India and West Asian countries. Apart from exchange of                    
 goods and commodities, India's cooperation with the Arab world was characterised by                   
 an enormous increase in the supply of technical and semi-skilled manpower to this                     
 region. An innovatory feature of international cooperation with countries of this                     
 region was the contribution made by India towards their industrialisation by the                      
 supply of material and technical know- how. The benefit of India's own experience                     
 of industrialisation was placed at the disposal of these nations for beneficial use                   
 in their own planned development. Close contacts and economic ties were also                          
 developed with Iran and States of the Gulf region.                                                    
                                                                                                       
 The holding of a Conference of Indian Envoys in West Asia and North Africa in New                     
 Delhi, in January 1977, reflected the importance India attached to the area and its                   
 efforts to explore ways and means to strengthen ties with the countries of this                       
 region.                                                                                               
                                                                                                       
 In Africa, wide-ranging technical and economic cooperation was fostered with                          
 Tanzania and Zambia. Under the umbrella of inter-governmental cooperation,                            
 thousands of Indian experts were chosen and deployed in diverse branches of the                       
 develop- mental infrastructure of these two countries. India's coopera- tion was                      
 particularly relevant not only in the field of small-scale                                            
                                                                                                       
 pg5                                                                                                   
                                                                                                       
 industries and industrial estates but also in technologically sophis- ticated areas                   
 like sugar manufacture and exploration of oil. A hopeful beginning was also made in                   
 the cooperation with these countries in science and technology. Exchange of visits                    
 at a high-level between India and a number of African countries demonstrated their                    
 mutual desire to increase contacts and pro- mote cooperation.                                         
                                                                                                       
 With the independence of the former Portuguese colonies in Africa, the focus of                       
 international attention shifted to the liberation struggle in Zimbabwe. India                         
 reiterated its commit- ment to provide all possible assistance to the people of                       
 Zimbabwe in their struggle to achieve effective majority rule. Equally, the                           
 continued and illegal occupation of Nambibia by the South African regime was                          
 condemned and India pledged its support to the Nambibian people in their legitimate                   
 struggle for indepen- dence, under the leadership of SWAPO. In an unusual gesture,                    
 the Special Committee against apartheid in the United Nations held a special                          
 meeting to acknowledge India's contribution to the world struggle against apartheid                   
 in South Africa.                                                                                      
                                                                                                       
 The holding in New Delhi of a Conference of Indian Heads of Missions in countries                     
 South of the Sahara reflected India's keenness to promote bilateral cooperation                       
 with the African count- ries in various fields.                                                       
                                                                                                       
 A significant feature of India's external relations was the continuing friendship                     
 and cooperation with the Socialist countries, particularly the Soviet Union. These                    
 relations found sustenance from a similarty of views on most international problems                   
 as well as a tradition of mutually by beneficial bilateral cooperation in various                     
 fields over a considerable period. The visit of former Prime Minister, Mrs. Indira                    
 Gandhi, to the Soviet Union and the visits of senior leaders of Bulgaria, Hungary,                    
 Poland and Romania to India reflected the strong ties of friendship between India                     
 and these countries. The visit of the Soviet Foreign Minister, Mr. Gromyko, in                        
 April 1977, soon after the formation of the                                                           
                                                                                                       
 pg6                                                                                                   
                                                                                                       
 new Government, was of particular significance. The agree- ments signed during the                    
 visit and the Joint Communique issued reflected the desire of the two countries to                    
 further develop their friendship and economic cooperation.                                            
                                                                                                       
 The existing commercial, technological and economic ties between India and the                        
 European Economic Community and the other countries of Western Europe were still                      
 further developed during the period under review. In the political field, friendly                    
 relations were maintained through exchange of visits at a high level. The visit of                    
 the Foreign Minister of the Federal Republic of Germany in April 1977 held out                        
 prospects of greater under- standing and cooperation with that country.                               
                                                                                                       
 India's relations with the United States were marked by a dialogue at various                         
 levels to explore ways and means to develop cooperation. The United States showed                     
 great understanding and appreciation of the peaceful change of government through                     
 demo- cratic methods as a result of a free and fair elections. It was India's hope                    
 that relations with the United States would develop on the basis of equality,                         
 understanding and mutual benefit.                                                                     
                                                                                                       
 The association with India of several countries of South and Central America as                       
 members of the non-aligned group provided greater scope for cooperation. India                        
 signed a number of bilateral agreements and furthered its contacts, through                           
 exchange of visits, to increase cooperation with the countries of the region.                         
                                                                                                       
 The economic challenges faced by the world community because of the disparity                         
 between the rich and the poor countries continued to engage India's attention.                        
 Self-reliance and coopera- tion among the developing countries in various fields is                   
 necessary to withstand outside pressures and means an effort to bring about some                      
 redistribution in the decision-making processes in the world economic system. The                     
 series of UNCTAD Conference over the last 13 years had achieved some results :                        
 there was, how- ever, much more to be done and, in the meantime, the gap between                      
 the rich and the poor countries had been widening.                                                    
                                                                                                       
 pg7                                                                                                   
                                                                                                       
 Both, in these Conferences and in the Paris Conference on Inter- national Economic                    
 Cooperation, India tried to project a cons- tructive point of view, trying to                         
 reconcile differences between the developed and the developing countries and also,                    
 in some cases, between the developing countries themselves.                                           
                                                                                                       
 India took a leading role in the Ministerial Conference of non-aligned countries on                   
 the Press Agencies Pool, held in New Delhi in July 1976, which recommended the                        
 constitution of a non-aligned press agencies pool. At the Colombo Summit, India                       
 stressed the relevance of non-alignment and the importance of solidarity and                          
 cooperation among the non-aligned countries. India hosted the Conference of Foreign                   
 Ministers of the Bureau of Non-Aligned countries that met in New Delhi in April                       
 1977. Addressing the twenty-five member Bureau the Prime Minister said that                           
 non-alignment had become the mainstream of interna- tional life. For India it                         
 represented a national consensus and India would remain non-aligned in the real                       
 sense of the term. The Minister of External Affairs called for the implementation                     
 of the decisions of the Colombo Summit in a concrete and co- ordinated manner. He                     
 said that the challenge before the non- aligned countries was to show their                           
 willingness, to adjust, share and, if necessary, sacrifice in order to realise by                     
 collective efforts and self-reliance their collective aspirations. India believes                     
 that the developing countries should safeguard their interests through mutual                         
 cooperation and self-reliance but it is necessary that equitable interdependence                      
 based on mutual benefit should be evolved leading to a new international economic                     
 order that will lay the foundation of economic and political stability based on                       
 overall peace and prosperity.                                                                         
                                                                                                       
 pg8                                                                                                   
                                                                                                       
 Jan 01, 1976                                                                                          
                                                                                 Top                   
 India's, Neighbours                                                                                   
 CHAPTER I                                                                                             
                                                                                                       
 INDIA'S, NEIGHBOURS                                                                                   
                                                                                                       
 Afghanistan                                                                                           
                                                                                                       
 The traditionally friendly relations between India and Afgha- nistan were further                     
 strengthened by the visit of the Prime Minister to Afghanistan from 4 to 7 July. It                   
 provided an opportunity for exchange of views with the Head of State and Prime                        
 Minister of Afghanistan on matters of bilateral, regional and international                           
 interest. Both countries reaffirmed their faith in the non-aligned movement and its                   
 role in strengthening world peace and security and in promoting international                         
 cooperation. The visit also helped to underline the results achieved by Indo-Afghan                   
 Joint Commis- sion for Economic and Technical Cooperation. India undertook to                         
 further expand the area of bilateral cooperation between the two countries for the                    
 forthcoming seven-year development plan of Afghanistan. The significant event in                      
 the cultural field was the completion of the restoration work by the Archaeological                   
 Survey of India on the Khawaja Parsa mosque at Balkh in Afghanistan.                                  
                                                                                                       
 Bangladesh                                                                                            
                                                                                                       
 The visit to New Delhi of a high-level delegation from Bangladesh, headed by Mr.                      
 Justice A. Sattar, in December, 1975, initiated a dialogue on normalisation of                        
 relations between the two countries. Unfortunately, however, relations between the                    
 two countries remained strained because of various misunder- standings. The visit                     
 of a goodwill delegation from India under the leadership of Chairman, Policy                          
 Planning Committee, Shri G. Parthasarathi, to Dacca in June 1976 failed to reverse                    
 this trend. The Non-aligned Summit Conference in Colombo pro- vided an opportunity                    
 for discussions between the delegations of                                                            
                                                                                                       
 pg9                                                                                                   
                                                                                                       
 the two countries on bilateral issues also. Unfortunately, these turned out to be                     
 nonproductive.                                                                                        
                                                                                                       
 Most of the difficulties between the two countries stemmed from the Farakka                           
 problem; there was also the allegation that India was providing sanctuaries to                        
 miscreants and encouraging them to indulge in subversive activities along the                         
 Indo-Bangla- desh border. The Government of India refuted these charges and                           
 repeatedly assured Bangladesh that it was vitally interested in the sovereignty,                      
 independence and territorial integrity of Bangladesh and had no interest in                           
 promoting instability or dis- Order in that country because that was bound spill                      
 over into India.                                                                                      
                                                                                                       
 On the Farakka issue India continued to express its readiness to work for an                          
 equitable solution through bilateral negotiations. Before the commencement of the                     
 1976 lean season India invited Bangladesh for talks with a view to reach an                           
 equitable solution. The talks at the level of experts were held in April and May                      
 and the goodwill delegation which visited Dacca from 18 to 23 June devoted most of                    
 its time to the discussion of this issue. In Sep- tember 1976 India renewed its                       
 invitation to Bangladesh for further talks and these were held in New Delhi from 7                    
 to Sep 10, 1976. During these negotiations, India made far- reaching proposals to                     
 reduce its withdrawals at Farakka during the lean season to accommodate Bangladesh.                   
 Further, it offered to undertake joint investigation and study of all possibilities                   
 for a long-term solution for augmenting the flow of the Ganga in the lean period;                     
 The Bangladesh Government were not satisfied with these compromise solutions and                      
 decided to take their com- plaint to the United Nations. In the United Nations, a                     
 con- sensus statement recommended by the Special Political Committee led Bangladesh                   
 to withdraw a draft resolution submitted by it on the subject. The consensus                          
 statement declared that India and Bangladesh had decided to meet in Dacca at the                      
 Ministerial level with a view to arrive at a fair and expeditious settlement.                         
                                                                                                       
 An Indian delegation led by Shri Jagjivan Ram, Minister for Agriculture and                           
 Irrigation, visited Bangladesh for bilateral talks                                                    
                                                                                                       
 pg10                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 on the Farakka issue from 6 to 8 December 1976. Progress was made in the talks                        
 towards understanding each other's position and it was decided to resume the talks                    
 shortly. In January 1977 talks were held at Dacca and again at New Delhi but                          
 unfortunately these did not lead to a settlement of the problem.                                      
                                                                                                       
 Direct negotiations on the Ganga waters were resumed im- mediately after the                          
 formation of the new Government. An Indian delegation led by Shri Jagjivan Ram,                       
 Minister for Defence in the new Government, had extended discussions in Dacca in                      
 April 1977. These resulted in the arrival of a common under- standing in principle                    
 on the allocation of waters during the lean season. This was followed by                              
 discussions at the official level from 7 to 11 May between the Bangladesh                             
 delegation led by Mr. Abbas and the Indian delegation led by the Foreign. Secre-                      
 tary, Shri Jagat Mehta. Considerable progress was made in working out the details                     
 of a possible solution. It is hoped that this and further rounds of talks at the                      
 official level will lead to a permanent solution of the problem of allocation of                      
 the Ganga waters both during the lean season and throughout the year.                                 
                                                                                                       
 The Trade Agreement between India and Bangladesh and the Indo-Bangladesh Cultural                     
 Cooperation Programme which were to expire at the end of September 1976, were                         
 extended through exchange of letters. Annual trade talks between the two coun-                        
 tries took place in the second week of February 1977.                                                 
                                                                                                       
 India agreed to import newsprint, molasses, nephtha and fur- nace oil worth about                     
 25 crore Taka from Bangladesh. It is hoped that this will contribute to lessening                     
 the trade gap between the two countries.                                                              
                                                                                                       
 Since the emergence of Bangladesh as an independent country India has provided or                     
 committed assistance totalling Rs. 316.02 crores to Bangladesh by way of official                     
 grants and credits as well as commercial credits. During the year under report, a                     
 sum of Rs. 4.77 crores was utilised (up to the end of November 1976), covering                        
 supplies of commodities and equipment under official credits and grants. Under its                    
 Technical                                                                                             
                                                                                                       
 pg11                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 Assistance Programme India provided 100 scholarships to Bang- ladesh nationals in                     
 various disciplines. Supplies of capital equipment to Bangladesh under commercial                     
 credits extended by India also continued during the year.                                             
                                                                                                       
 An agreement was reached among India, Bangladesh and Nepal to set up a Jute                           
 International designed mainly to carry out research and development work relating                     
 to raw jute and jute manufactures and to coordinate the policies of the three gov-                    
 ernments with a view to improving the market prospects and export earnings from                       
 jute.                                                                                                 
                                                                                                       
 Bhutan                                                                                                
                                                                                                       
 India's relations with Bhutan continued to be characterised by close friendship and                   
 understanding.                                                                                        
                                                                                                       
 On his way to attend the Fifth Non-aligned Summit in Colombo, H.M. the King of                        
 Bhutan spent two days in Delhi in 13 and 14 August 1976. During his stay, he held                     
 meetings/ discussions with Indian leaders. At the summit in Colombo die. King                         
 praised India's good neighbourly policy and characterised India's efforts to                          
 normalise relations with Pakistan & China as contributory to peace and stability in                   
 Asia. The King also paid a handsome tribute to the generous financial and technical                   
 co- operation extended "by our good friend and neighbour India" to his country.                       
                                                                                                       
 At the invitation of the Government of India, the Royal Grandmothers of the King,                     
 Ashi Phuntsog Chhoden and Ashi Pema Dechhen visited India in January 1976.                            
                                                                                                       
 On official invitation, HRH Ashi Dechhen, sister of the king of Bhutan and his                        
 representative in the Ministry of Development, visited New Delhi from 2 to 7                          
 January 1976. Apart from visit- ing the Bhakra and Beas Projects, the Princess had                    
 discussions with the Minister of External Affairs on Bhutan's Fourth Five Year Plan                   
 (1976-81).                                                                                            
                                                                                                       
 pg12                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 The Foreign Secretary paid a visit to Bhutan from 24 to 26 July 1976, and held                        
 useful discussions with the King, the Foreign Minister and other prominent                            
 personalities.                                                                                        
                                                                                                       
 The Government of India continued to bear special respon- sibility for providing                      
 assistance for Bhutan's socioeconomic deve- lopment. For the Fourth Five Year Plan                    
 (1976-81), it was decided that the Government of India would contribute as grant a                    
 sum of Rs. 70.29 crores. Certain Projects like Area Develop- ment, Poultry,                           
 Fishery, Animal Feed Plant, Fruit Canning, etc., have also been identified and                        
 would be executed by the Gov- ernment of India, on behalf of the Government of                        
 Bhutan. For the annual plan (1976-77) the Government of India agreed to provide Rs.                   
 12.00 crores to the Government of Bhutan. This excluded India's assistance to                         
 Bhutan in financing the Chukha Hydel Project and Penden Cement Plant, on which                        
 Agreements had already been signed. The Chukha Project Authority came into being on                   
 27 September 1975, when its first meeting was held in Thimpu. The second and third                    
 meetings of the Autho- rity took place on 26 March and 15 October 1976                                
 respectively. The work of the Project has now gone into full swing.                                   
                                                                                                       
 As in the past, cooperation between the two countries in various development fields                   
 continued to be implemented through visits and surveys by Indian teams of experts                     
 and specia- lists to Bhutan, in the field of Forestry, Minerals, Telecommuni-                         
 cation, Hydel Survey, etc. Students and trainees from Bhutan continued to receive                     
 educational and training facilities in India in various fields including science,                     
 technology, medicine, public administration, forestry, telecommunications, etc.                       
                                                                                                       
 The King of Bhutan visited India in April 1977 and had talks with the leaders of                      
 the new government. The visit gave an opportunity to both sides to reaffirm their                     
 unique links of friendship and brotherhood.                                                           
                                                                                                       
 pg13                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 Burma                                                                                                 
                                                                                                       
 Relations with Burma continued to be cordial throughout the year. The India-Burma                     
 Boundary Commission held a meeting in New Delhi in March, 1976, at which maps                         
 relating to the sectors already demarcated were initialled by both sides. Under a                     
 Memorandum of Understanding signed in June 1976, India agreed to supply 15 pilot                      
 plants to Burma under the ITEC Programme, The Burmese Minister of Culture, U Aye                      
 Maung, paid a brief visit to India in June 1976.                                                      
                                                                                                       
 The Foreign Secretary, Shri J. S. Mehta, led a delegation to Rangoon in March 1977.                   
 He held discussions with the Burmese Ministry of Foreign Affairs on matters of                        
 bilateral importance with special emphasis on economic cooperation.                                   
                                                                                                       
 The Maldives Friendly relations between India and the Republic of the Maldives were                   
 further strengthened during the year. India wel- comed the admission of the                           
 Maldives to the non-aligned Group.                                                                    
                                                                                                       
 In September 1976, a resident Indian Embassy was estab- lished in Male.                               
                                                                                                       
 H. E. Amir Ahmed Hilmy Fashana Kilegefaanu, Vice-Presi- dent of the Republic of the                   
 Maldives, paid a visit to India from 24 December 1976 to 2 January 1977 on the                        
 invitation of the Government of India. During the course of the visit, an agree-                      
 ment was signed by H. E. the Vice-President and India's Minis- ter of External                        
 Affairs at New Delhi on 28 December 1976 deli- miting the maritime boundary between                   
 India and the Maldives.                                                                               
                                                                                                       
 India has proposed economic and technical cooperation with the Maldives in a number                   
 of fields including tourism.                                                                          
                                                                                                       
 pg14                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 Nepal                                                                                                 
                                                                                                       
 There was a great deal of positive movement in the relations between the two                          
 countries. There were several visits at the political and official levels which                       
 provided an opportunity for a continuing dialogue between the two Governments. From                   
 the Nepalese side, visitors included the Prime Minister, Foreign Minis- ter,                          
 Minister of Commerce & Industry (in April) and Their Royal Highnesses, Prince                         
 Gyanendra and Prince Dhirendra, the younger brothers of His Majesty the King of                       
 Nepal (in November). At the official level, the Nepalese Foreign Secretary visited                    
 India in March and India's Foreign Secretary returned the visit in October.                           
                                                                                                       
 In March Shri Y. T. Shah, Secretary, Ministry of Energy, led an Indian delegation                     
 to Nepal and exchanged views with the Nepalese officials on matters relating to the                   
 utilisation of the water of the rivers common to both the countries. Shri S. S.                       
 Sidhu, Additional Secretary in the Ministry of Home Affairs, led another Indian                       
 delegation to Nepal during November-Decem- ber to discuss ways and means for                          
 facilitating the visit of Nepa- lese nationals to various protected and restricted                    
 areas of India. Questions relating to the joint harnessing of the vast potential of                   
 river waters for the benefit of both the countries were sorted out. Understanding                     
 was reached between the two countries to hold joint investigations for the                            
 Pancheswar Dam Project on the River Mahakali and also for the Flood control scheme                    
 on the River Rapti. The Nepal Eastern Gandak Canal was completed and handed over to                   
 the Nepalese Government. An agreement was reached about the cost estimates of                         
 Chandra and Pump Canals which would be constructed by the Nepalese Govern- ment and                   
 financed by the Government of India. The estimated cost would be Rs. 11.90 crores.                    
                                                                                                       
 The Government of India decided that the Nepalese nationals wanting to visit                          
 protected/restricted areas of India shall be treat- ed on par with other foreign                      
 nationals and as such would be re- quired to obtain permits for this purpose. In                      
 order to ensure                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
 pg15                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 that bona fide Nepalese travellers to these areas were not incon- venienced, simple                   
 and convenient procedures were laid down for the issue of such permits.                               
                                                                                                       
 The Indo-Nepal Treaty on Trade and Transit, 1971 came up for renewal during the                       
 year. Two rounds of discussions have already been held and it was hoped that the                      
 text of the new Treaty would be finalised at the next meeting. Pending the                            
 finalisation of the new document, the 1971 Treaty was extended by mutual agreement                    
 till such time as the new one was signed and came into force. This was done to                        
 ensure that there was no hindrance in the flow of essential commodities to Nepal                      
 and the Nepalese transit trade with third countries did not suffer. There appeared                    
 greater awareness on the part of the two coun- tries to stop smuggling and                            
 deflection which, in the past tended to affect Indo-Nepal trade relations.                            
                                                                                                       
 The 25th anniversary of the Colombo Plan, under which India has been extending                        
 capital and technical cooperation to Nepal on a bilateral basis, was celebrated                       
 during the year. Budget provision made for grants-in-aid for development schemes,                     
 in Nepal in 1976-77 amounted to about Rs. 10 crores.                                                  
                                                                                                       
 Important projects in Nepal, completed during 1976, were the Industrial Estates at                    
 Nepalganj and Dharan, a drinking water treatment plant at Rajbiraj and                                
 black-topping of the 49-km long Rani Pauwa-Trisuli Road. The major schemes under                      
 imple- mentation were the 250-km long East-West Highway, a 1300- line cross bar                       
 telephone exchange at Biratnagar and the Kamla River Bridge on the East-West                          
 Highway. During the year, the Government of India provided funds for the                              
 construction of cer- tain infra-structural works at the site of the 14-MW                             
 Hydro-elec- tric project at Devighat. Assistance for this will be provided under                      
 the Indian Economic Cooperation Programme.                                                            
                                                                                                       
 The King of Nepal, who was on a private visit to India, visited Delhi in April 1977                   
 and had detailed exchange of views with the Prime Minister and his colleagues in                      
 the new government.                                                                                   
                                                                                                       
 pg16                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 Pakistan                                                                                              
                                                                                                       
 Since the signing of the Simla Agreement in July 1972, India took various                             
 initiatives to normalise relations between the two countries with a view to                           
 establishing a durable peace in the sub-continent. As a result of this, many                          
 outstanding prob- lems were resolved.                                                                 
                                                                                                       
 On 27 March 1976, the Prime Minister of Pakistan wrote to the Prime Minister of                       
 India that Pakistan was prepared to with- draw its case from the International                        
 Civil Aviation Organisation with a view "to impart to the normalisation process the                   
 impetus that it needs". India had already urged such a course of action in order                      
 that the normalisation process could continue. Con- sistent with India's firm                         
 belief that the Simla Agreement provi- ded a sound framework for the establishment                    
 of durable peace and harmonious bilateral relations, the Prime Minister, replying                     
 on 11 April 1976 suggested that the Foreign Secretaries of the two countries should                   
 meet and discuss not only civil aviation matters but also resumption of rail and                      
 road communications as well as restoration of diplomatic relations between the two                    
 coun- tries. The Prime Minister of Pakistan accepted these sugges- tions. As a                        
 result, the Foreign Secretaries of India and Pakis- tan met at Islamabad from 12 to                   
 14 May 1976 and issued a Joint Statement which embodied an agreement between the                      
 two sides to restore all the severed links between the two countries. The two sides                   
 also agreed to open their bilateral trade to the private sector.                                      
                                                                                                       
 The entire package embodied in the Joint Statement was put into effect between 17                     
 and 24 July 1976. The air links between the two countries were restored on 21 July,                   
 the first train left Amritsar for Lahore on 22 July, and the Ambassadors of the two                   
 countries presented their credentials on 24 July.                                                     
                                                                                                       
 During the latter half of the year, the delegations of India and Pakistan met in                      
 New Delhi & Islamabad to consider Pakis- tan's objections to the design of the                        
 Salal Hydro-electric project                                                                          
                                                                                                       
 pg17                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 on the river Chenab in the State of Jammu and Kashmir. The project is being set up                    
 in accordance with the Indus Waters Treaty of 1960 under which India is allowed the                   
 use of the waters of the three western rivers, namely, Chenab, Jhelum and Indus,                      
 for the generation of hydro-electric power provided that the design, construction                     
 and operation of these plants conform to the criteria laid down in the Treaty. The                    
 matter had been kinder discussion in the Permanent Indus Commission comprising the                    
 representatives of India and Pakistan for the last six years. As the Commission                       
 could not reach an agreement, Pakistan proposed in July 1976 that the question                        
 should be referred to Neutral Expert in terms of the Treaty. India, however,                          
 sugges- ted that before such a reference was made, the issue should be discussed                      
 bilaterally. Pakistan accepted this suggestion. Two rounds of discussions took                        
 place in New Delhi and Islamabad in October 1976. These were held in a cordial                        
 atmosphere and were constructive and useful. The Joint Statement issued at the end                    
 of the talks held in Islamabad expressed the hope that in the third round of talks                    
 to be held in New Delhi a final agree- ment would be reached.                                         
                                                                                                       
 The process of normalisation by and large went smoothly and resulted in the                           
 restoration of many links which had remain- ed severed for a number of years. These                   
 developments were widely appreciated internationally.                                                 
                                                                                                       
 After the formation of the new Government, friendly messages were exchanged. Mr.                      
 Bhutto sent a special emissary to New Delhi in April 1977 with a personal message                     
 for the Prime Minister. The new government hope to maintain and promote friendly                      
 relations with Pakistan. In the same month, following the visit of a Pakistani                        
 delegation, the two countries decided to set up a Joint Commission to review and                      
 further pro- mote trade between them.                                                                 
                                                                                                       
 Sri Lanka                                                                                             
                                                                                                       
 A historic landmark in the friendly cooperation between India and Sri Lanka was the                   
 signing of two Agreements, extending                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 pg18                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 the maritime boundary in the Palk Bay, delimited in July 1974, in the Gulf of                         
 Manaar and the Arabian Sea, upto the Trijunction with the Maldives on one hand and                    
 in the Bay of Bengal, upto a distance of 200 miles, on the other. Thus the entire                     
 maritime boundary between India and Sri Lanka now stands delimited.                                   
                                                                                                       
 The friendly relations between the two countries were fur- ther strengthened in                       
 1976 by expanding collaboration in the economic, cultural and technical fields and                    
 by exchange of high- level visits.                                                                    
                                                                                                       
 Mrs. S. Bandaranaike, Prime Minister of Sri Lanka, paid an official visit to India,                   
 from 13 to 15 April 1976 and held friendly talks with the Prime Minister of India                     
 on matters of international and bilateral interest.                                                   
                                                                                                       
 The Prime Minister and the Minister of External Affairs visited Colombo in August                     
 1976 in connection with the Non- aligned Summit and were accorded a warm and                          
 friendly wel- come by the Government and the people of Sri Lanka. Close and                           
 continuous cooperation between the two sides on the eve of and during the Summit                      
 further strengthened the cordial rela- tions between the two countries.                               
                                                                                                       
 Under the 1964 Agreement on Persons of Indian, origin 2,37,390 persons were                           
 repatriated to India and 1,35,680 persons were registered as Sri Lanka citizens                       
 till 31 December 1976.                                                                                
                                                                                                       
 pg19                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 Sep 10, 1976                                                                                          
                                                                                 Top                   
 South-East, Asia                                                                                      
 CHAPTER II                                                                                            
                                                                                                       
 SOUTH-EAST, ASIA                                                                                      
                                                                                                       
 Australia Despite differences of approach on the establishment of a Zone of Peace                     
 in the Indian Ocean, India and Australia conti- nued to work for closer cooperation                   
 at the bilateral level. The 8th round of Indo-Australian bilateral talks was held                     
 in Canberra.                                                                                          
                                                                                                       
 In August, the Minister of Commerce, visited Australia and signed the                                 
 Indo-Australian Trade Agreement. The Agreement formalised bilateral trade relations                   
 between India and Australia and provided that the two countries should take all                       
 measures to facilitate, strengthen and diversify bilateral trade which will be                        
 conducted in accordance with the General Agreement on Tariff and Trade (GATT) to                      
 which both countries are parties. The Trade Agreement provided for an increased                       
 level of contacts between Indian and Australian enterprises through the develop-                      
 ment of Industrial cooperation, including joint ventures, between the two                             
 countries. On 16 September, an Australian parliamen- tary delegation arrived for a                    
 6-day visit to India. The delegation showed keen interest in understanding the                        
 progress recorded by the Indian economy during the last one-and-a-half years. On                      
 the occasion of the inauguration of Air India's 747 service between Bombay and                        
 Sydney, the Minister of State in the Ministry of Home Affairs, and the Minister for                   
 Parliamentary Affairs led a Parliamentary delegation.                                                 
                                                                                                       
 There was also an exchange of visits by the Secretaries of the Department of                          
 Science & Technology to identify the areas of cooperation and to assist on-going                      
 projects. I.N.S. BETWA paid a goodwill visit to Port Darwin and Port Brisbane in                      
 May and June respectively.                                                                            
                                                                                                       
 pg20                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 Indonesia                                                                                             
                                                                                                       
 On the question of East Timor, India extended its full support to Indonesia. This                     
 was appreciated by the Govern- ment and people of Indonesia. During the year,                         
 negotiations were completed on the extension of maritime boundary bet- ween India                     
 and Indonesia in the Indian Ocean and the Andaman Sea. This had been partly                           
 delimited in 1974.                                                                                    
                                                                                                       
 At the 7th round of annual bilateral talks held in Djakarta in July 1976, the                         
 Foreign Ministers of India and Indonesia re- viewed bilateral relations and also                      
 exchanged views on the inter- national situation.                                                     
                                                                                                       
 Two prominent Indian visitors to Indonesia were the Speaker of Lok Sabha, B. R.                       
 Bhagat, and Shri Pranab Mukherjee, Minister of Revenue & Banking. Shri Bhagat led                     
 an Indian Parliamentary delegation to Indonesia. From the Indonesian side, the                        
 Chief of the Air Staff, Air Marshal Saleh Basarah and the Chief of Inteligence.                       
 Yoga Sugama, paid an official visit to India. In order to identify capital goods                      
 for import from India, an official industrial delegation from Indonesia visited                       
 India.                                                                                                
                                                                                                       
 Malaysia                                                                                              
                                                                                                       
 The year saw further intensification of the tempo of economic cooperation between                     
 India and Malaysia. In order to promote industrial collaboration an Agreement on                      
 the Avoidance of Double Taxation was signed. Four more industrial joint ven- tures                    
 came on stream during the year. Educational institutions in India continued to play                   
 host to a large number of Malaysian students. In March, bilateral talks at the                        
 official level were held in New Delhi.                                                                
                                                                                                       
 Among important Malaysian visitors to India were the Malaysian Chief of Staff of                      
 the Armed Forces, Tan Sri General Ibrahim bin Ismail and the Solicitor-General, Tan                   
 Sri Haji Mohammad Sallahin Abbas. From the Indian side, Shri Pranab Mukherjee,                        
 Minister of Fevenue & Banking, and Shri Bipinpal                                                      
                                                                                                       
 pg21                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 Das, Deputy Minister of External Affairs and General T. N. Raina, Chief of the Army                   
 Staff, paid official visits to Malaysia.                                                              
                                                                                                       
 The Philippines                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
 President and Mrs. Marcos touched New Delhi in May on their way back from the                         
 UNCTAD-IV meeting. The Prime Minister and the Minister of External Affairs were                       
 among those who received them at the airport. President Marcos called on President                    
 Fakhruddin Ali Ahmed at the Rashtrapati Bhavan India took note of Philippines'                        
 desire to come closer to the non- aligned group and welcomed its admission to the                     
 non-aligned Summit at Colombo as guest.                                                               
                                                                                                       
 Shri Pranab Mukherjee, Minister of Revenue & Banking and Shri Bipinpal Das, Deputy                    
 Minister of External Affairs, visited Manila.                                                         
                                                                                                       
 A highlight of technical cooperation between India and the Philippines was the                        
 agreement signed by the ICAR with its counterpart in the Philippines for                              
 collaboration in agricultural research.                                                               
                                                                                                       
 Singapore                                                                                             
                                                                                                       
 Friendly relations between India and Singapore were pro- moted with the official                      
 visits of Shri Pranab Mukherjee, Minister of Revenue & Banking, and Shri Bipinpal                     
 Das, Deputy Minister of External Affairs to Singapore.                                                
                                                                                                       
 Thailand                                                                                              
                                                                                                       
 Despite political changes in Thailand, steady progress was maintained in the                          
 development of bilateral relations. This was evident from the visits of Shri                          
 Jagjivan Ram, Minister for Agri- culture and Irrigation, Shri Pranab Mukherjee,                       
 Minister of Revenue & Banking and Shri Bipinpal Das, Deputy Minister of External                      
 Affairs.                                                                                              
                                                                                                       
 Places of Buddhist pilgrimage in India continued to attract a large number of Thai                    
 pilgrims, the most notable of whom during the year was Prof. Sanya Dharmasakti,                       
 President of the Privy                                                                                
                                                                                                       
 pg22                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 Council of Thailand and former Prime Minister. An appreciable number of Thai                          
 students continued to receive University educa- tion in India.                                        
                                                                                                       
 Fiji                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 Mr. Jone B. Naisara, Minister for Information of Fiji, visited India in September                     
 1976 as a guest of the Government of India. Shri Vishwanath Pratap Singh, Deputy                      
 Minister of Commerce, inaugurated an Indian trade exhibition in Suva in November.                     
 In June, I.N.S. BETWA paid a goodwill visit to Suva.                                                  
                                                                                                       
 Nauru                                                                                                 
                                                                                                       
 Relations between India and the Republic of Nauru were further strengthened during                    
 the year when the President of that country, Mr. Hammer D. Roburt, in his capacity                    
 as Minister for Industries and Minerals, visited India. He came to finalise an                        
 agreement on the establishment of a joint venture in India for the manufacture of                     
 phosphoric acid based on Nauru phosphate.                                                             
                                                                                                       
 New Zealand                                                                                           
                                                                                                       
 India's relations with New Zealand continued to be friendly and cordial and                           
 progress was maintained in cooperation in var- ious fields.                                           
                                                                                                       
 Papua New Guinea                                                                                      
                                                                                                       
 In May, India and Papua New Guinea decided to establish diplomatic relations.                         
 Subsequently, India's first High Commis- sioner presented his Letters. of Credence                    
 to the Governor-General on Aug 26, 1976.                                                              
                                                                                                       
 Tonga                                                                                                 
                                                                                                       
 In April 1976 the Crown Prince of Tonga visited India.                                                
                                                                                                       
 pg23 Aug 26, 1976                                                                                     
                                                                                 Top                   
 East Asia                                                                                             
 CHAPTER III                                                                                           
                                                                                                       
 EAST ASIA                                                                                             
                                                                                                       
 India took the initiative to normalise relations with China and, through bilateral                    
 exchanges and friendly contacts, worked for understanding and cooperation with                        
 other countries of East Asia.                                                                         
                                                                                                       
 China                                                                                                 
                                                                                                       
 Informal exchanges between the two countries at official level on restoration of                      
 diplomatic representation to the Ambass- adorial level took place in early 1976.                      
 These talks proved fruit- ful and were followed by the announcement in April 1976                     
 of the nomination of Shri K. R. Narayanan as India's Ambassador to the People's                       
 Republic of China. China, making a positive response to India's initiative,                           
 announced, in July 1976, the appointment of Mr. Chen Chan-yuan as its Ambassador to                   
 India. The Indian Ambassador presented his credentials in July 1976. The Chinese                      
 Ambassador, while presenting his credentials in September stated that the                             
 normalisation of relations through joint efforts was in full accord with the                          
 interests of the people of the two countries. India considered the restoration of                     
 channels of communication at the Ambassadorial level, after a lapse of 15 years, as                   
 a first step towards the normalisation of relations and for developing constructive                   
 and meaningful bilateral relations with China.                                                        
                                                                                                       
 The Prime Minister and the Minister of External Affairs sent messages of sympathy                     
 to the Chinese leaders following the earth- quake in North Eastern China in August                    
 1976. The offer to assist in the relief of earthquake victims was greatly                             
 appreciated by the Chinese Government. The Prime Minister also sent felicitations                     
 to Chairman Hua Kuo-feng on his appointment to                                                        
                                                                                                       
 pg24                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 the office of Chairman of the Communist Party and expressed the hope that relations                   
 between India and China would develop fur- ther in the years to come.                                 
                                                                                                       
 The visit of the Chinese badminton team to India in Octo- ber/November and the                        
 visit of an un-official Indian delegation to China in December 1976, on the                           
 inauguration of the Dr. Kotnis Memorial Hall, reflected hopeful trends towards in-                    
 creasing between the two countries.                                                                   
                                                                                                       
 A non-official Trade Delegation from India, including re- presentatives of State                      
 Trade organisations, visited the Canton Spring Fair in April 1977. Preliminary                        
 agreements have been signed and it is hoped that these will lead to some                              
 substantial progress in renewing the commercial relations between the two                             
 countries.                                                                                            
                                                                                                       
 Japan                                                                                                 
                                                                                                       
 Relations between India and Japan were marked by contin- ued contacts and exchanges                   
 at various levels. The inauguration of Japan-India Parliamentarians Friendship                        
 Association in March 1976, which was joined by 84 Diet members of the ruling                          
 Liberal Democratic Party, was an important step towards promoting friendly                            
 relations.                                                                                            
                                                                                                       
 The Governments of the two countries exchanged notes, in March 1976, pertaining to                    
 Commodity Loan of Yen 7 billion (Rs. 21 crores). By another exchange of notes in                      
 November 1976 Japan agreed to grant debt relief loan to India of Yen 12.2 billion                     
 (Rs. 40 crores) for 1976-77.                                                                          
                                                                                                       
 The Ninth Joint Meeting of the India-Japan Business Co- operation Committee was                       
 held in Madras on 16-Nov 17, 1976. The Japanese delegation was led by Dr. Shigeo                      
 Nagano, Director and Honorary Chairman, Nippon Steel Corporation. More than 100                       
 delegates from both sides participated in the deli- berations of this Committee.                      
                                                                                                       
 pg25                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 The Eleventh Consultative Meeting of the. officials of the Ministry of External                       
 Affairs of India and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Japan met in India on 6-7                     
 December 1976. The Indian side was led by Shri M. A. Vellodi, Secretary (East) and                    
 the Japanese delegation by Mr. Keisuke Arita, Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs.                    
 The two sides affirmed their intention to maintain close contacts on all matters of                   
 mutual interest through diplomatic channels and promote greater interaction at all                    
 levels between the two countries.                                                                     
                                                                                                       
 Shri G. S. Marak, Minister in-charge of sericulture and weav- ing of. Meghalaya                       
 visited Japan in July 1976 for study of the latest technological, scientific and                      
 organisational developments in the Japanese sericulture industry.                                     
                                                                                                       
 Republic of Korea                                                                                     
                                                                                                       
 An economic study mission of the Government of the Re- public of Korea led by Mr.                     
 Seung Jae Koh, Executive Member, President's Council of Economic and Scientific                       
 Advisers, visited India from 2 to 6 October 1976. During the visit, he held dis-                      
 cussions with the Minister of Commerce, Minister of Industry and Civil Aviation,                      
 the Vice-Chairman of Planning Commission and the Deputy Minister of Commerce. An                      
 Indian trade dele- gation from the Ministry of Commerce visited the Republic in                       
 December for trade review talks.                                                                      
                                                                                                       
 The Deputy Minister of External Affairs, Shri Bipinpal Das, paid a goodwill visit                     
 to the Republic from 19 to 23 December 1976, at the invitation of its Vice-Minister                   
 for Foreign Affairs. He called on the Prime Minister and the Foreign Minister and                     
 some other leaders and had wide ranging discussions on bilateral and other matters                    
 of mutual interest. In the cultural field, India took part in the 22nd Asian Film                     
 Festival held in Pusan, from 15 to 17 July 1976, and two entries from India won                       
 prizes.                                                                                               
                                                                                                       
 pg26                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 Democratic People's Republic of Korea A trade mission from the Democratic People's                    
 Republic of Korea, led by Mr. Li tae Baek, Vice-Minister of foreign trade visited                     
 New Delhi in March 1976 and signed a Trade Protocol for 1976.                                         
                                                                                                       
 A 3-member delegation of the Foreign Ministry of the Demo- cratic People's Republic                   
 visited India from 2 to 6 July 1976. During the course of the visit, the delegation                   
 called on the Mini- ster of External Affairs. An agreement on cultural cooperation                    
 between India and the Democratic People's Republic of Korea was signed on 2 July                      
 1976. The Vice-President of India sent a message of condolence on the occasion of                     
 untimely death of Mr. Chow Yong Kun, Vice-Premier of the Democratic People's                          
 Republic of Korea.                                                                                    
                                                                                                       
 Mongolia                                                                                              
                                                                                                       
 The Minister of External Affairs paid an official and friendly visit to Mongolia                      
 from 4 to 8 September 1976. The two coun- tries had exchanged several high-level                      
 visits since the establish- merit of diplomatic relations in 1956, but this was the                   
 first visit by an Indian Minister of External Affairs to Mongolia. During the                         
 visit, both sides expressed satisfaction at the continuing de- velopment of                           
 relations between the two countries and reaffirmed their determination to further                     
 strengthen and expand political, trade, cultural and other ties.                                      
                                                                                                       
 India agreed to give a more positive content to its trade re- lations with                            
 Mongolia. Both sides agreed to make efforts to identify areas in which the existing                   
 relations between the two countries could be expanded to mutual benefit.                              
                                                                                                       
 Vietnam                                                                                               
                                                                                                       
 India's relations with Vietnam were marked by efforts to promote friendship and                       
 cooperation. Before the two Vietnams                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 pg27                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 were united, the Foreign Minister of the Provisional Revolutionary Government of                      
 South Vietnam, Madame Nguyen Thi Binh, paid a friendly visit to India in May 1976.                    
 Discussions between her and the Minister of External Affairs showed unanimity of                      
 views on various issues. India welcomed the reunification of Vietnam in June 1976,                    
 to form the Socialist Republic of Vietnam, as it marked the fulfilment of the                         
 cherished aspirations of the Viet- namese people. India viewed with special                           
 interest and sympathy the efforts of the Vietnamese Government towards                                
 reconstruction of the economy. The Indian Red Cross made a gift of 101 buffaloes                      
 and an Indian agricultural delegation visited Vietnam in October 1976. In its                         
 discussions with the Vietnamese agri- cultural delegation the two sides identified                    
 a number of fields for cooperation between the two countries.                                         
                                                                                                       
 A postal agreement, signed with Vietnam in November 1976, was aimed at establishing                   
 postal and telecommunication relations with a view to developing communications                       
 between the peoples of the two countries.                                                             
                                                                                                       
 A Cultural Agreement signed with Vietnam, in December 1976, sought to promote and                     
 develop relations and-understanding between the two countries in the realm of art,                    
 culture, education, including academic exchanges in the fields of science and tech-                   
 nology, sports, public health and public media.                                                       
                                                                                                       
 The Government of Vietnam granted permission to Air India. for overflying its                         
 territorial space.                                                                                    
                                                                                                       
 Mr. Phen Hien, Special Envoy of the Prime Minister of Vietnam, during his visit to                    
 India in February 1976, held dis- cussions to further consolidate relations and                       
 promote cooperation between India and Vietnam in various fields.                                      
                                                                                                       
 The Foreign Minister of Vietnam, Mr. Nguyen Duy Trinh, visited India during April                     
 1977 and had talks with the leaders of the new Government. The Minister of External                   
 Affairs offered India's help to share India's experience and trained personnel in                     
 the task of reconstruction of Vietnam. The two Ministers                                              
                                                                                                       
 pg28                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 further discussed how to strengthen relations between their two countries in the                      
 political, economic, technical and cultural fields.                                                   
                                                                                                       
 Kampuchea                                                                                             
                                                                                                       
 Cambodia was renamed "Democratic Kampuchea" under the new constitution that country                   
 adopted on 5 January 1976. The President, Prime Minister and the Minister of                          
 External Affairs sent warm messages of felicitations to their Kampuchean counter-                     
 parts, who were elected to these high offices under the new con- stitution. They                      
 expressed the hope that friendly relations bet- ween the two countries would be                       
 further strengthened. Views were exchanged between the leaders of the two countries                   
 when the Minister of External Affairs met Mr. Ieng Sary, Vice-Premier incharge of                     
 Foreign Affairs of Kampuchea, at New York in October 1976.                                            
                                                                                                       
 Laos                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 A major event in the steadily improving relationship between the two countries was                    
 the visit of President Souphanouvong to India which concluded on 19 January 1977. A                   
 joint communi- que was issued after the visit. Responding to the wishes of Loas,                      
 India agreed to share its technological experiences and reaffirmed its willingness                    
 to cooperate in the task of post-war reconstruction in Laos.                                          
                                                                                                       
 The Indian Red Cross Society sent textiles worth Rs. 2 lakhs and medicines costing                    
 about Rs. 50,000 to Laos as emergency aid.                                                            
                                                                                                       
 India is operating an on-going Technical Assistance Pro- gramme for the benefit of                    
 Laos. The Programme is estimated to cost Rs. 20 lakhs and involves, among other                       
 items, Indian assistance in conducting techno-economic surveys, training of Lao                       
 technicians and deputation of Indian experts to that country.                                         
                                                                                                       
 pg29                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
                                                                                 TOP                   
                                                                                                       
 CHINA INDIA MALI USA JAPAN UNITED KINGDOM KOREA MONGOLIA VIETNAM CAMBODIA LAOS                        
                                                                                                       
 West Asia And North Africa                                                                            
                                                                                                       
 CHAPTER IV                                                                                            
                                                                                                       
 WEST ASIA AND NORTH AFRICA                                                                            
                                                                                                       
 GENERAL                                                                                               
                                                                                                       
 India continued to attach great importance to the further strengthening of                            
 bilateral relations and cooperation with countries of West Asia and North Africa.                     
 Significant expansion took place in India's commercial, economic and technical                        
 coopera- tion with these countries built on the complementarities of their                            
 economies and needs of development. Frequent exchanges of high level visits, as                       
 well as discussions at other levels, re- affirmed the traditional ties and the                        
 close similarity of views on important international and regional issues between                      
 India and the countries of West Asia and North Africa.                                                
                                                                                                       
 The Government of India continued its firm support for the Arab States in their                       
 efforts to obtain a just solution of the Arab- Israeli problem, based on Israeli                      
 withdrawal from all Arab terri- tories occupied in 1967 and the realisation of the                    
 legitimate rights and aspirations of the Palestinian people. India was greatly                        
 relieved at the prospects of complete cessation of the tragic fratricidal fighting                    
 in Lebanon, which cast its shadow over the region for the greater part of the year.                   
                                                                                                       
 The understanding shown by some of the oil exporting coun- tries of the problems                      
 facing a friendly country like India, due to the sharp rise in prices of crude oil                    
 and fertilisers, helped, to some extent, in mitigating the effects of these price                     
 increases on the Indian economy. India hoped that this understanding would                            
 continue.                                                                                             
                                                                                                       
 A conference of 21 Heads of Indian Missions in West Asia and North Africa was held                    
 in New Delhi in January 1977. The importance of this region to India was                              
 highlighted at the                                                                                    
                                                                                                       
 pg30                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 Conference. It was further stressed that sustained efforts should continue to                         
 further improve the already existing cordial relations between India and these                        
 countries.                                                                                            
                                                                                                       
 West Asia                                                                                             
                                                                                                       
 The violence and bloodshed in Lebanon, and the repeated failure of attempts to put                    
 an end to the fighting, was a matter of great concern to the Government of India.                     
 The personnel of the Indian Mission in Beirut were reluctantly withdrawn. when it                     
 became difficult to assure their safety. The majority of other Indians living in                      
 Beirut also left. The Government of India was gratified when the collective wisdom                    
 of Arab statesmen at the Riyadh and Cairo summits was able to bring about a                           
 settlement resulting in the subsiding of the fighting and bloodshed. It was the                       
 hope of the Government of India that normal political and economic life in Lebanon                    
 would be speedily restored and that its sovereignty, integrity and non-aligned                        
 character would be preserved. The Government of India ex- pressed its readiness to                    
 offer all possible cooperation and assistance towards economic reconstruction and                     
 in the restora- tion of public services and utilities. The Government of India                        
 welcomed the reconciliation between Syria and Egypt which it considered vital for a                   
 united effort by the Arab States to realise their objectives. Statements made re-                     
 garding the reconvening of the Geneva Conference on the Middle East provided a                        
 cause for cautious optimism. The Govern- ment was of the view that the Conference,                    
 to be meaningful, would require the effective participation of all concerned                          
 parties, including the Palestine Liberation Organisation.                                             
                                                                                                       
 The treatment by Israel of the Arab population in its occupied territories was a                      
 matter of concern. India was convinced that the restoration to the Palestinians of                    
 their legitimate national rights was crucial for an Arab-Israeli settlement.                          
 Israel's in- cursions and occupation of territories in Southern Lebanon, however,                     
 reduced the credibility of statements by Israeli leaders expressing their desire                      
 for a peaceful settlement.                                                                            
                                                                                                       
 pg31                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 India's bilateral relations with countries in the region were strengthened through                    
 exchange of visits, discussions and con- clusion of bilateral agreements.                             
                                                                                                       
 Iran                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 The visit of Prime Minister Hoveyda and the Iranian Com- merce Minister, Dr.                          
 Manuchehr Taslimi, from 10 to May 14, 1976, opened new vistas for Indo-Iranian                        
 cooperation. The President and Begum Abida Ahmed visited Iran, from 26 to 30 June                     
 1976, and held wide ranging discussions with the Shahanshah of Iran on matters of                     
 mutual interest including bila- teral cooperation. Their Imperial Majesties                           
 accepted the in- vitation of the President and Begum Abida Ahmed to visit India.                      
                                                                                                       
 Shri K. V. Raghunatha Reddy, Labour Minister, visited Iran, from 20 to 24 September                   
 1976, to attend the Asian Labour Ministers Conference. Shri K. D. Malaviya,                           
 Minister of Petroleum, visited Iran, in October 1976, and had discus- sions with                      
 the Shahanshah and others. The Chief of the Army Staff, General T. N. Raina,                          
 visited Iran from 10 to 18 November 1976. He called on the Shahanshah and the                         
 Iranian Prime Minister and visited Iranian defence establishments.                                    
                                                                                                       
 Among other Iranian dignitaries who visited India during the year were H. E. Mr.                      
 Ali Daftrian, Governor-General of Ostan (25 April to 7 May 1976), General Azhari,                     
 Chief of the Sup- reme Commanders' Staff of the Imperial Iranian Armed Forces (2 to                   
 9 March 1976), Mr. Manuchehr Eghbal, President of the Iranian Oil Company (August                     
 1976) and Mr. Pakdaman, Chairman of the Iranian State Railways (October 1976).                        
                                                                                                       
 A party of instructors and students of the Imperial Iranian National Defence                          
 University visited India in June 1976 while a party of the staff and students of                      
 the National Defence College visited Iran in August 1976. The multi-faceted                           
 economic relationship between India and Iran continued to register notable progress                   
 throughout the year                                                                                   
                                                                                                       
 pg32                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 under review. Almost all the projects in which the two countries are engaged are                      
 not only quantitatively impressive by themselves but have a special significance in                   
 the developing economies of either country. To single out any one of them would be                    
 invidious but the Kudremukh Project which has already made an excellent beginning                     
 deserves special mention.                                                                             
                                                                                                       
 Iraq                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 Dr. Saadoun Hammadi, Iraqi Minister of Foreign Affairs, visited India, from 25 to                     
 26 February 1976, as the personal Envoy of the President of Iraq. He held                             
 discussions with the Indian Minister of External Affairs on matters relating to the                   
 Non-aligned Summit at Colombo. Mr. Mir Hikmat Al-azzawi, Iraqi Minister of Foreign                    
 Trade, paid a one-week visit to India in February 1976. Com- mercial and economic                     
 matters were discussed in depth during his visit.                                                     
                                                                                                       
 Dr. Shankar Dayal Sharma, Minister of Communications, visited Baghdad (4 to 8 May                     
 1976) and discussed matters re- lating to cooperation in the field of                                 
 telecommunications. Pro- fessor S. Nurul Hasan, Minister of Education & Social Wel-                   
 fare, during his visit (7 to 9 July 1976), held discussions re- lating to                             
 cooperation in the field of education, science and tech- nology. Shri T. A. Pai,                      
 Minister of Industry, who visited Baghdad in October 1976, reached a broad                            
 understanding on exchange of know-how, equipment and construction of projects. A                      
 number of other official visits were also exchanged with a view to further                            
 expanding the existing economic relations bet- ween the two countries.                                
                                                                                                       
 United Arab Emirates                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 The President of India, accompanied by Begum Abida Ahmed, paid a State visit to the                   
 United Arab Emirates from 4 to 7 October 1976. The President held discussions with                    
 the UAE                                                                                               
                                                                                                       
 pg33                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 President Sheikh Zayed Bin Sultan Al-Nahyan and Vice Presi- dent Sheikh Rashid on                     
 issues of international importance and on bilateral cooperation. These revealed a                     
 close similarity of views between the two countries. The visit reaffirmed and                         
 streng- thened the close friendship and cooperation between India and the UAE.                        
                                                                                                       
 Jordan                                                                                                
                                                                                                       
 A Cultural Agreement between India and Jordan was signed on 15 February 1976 and a                    
 Trade and Economic Agreement on 25 February 1976.                                                     
                                                                                                       
 His Royal Highness Prince Hassan Bin Talal, accompanied by his wife Princess                          
 Sarvath and by Princess Alia, visited India, from 24 November to 1 December 1976,                     
 at the invitation of the Vice-President of India. The Crown Prince and members of                     
 the delegation held discussions with the Indian leaders on topics of mutual                           
 interest mainly pertaining to economic coopera- tion between India and Jordan.                        
 Agreements on Economic and Technical Cooperation and on cooperation in the fields                     
 of Science and Technology were also initialled during the visit.                                      
                                                                                                       
 Syria                                                                                                 
                                                                                                       
 A two member Syrian delegation attended the Seminar on Non-alignment held in New                      
 Delhi (24 to 26 April 1976). The Syrian Information Minister led a delegation to                      
 the Non-aligned News Agencies Conference held in New Delhi in July 1976.                              
                                                                                                       
 Somalia                                                                                               
                                                                                                       
 A direct shipping service was established between India and Somalia during the                        
 year.                                                                                                 
                                                                                                       
 Egypt                                                                                                 
                                                                                                       
 Shri S. D. Sharma, Minister of Communications, led an Indian delegation to the                        
 Tripartite Meeting between Egypt, India and Yugoslavia in Cairo (20 April to 3 May                    
 1976). The meeting                                                                                    
                                                                                                       
 pg34                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 dealt with commercial and Industrial cooperation among the three participating                        
 countries.                                                                                            
                                                                                                       
 A two member delegation from Egypt. participated in the Seminar on Non-alignment,                     
 organised by the India International Centre in New Delhi in April 1976.                               
                                                                                                       
 North Africa                                                                                          
                                                                                                       
 The continuing dispute regarding the Western Sahara and the differences between                       
 Libya on the one hand and Egypt and Sudan on the other distressed the Government of                   
 India. Special Envoys from the Presidents of Morocco and Mauritania visited India                     
 to explain their position on the Western Sahara question. It was India's hope that                    
 a satisfactory solution of their dis- putes and differences could be brought about                    
 through bilateral discussions between the countries concerned, in a spirit of good-                   
 will and cooperation.                                                                                 
                                                                                                       
 Libya                                                                                                 
                                                                                                       
 Indo-Libyan economic cooperation developed rapidly during the year. Indian firms                      
 and organisations were awarded contracts for airport construction, power generation                   
 and transmission, etc. The Industries & Civil Supplies Minister, Shri T. A. Pai,                      
 paid a two-day visit to Libya in April 1976, and signed a pro- tocol with his                         
 counterpart on industrial and technical coopera- tion.                                                
                                                                                                       
 The Deputy Minister of External Affairs, Shri Bipinpal Das, visited Libya from 15                     
 to 18 March 1976 and had discussions with the Libyan Prime Minister and others on                     
 strengthening bilateral relations and on important international issues.                              
                                                                                                       
 Tunisia                                                                                               
                                                                                                       
 A special delegation headed by Deputy Minister of External Affairs, Shri Bipinpal                     
 Das, participated in the 20th Anniver- sary celebrations of Tunisia's Independence,                   
 from 9 to 12 March 1976.                                                                              
                                                                                                       
 pg35                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 Algeria                                                                                               
                                                                                                       
 The Minister of External Affairs visited Algiers in May-June 1976 for the                             
 Non-aligned Bureau meeting and called on Presi- dent Boumedienne. He signed a                         
 cultural agreement with the Foreign Minister of Algeria. The agreement provided for                   
 edu- cational and training facilities in India, for exchanges in the fields of                        
 radio and television, exchange of cultural troupes and cooperation in the field of                    
 journalism. H.E. Mr. I. Yaker, Algerian Minister of Foreign Trade, visited India in                   
 January-February 1976 and called on the Prime Minister and the Minister of External                   
 Affairs. Dr. Ahmed Taleb Ibrahim, Algerian Minister of Information and Culture,                       
 visited India from 7 to 14 July 1976, to participate in the Ministerial Conference                    
 of the Non-aligned News Agencies Pool.                                                                
                                                                                                       
 Mauritania                                                                                            
                                                                                                       
 H.E. Mr. Mohamed Sidi Ali and H.E. Mr. Ahmedou Ould Tolba, Special Envoys of the                      
 President of Mauritania, visited India in April and July 1976 respectively to                         
 explain Mauritania's position on the Western Sahara issue.                                            
                                                                                                       
 His Excellency Mr. Moktar Ould Dadah, President of Mauritania, visited India in                       
 August 1976 and had wide ranging talks with Indian leaders on strengthening                           
 bilateral cooperation and on international issues. The discussions revealed a close                   
 similarity of views between the leaders of the two countries.                                         
                                                                                                       
 pg36                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 May 14, 1976                                                                                          
                                                                                 Top                   
 Africa                                                                                                
 CHAPTER V                                                                                             
                                                                                                       
 AFRICA (South of the Sahara)                                                                          
                                                                                                       
 India's relations with the countries of Africa, South of the Sahara, were marked by                   
 greater contacts in order to promote understanding and increase cooperation with                      
 them. These con- tacts were developed through the exchange of visits by important                     
 leaders and signing of bilateral agreements in various fields. They highlighted the                   
 keen interest of India in the developments in Southern Africa and its opposition to                   
 colonialism, recialism and apartheid and its material and moral support for the                       
 African liberation movements in their struggle to end white domination. India's                       
 friendly relations with the countries of East Africa were reflected through the                       
 exchange of visits at different levels. The Foreign Minister of Kenya, Mr. F. M.                      
 Waiyaki, visited India in August 1976 and exchanged views with the Minister of                        
 Exter- nal Affairs on international affairs and the further strengthening of                          
 relations between India and Kenya. Two Indian naval ships paid a friendly visit to                    
 Kenya. The payment by the Govern- ment of Uganda of a sum of Rs. 1,44,88,792.60                       
 marked the successful resolution of the problem of compensating Indian nationals                      
 who had been expelled from Uganda in 1972. A large amount of the sum received was                     
 disbursed to the claimants con- cerned, after due scrutiny, by the Uganda                             
 compensation settle- ment office set up in Bombay for that purpose. The visit of                      
 the Ministers of Industry and Power and of Transport and Com- munications of Uganda                   
 to India helped to promote commercial and economic cooperation between India and                      
 Uganda.                                                                                               
                                                                                                       
 The most important development in India's relations with African countries was the                    
 visit of the Prime Minister of India                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 pg37                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 to Mauritius (8-11 October), Tanzania (11-14 October), Zambia (15--17 October) and                    
 Seychelles (17 October). India's close cultural ties with Mauritius had already                       
 been demonstrated earlier when India sent a 30-man official delegation, headed by                     
 the Minister of Health and Family Planning, Dr. Karan Singh, to the Second World                      
 Hindi Sammelan held in Mauritius. These were further highlighted when the Prime                       
 Minister, during her visit, inaugurated the Gandhi Institute. Earlier, the visit of                   
 the Minister of Information and Broadcasting at the time of independence day                          
 celebrations of Mauritius and the visit. of the Minister of Steel and Mines                           
 reflected friendly ties between India and Mauritius.                                                  
                                                                                                       
 There were many exchanges of visits between senior officials of India and Tanzania                    
 before the Prime Minister visited that country in October. In April 1976, India and                   
 Tanzania signed an agreement for cooperation in the establishment of a number of                      
 small scale industries projects in Tanzania. The visit of the Prime Minister to                       
 Zambia constituted another stage in a conti- nuing dialogue with a friendly country                   
 with which India had developed the tradition of constructive cooperation. During                      
 the visit, both sides expressed satisfaction at the progress made in strengthening                    
 bilateral cooperation in the economic and technical fields and agreed to explore                      
 further areas to expand their relations. The distinguishing feature of the visit of                   
 the Prime Minister was the common interest shown by her and the leaders of                            
 Mauritius, Tanzania and Zambia in the developments taking place in Southern Africa.                   
 The visit underlined India's solidarity with these countries in their total support                   
 for the oppressed people of Southern Africa in their just struggle. The Prime                         
 Minister, during the visit, met the leaders of the African Libera- tion Movements                     
 and assured them of India's full support in their struggle. India and these                           
 countries also reaffirmed the in- alienable rights of the people of Namibia to                        
 freedom and inde- pendence and pledged their moral and material support for them in                   
 their heroic struggle under the leadership of the SWAPO. As                                           
                                                                                                       
 pg38                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 regards Zimbabwe, India and these countries noted the favour- able developments,                      
 reflected in the declaration made by the racist regime of Rhodesia, in September                      
 1976, to allow majority rule in the country within a period of two years. India                       
 welcomed the holding of the Constitutional Conference at Geneva and expressed the                     
 hope that this would lead to immediate majority rule in Zimbabwe. The Prime                           
 Minister further made it clear that if the Constitutional Conference failed, the                      
 Government of India would fully support the intensified struggle for the inde-                        
 pendence of Zimbabwe.                                                                                 
                                                                                                       
 The Prime Minister's brief visit to Seychelles demonstrated India's desire to                         
 strengthen friendship with that country. India had already established friendly                       
 contacts with Seychelles when the Minister of State for Tourism and Civil Aviation,                   
 Shri Surendra Pal Singh, led the Indian delegation to the island on the occasion of                   
 its independence on 29 June. A 10-member cultural troupe and a flotilla of 3 Indian                   
 ships also took part in the celebrations to mark the occasion. The Prime Minister                     
 of Seychelles, Mr. F. A. Rene, visited India in September and ex- changed views for                   
 further strengthening relations between India and Seychelles.                                         
                                                                                                       
 The Government of India maintained its boycott of the racist regime of South Africa                   
 and denounced its pernicious policy of racial discrimination. It condemned the                        
 brutal action taken by the South African Government against school children of the                    
 African township of Soweto who had protested against the im- position of Afrikaans                    
 in schools.                                                                                           
                                                                                                       
 India's interest in Southern Africa was further demonstrated by development Of                        
 friendly ties with Mozambique and closer con- tacts with Lesotho and Botswana. Shri                   
 Bipinpal Das, Deputy Minister of External Affairs during his visit to Mozambique in                   
 October, expressed the continued desire of the Government of India to help                            
 Mozambique to strengthen its newly won indepen- dence. An agreement on technical,                     
 economic and scientific co- operation was signed during his visit. India also                         
 pledged a grant of Rs. 900,000 as part of the collective contribution by the Com-                     
 monwealth for the purchase of some of its necessary requirement's                                     
                                                                                                       
 pg39                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 from India. This would help Mozambique to meet the loss it would be incurring                         
 because of closing the border with Rhodesia in response to the UN resolution. The                     
 Foreign Minister of Lesotho, Mr. C. D. Molapo, visited India in August and an                         
 agreement on technical and economic cooperation was signed between India and                          
 Lesotho during the visit. A cultural agree- ment was signed with Lesotho during the                   
 visit of India's Deputy Minister of External Affairs to that country on the                           
 occasion of the celebrations of its 10th anniversary of independence. The visit of                    
 the President and the Foreign Minister of Botswana in April 1976 marked India's                       
 developing contacts with Botswana. India and Botswana agreed to expand their                          
 relations in the economic, commercial, scientific and technical fields. Relations                     
 were further strengthened when India's Deputy Minister of External Affairs attended                   
 the 10th anniversary celebrations of independence of Botswana on Nov 30, 1976.                        
                                                                                                       
 As regards West Africa, India strengthened its relations with Angola and increased                    
 contacts with Ghana and Nigeria. The Special Envoy of the Prime Minister, during                      
 his visit to Angola, in April 1976, carried a message from the Prime Minister to                      
 President Agostinho Neto as well as a consignment of medicines. This gesture was                      
 appreciated by the President of Angola. India expressed its support for the people                    
 of Angola in their struggle to defend and strengthen their newly won freedom.                         
                                                                                                       
 A significant development in regard to relations with Ghana and Nigeria was the                       
 signing of air services agreements with these countries. In terms of these                            
 agreements, Air India would be able to operate two services a week to Lagos and                       
 Accra and this would help to promote greater contacts between India and these                         
 countries. Relations with Ghana were further promoted by the visit of Chief Justice                   
 of the Supreme Court, Shri A. N. Ray, to Ghana to attend the centenary celebrations                   
 of the Sup- reme Court of Ghana and the visit of Mr. Joe Appiah, the Roving                           
 Ambassador of Ghana, to India on the invitation of the Indian Council for Cultural                    
 Relations.                                                                                            
                                                                                                       
 pg40                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 Ghana's Minister for Works and Housing, Col. K. A. Jackson, during his visit to                       
 India, was impressed by the design and tech- niques used to provide houses for low                    
 and middle income group. India offered to assist Ghana in the construction field.                     
                                                                                                       
 As regards other countries of West Africa, the visit of the Minister of Commerce                      
 and Industrial Development of Upper Volta to India in March 1976 resulted in the                      
 signing of a Memorandum of Understanding on economic, technical and cul- tural                        
 cooperation between India and Upper Volta. India, as a friendly gesture, in                           
 response to an appeal from the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, sent                    
 medicines worth Rs. 30,000 to Guinea (Bissau) as its contribution towards drou- ght                   
 relief. A contribution towards drought relief was also sent to Cape Verde Island.                     
                                                                                                       
 The visit of the Foreign Minister of Mali, Col. Charles Cissoko, Samba, to India                      
 marked the beginning of establishing friendly contacts with Mali.                                     
                                                                                                       
 The holding of a Conference of Heads of Indian Missions in African countries South                    
 of the Sahara in New Delhi, in December 1976, highlighted the significance which                      
 India atta- ched to Africa and its detsire to obtain first-band information on                        
 developments in various countries in order to explore ways and means of                               
 strengthening relations with them through mutual cooperation. The Conference was                      
 attended by Indian envoys to Ethiopia, Guinea, Kenya (designate), Madagascar                          
 (desig- nate), Mozambique, Zaire, Senegal, Ghana, Mauritius, Tanzania, Malawi,                        
 Uganda, Zambia and the Acting High Commissioner in Nigeria. It discussed in depth                     
 India's policy and diplomatic ob- jectives and problems and perspectives relating                     
 to economic and technical cooperation. It was felt that India had a vast reservoir                    
 of experience in the field of development and this could be shar- ed with African                     
 countries. India had made great progress in industry, science, technology and                         
 agriculture and its methods and                                                                       
                                                                                                       
 pg41                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 innovations were more suited to African needs and circumstances than those of the                     
 richer countries. This basic complementarity between India and African countries                      
 could be translated into reality through greater technical cooperation. The                           
 Conference decided to strengthen India's presence in Africa and stressed the need                     
 for encouraging visits from the present and potential lea- ders of African                            
 countries in political, economic and technological fields.                                            
                                                                                                       
 pg42                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 Nov 30, 1976                                                                                          
                                                                                 Top                   
 Europe                                                                                                
 CHAPTER VI                                                                                            
                                                                                                       
 EUROPE                                                                                                
                                                                                                       
 Western Europe India's relations with the countries of Western Europe, by and                         
 large, progressed satisfactorily. The mutuality of interests and benefits was                         
 reflected in the growth of relations in economic and commercial fields. The                           
 countries of Western Europe accounted for almost a quarter of India's total foreign                   
 trade and a predominant contribution of the development assistance-finan- cial and                    
 technological-received by India from the outside world. Relations were marked by                      
 increase in exchanges in the fields of education and culture, science and                             
 technology.                                                                                           
                                                                                                       
 India continued its efforts to promote relations with the European Economic                           
 Community through greater and more diversified trade, increased foreign investment                    
 in approved areas, particularly in entirely export-oriented sectors, transfer of                      
 tech- nology and joint cooperation projects in third countries. Efforts were also                     
 made to strengthen bilateral relations through exchange of high-level visits and                      
 discussions to promote coopera- tion in various fields.                                               
                                                                                                       
 United Kingdom                                                                                        
                                                                                                       
 Indo-British relations remained friendly and cordial. Among significant visits made                   
 by important British leaders and persona- lities to India were those of Mr. Michael                   
 Foot, Lord President of the Council, Mrs. Margaret Thatcher, Leader of the Conser-                    
 vative Party, Mr. Jeremy Thorpe, former leader of the Liberal Party and the                           
 Archbishop of Canterbury. From the Indian side, the Minister of External Affairs,                     
 Shri Y. B. Chavan and a few other Ministers of the Indian Government as well as                       
 some other Indian leaders visited Britian. The External Affairs                                       
                                                                                                       
 pg43                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 Minister during his visit, conferred with Mr. James Callaghan, Prime Minister of                      
 Britain, and had wide ranging talks with Mr. Anthony Crosland, the Secretary of                       
 State for Foreign Affairs and with Mr. Michael Foot.                                                  
                                                                                                       
 A high-powered British industrial delegation led by Sir Ralph Bateman,                                
 Vice-President of the Federation of British Indust- ries, came to India in October                    
 1976 to explore possibilities of greater Indo-British trade and economic                              
 cooperation as well as collaboration in third countries. A ministerial-level                          
 meeting of Indo-British Joint Committee on Trade and Economic Cooperation was held                    
 in London. British development assistance to India in the year 1976-77 amounted to                    
 Pounds 112 million (about Rs. 170 crores), the largest amount received from any                       
 country. This assistance was given entirely in the form of grants.                                    
                                                                                                       
 France                                                                                                
                                                                                                       
 An Indo-French Committee on Technical and Economic Cooperation was set up at                          
 Ministerial level during the visit of French Prime Minister to India in January                       
 1976. Prof. Chatto- padhyaya, Minister of Commerce, visited Paris in July 1976 for                    
 preliminary discussions on issues relating to cooperation between the two                             
 countries. The visit of Shri T. A. Pai, Mini- ster of Industry, and Shri K. D.                        
 Malaviya, Minister of Petro- leum, to France indicated Indias efforts to explore                      
 possibilities of further economic cooperation with France. France was the first                       
 member of the Aid India Consortium to conclude a Development Assistance Agreement                     
 with India for the year 1976-77. Financial credits of Francs 340 million (about Rs.                   
 60 crores) for the purchase of French goods and services was extended during the                      
 year.                                                                                                 
                                                                                                       
 Among the many delegations exchanged between the two countries was an Indian                          
 Parliamentary delegation led by the Deputy Chairman of the Rajya Sabha, which went                    
 to France in October 1976.                                                                            
                                                                                                       
 pg44                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 Federal Republic of Germany                                                                           
                                                                                                       
 India's relations with the Federal Republic of Germany con- tinued to be marked by                    
 cordiality and mutual desire for better understanding and cooperation. In June                        
 1976, an agreement was signed whereby the Federal Republic would provide DM 362                       
 million (Rs 124 crores) as development assistance to India for the year 1976-77. As                   
 in the previous years, this assistance was completely untied and was given on very                    
 favourable terms, same as those of IDA, the soft loan affiliate of the World Bank.                    
 Friendly relations were also marked by exchange of high- level visits between the                     
 two countries. Prof. Nurul Hassan, Minister of Education, visited the Fede- ral                       
 Republic, of Germany in, June 1976 and the Deputy Minister of Finance, Shrimati                       
 Rohatgi, in November 1976. From the German side a delegation of 15 prominent                          
 industrialists, led by the President of the Association of German Chambers of                         
 Industry and Commerce, visited India from 10 to Mar 13, 1976 to attend the 20th                       
 anniversary celebration of the Indo-German Chambers of Commerce. An Indo-FRG                          
 seminar, held in New Delhi in November 1976, provided an opportunity for Indian and                   
 West German educationists and scholars to discuss common problems and challenges of                   
 education and economic development.                                                                   
                                                                                                       
 An important event in the relations with West Germany was the visit of the Foreign                    
 Minister of that country, Mr. Genscher, to India in April, 1977. The visit provided                   
 an opportunity to reinforce mutual understanding and explore prospects of pro-                        
 moting further cooperation. The two sides agreed to set up an Ad hoc Joint                            
 Commission to explore further improvement in economic and technical cooperation.                      
                                                                                                       
 Italy                                                                                                 
                                                                                                       
 New ground in bilateral relations was broken with the sign- ing, in November 1976,                    
 of the first Cultural Agreement between                                                               
                                                                                                       
 pg45                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 India and Italy. The first meeting of the Indo-Italian Joint Com- mittee on, Trade                    
 and Economic Cooperation was held in Rome in December 1976. Prof. Chattopadhaya,                      
 Minister of Commerce, attended its concluding session.                                                
                                                                                                       
 Netherlands                                                                                           
                                                                                                       
 Netherlands maintained its liberal and helpful development cooperation                                
 policy-towards India. It increased development assis- tance to India from Guilders                    
 150 million in 1975-76 to Guilders 170 million (Rs. 38 crores) for 1976-77.                           
                                                                                                       
 Denmark                                                                                               
                                                                                                       
 The visit of the Danish Minister for Foreign Economic Affairs, Mr. Ivar Norgaard,                     
 to India in October 1976 paved the way for strengthening economic cooperation                         
 between India and Denmark. In December, Mr. Orla Moller, Danish Minister for                          
 Justice and Defence, visited India and exchanged views on matters of mutual                           
 interest with India's Minister of Defence and Minister of Law.                                        
                                                                                                       
 Cyprus                                                                                                
                                                                                                       
 There was no significant change in the situation, in Cyprus. Bi-communal talks                        
 between Greek Cypriots and Turkish Cypriots seemed to have come to a standstill.                      
 India consistently favoured continued negotiations between, the two communities to                    
 arrive at a just and equitable solution. India continued its support for the                          
 sovereignty, territorial integrity, independence and non-aligned character of the                     
 Republic of Cyprus and early implementation of the relevant United Nations                            
 resolution.                                                                                           
                                                                                                       
 Turkey                                                                                                
                                                                                                       
 The Minister of External Affairs visited Turkey from 31 March to 4 April 1976. He                     
 had talks with the Turkish Presi- dent, Prime Minister, Foreign Minister and leader                   
 of the oppo- sition. The visit strengthened the friendly ties between India and                       
                                                                                                       
 pg46                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 Turkey and brought about better understanding of each country's position on various                   
 issues of bilateral and multilateral interest. An Indo-Turkish agreement- on                          
 cooperation in the fields of science and technology was signed during the visit and                   
 the cultural exchange programme was reactivated. It was also deci- ded to encourage                   
 the exchange of delegations between the two countries to boost Indo-Turkish                           
 economic cooperation and to hold the first meeting of the Joint Committee,                            
 established under the Indo-Turkish Trade Agreement of 1973, at an early date.                         
                                                                                                       
 Norway                                                                                                
                                                                                                       
 Shri Jagjivan Ram, Minister of Agriculture and Irrigation, visited Norway and held                    
 discussions with the Norwegian Gov- ernment on further cooperation between India                      
 and Norway in agriculture, fisheries and other fields. A delegation from Nor- way,                    
 including Government and private representatives dealing with the oil industry and                    
 allied fields, visited India in November 1976. Indo-Norwegian cooperation in these                    
 fields was discussed and various possibilities of Norwegian technical assistance to                   
 India including supply of equipment for off-shore prospecting for oil and oil                         
 production were identified. Norway agreed to build 6 to 8 fishing vessels as an                       
 extension of the Norwegian assistance programme for fisheries development in India.                   
                                                                                                       
 Sweden                                                                                                
                                                                                                       
 The Swedish Foreign, Minister, Mr. Sven Andersson, visited India from 1 to 6 March                    
 1976, Official talks held during the visit covered wide range of bilateral and                        
 international issues. His visit reflected the friendly relations existing between                     
 India and Sweden. The Second meeting of Indo-Swedish Joint Commission took place in                   
 Stockholm in October 1976. It examined further possi- bilities of increasing                          
 bilateral trade, industrial collaboration and transfer of technology.                                 
                                                                                                       
 pg47                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 Swedish assistance to India amounted to Swedish Kr. 230 million (about Rs. 47                         
 crores) for 1976-77. It was given entirely in the form of grants.                                     
                                                                                                       
 The Soviet Union and Eastern Europe                                                                   
                                                                                                       
 The Soviet Union                                                                                      
                                                                                                       
 The relations of friendship and mutual beneficial coopera- tion with the Soviet                       
 Union were promoted through the signing of a number of important agreements. These                    
 included agreements on trade, merchant shipping and cultural exchange programme.                      
 Close contacts were also maintained through exchange of visits at a high level. The                   
 visits included that of India's Prime Minister to the Soviet Union in June 1976 and                   
 of the Minister of External Affairs in August 1976 while on his way to the                            
 Mongolian People's Republic. From the Soviet, side, the Deputy Minister Mr.                           
 Firyubin visited Delhi in March 1976 to hold periodical dis- cussions between the                     
 Ministries of Foreign Affairs of Indian and the Soviet Union. The next round of                       
 such consultations took place in Moscow in February 1977. The Indian delegation was                   
 led by Shri Jagat Mehta, Foreign Secretary.                                                           
                                                                                                       
 The Soviet Deputy Prime Minister, Mr. Arkhipov, visited India in April-May 1976 to                    
 attend the inauguration of the Hot Strip Mill at Bokaro Steel Plant and again in                      
 November to inaugurate the first Soviet National Exhibition. Dr. G. S. Dhillon,                       
 Minister of Shipping and Transpor visited the USSR in June 1976 to attend the                         
 celebrations in Odessa on the occasion of the 20th anniversary of the opening of                      
 the Shipping service between India and the USSR. The Speaker of the Lok Sabha, Shri                   
 B. R. Bhagat, led a Parliamentary delegation to the USSR, during his visit from 25                    
 July to 4 August. Messages were exchanged between the leaders of the two countries                    
 on the occasion of the 5th anniversary of the signing of the Indo-Soviet Treaty.                      
                                                                                                       
 The Soviet Foreign Minister, Mr. Gromyko visited India in April 1977 to exchange                      
 views with the new leaders of the gov- ernment. The visit provided an opportunity                     
 for exchange of views                                                                                 
                                                                                                       
 pg48                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 on many international problems and matters of mutual interest. Three agreements                       
 were signed during the visit relating to econo- mic and technical cooperation,                        
 trade and establishment of tele- communication links. These were expected to                          
 further promote cooperation between, the two countries. During the visit, leaders                     
 of both sides expressed their desire to further strengthen and develop their ties                     
 in the fields of culture, art, literature, education, sports, and tourism. The                        
 discussions held indicated a broad simi- larity of views between the two countries                    
 on most international problems.                                                                       
                                                                                                       
 Bulgaria                                                                                              
                                                                                                       
 The highlight of Indo-Bulgarian, relations was the visit to India in November 1976                    
 by H.E. Mr. Todor Zhivkov. President of the State Council of the People's Republic                    
 of Bulgaria. Talks during his visit confirmed the close identity or broad                             
 similarity of views of the two countries on current international issues of mutual                    
 concern. Satisfaction, was expressed at the pace of imple- mentation of the                           
 mutually agreed collaboration programme. An agreement on Merchant Shipping,                           
 Protocol of the third session of the Indo-Bulgarian Joint Commission for Economic,                    
 Scienti- fic and Technical Cooperation, a Cultural Exchange Programme for 1977 and                    
 1978, and Trade Protocol for 1977 were also sign- ed during the visit.                                
                                                                                                       
 German Democratic Republic The visit of Prime Minister of India to the GDR, at the                    
 in- vitation of Mr. Erich Honecker, General Secretary of the Central Committee of                     
 the Socialist Unity Party of Germany, was a land- mark in relations between the two                   
 countries. The two sides ex- pressed their determination to further intensify and                     
 expand mu- tual cooperation in the political, economic, scientific, technologi-                       
 cal, cultural and other fields. Earlier, the Chief Justice of India, Shri A. N.                       
 Ray, and the Minister of Information and Broadcast- ing, visited the GDR.                             
                                                                                                       
 pg49                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 The Indo-GDR Trade Protocol for the. year 1976 envisaged a trade turnover of over                     
 Rs. 110 crores. It provides for increas- ed exports of non-traditional items from                     
 India to the GDR, particularly the engineering goods and polyster-based X-ray                         
 films.                                                                                                
                                                                                                       
 Hungary                                                                                               
                                                                                                       
 The visit of Mr. Pal Losonczi, President of the Presidential Council of the                           
 Hugarian People's Republic in, December 1976 reflected close understanding and                        
 cooperation between India and Hungary. In the talks held during the visit, there                      
 was broad identity and close similarity of views on various issues. Satisfac- tion,                   
 was also expressed regarding cooperation in the political, economic, scientific,                      
 technological and cultural fields. It was also felt that there was good possibility                   
 of further developing the eco- nomic and trade relations between the two countries.                   
 An agreement in the field of trade and another agreement on, coope- ration in the                     
 field of public health was signed during the visit.                                                   
                                                                                                       
 Poland                                                                                                
                                                                                                       
 Cooperation between India and Poland, especially in the field of trade and economic                   
 relations, steadily grew. Among the socia- list countries of Eastern Europe, Poland                   
 is the second biggest trade partner of India. During the visit of the Polish                          
 Minister of Foreign Trade and, Shipping to India from 19 to 22 October 1976, a                        
 4-year Trade Protocol, covering the period 1977-80, was signed. The Trade Plan for                    
 1977 envisaged a trade turn- over of Rs. 230 crores next year as against Rs. 190                      
 crores in 1975, rising to Rs. 260 crores by 1980. The new Protocol envis- aged                        
 increased exports of non-traditional items by India and import of textiles,                           
 machinery, ships and fishing trawlers from Poland. The two countries also agreed to                   
 explore avenues of pro- duction, cooperation as well as joint ventures in third                       
 countries. A number of agreements for industrial cooperation were conclud- ed                         
 during the year between the respective organisations of the two countries.                            
                                                                                                       
 pg50                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 Mr. Edward Gierek, First Secretary of the Central Committee of the Polish United                      
 Workers' Party, visited India in January 1977. Earlier, the notable visits from                       
 India were those of the Minister of Education, Social Welfare and Culture, Prof.                      
 Nurul Hasan, and the Minister for Civil Supplies and Cooperation, Shri A. C.                          
 George.                                                                                               
                                                                                                       
 Romania                                                                                               
                                                                                                       
 An important event in relations between India and Romania was the visit to India of                   
 the Romanian, Prime Minister, Mr. Manea Manescu in May 1976. During his visit, a                      
 Protocol on Economic, Commercial, Scientific and Technological Cooperation and the                    
 Indo-Romanian Cultural Exchange Programme for 1976-78 were concluded. The Minister                    
 of External Affairs, Shri Y. B. Chawan, visited Romania in January 1977. He held                      
 wide ranging and fruitful talks with the Romanian leaders and his visit served to                     
 underline the importance both countries attach to continued understanding and                         
 cooperation between, them. The Indo-Romanian Trade Protocol for 1977, concluded in                    
 November 1976 in Bucharest, provided for exchange of commodities of the total value                   
 of Rs. 133 crores as against Rs. 124.7 crores in 1975. The Education Minister,                        
 Prof. Nurul Hasan, paid a visit to Romania in October 1976 and a Parliamentary                        
 delegation led by the Speaker, Shri B. R. Bhagat, was in Bucharest in Novem- ber at                   
 the invitation of the Romanian Grand National Assembly.                                               
                                                                                                       
 Yugoslavia                                                                                            
                                                                                                       
 During the year, a number of important visits were exchang- ed between India and                      
 Yugoslavia. The Yugoslav Foreign Minis- ter, Mr. Milos Minic, and Information                         
 Minister, Mr. Mohd. Berberovic, visited India in April and March 1976 respectively.                   
 From the Indian side, the Commerce Minister Prof. D. P. Chat- topadhyaya,                             
 Co-Chairman of the Joint Indo-Yugoslav Economic Committee, headed India's                             
 delegation to the 10th session of the                                                                 
                                                                                                       
 pg51                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 Committee held in Belgrade in March 1976. Prof. Chattopadhyaya had a, detailed                        
 review of bilateral trade and economic relations as well as industrial cooperation                    
 in third countries and various other matters including the strengthening of the                       
 tripartite econo- mic cooperation between Yugoslavia, Egypt and India. In Sep-                        
 tember, the Minister of Industry, Shri T. A. Pai, visited Belgrade where he had                       
 talks for the further expansion of trade and ex- change of commodities. A Protocol                    
 on the equivalence of degrees and diplomas accorded by the two countries was signed                   
 in New Delhi in November 1976.                                                                        
                                                                                                       
 India and Yugoslavia cooperated very well at both the July 1976 New Delhi                             
 conference of non-aligned countries on the Press Agencies Pool and the Colombo                        
 Summit in August 1976.                                                                                
                                                                                                       
 pg52                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 Mar 13, 1976                                                                                          
                                                                                 Top                   
 The Americas                                                                                          
 CHAPTER VII                                                                                           
                                                                                                       
 THE AMERICAS                                                                                          
                                                                                                       
 United States of America                                                                              
                                                                                                       
 India continued its efforts towards promoting understanding and cooperation with                      
 the United States. It was felt that there was much that the two countries could do                    
 to strengthen peace and in- ternational cooperation. Indo-US relations were marked                    
 by a common desire for strengthening bilateral relations, improvement in trade and                    
 economic spheres, and exchange of views on inter- national economic problems. It                      
 was hoped that in view of the trend towards global detente Indo-American relations                    
 would also move towards a phase of friendly and cooperative relations based on                        
 equality and mutual understanding.                                                                    
                                                                                                       
 The year saw exchange of visits by Ministers and officials from both sides. The                       
 Minister of External Affairs paid a visit to the United States and met the US                         
 Secretary of State. Other Pro- minent Indians to visit were Shri Om Mehta Minister                    
 of State for Home Affairs, Shri Godey Murahari, Deputy Chairman of the Rajya Sabha,                   
 and Shri Dharam Bir Sinha, Deputy Minister for Information and Broadcasting. These                    
 visits contributed to a bet- ter understanding and awareness of India's view point                    
 in the United States.                                                                                 
                                                                                                       
 The Indo-US Joint Business Council, that met in Washington in February 1977,                          
 pointed out that commercial ties between India and the United States could be                         
 strengthened through in- crease in trade, joint ventures and industrial cooperation                   
 in third countries. The Council decided to take steps to increase aware- ness in                      
 the United States about trade prospects with India. To mark the Bi-Centennial                         
 Anniversary of the United States independence, India took a number of steps, such                     
 as release of                                                                                         
                                                                                                       
 pg53                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 a special postage stamp on that date, publication of an illustrated book on                           
 Indo-American contacts in the past 200 years as well as the deputation of a                           
 cultural troupe to convey the friendly feelings of the people of India towards the                    
 people of the United States. President Carter showed his goodwill towards India by                    
 sending a special delegation led by his mother Miss Lillian Carter to the funeral                     
 of late President Fakhruddin Ali Ahmed. There was great appreciation in the United                    
 States of the change of government in, India by peaceful and democratic methods                       
 through fair and free elections. Cordial messages were exchanged between the                          
 President and the new Prime Minister. It was expected that there would be greater                     
 sympathy and understanding between the two countries to enable them to re-establish                   
 their bilateral rela- tions on a firmer foundation.                                                   
                                                                                                       
 Canada                                                                                                
                                                                                                       
 Indo-Canadian differences on nuclear cooperation had been the subject of detailed                     
 discussions at various levels in earlier years. In March 1976, the officials of the                   
 two countries reached an understanding on all outstanding issues. However, on May                     
 18, 1976, Canada unilaterally decided to terminate nuclear coopera- tion. Shortly                     
 afterwards, the Minister of External Affairs made a detailed statement in the                         
 Parliament on the subject expressing India's regret.                                                  
                                                                                                       
 South and Central America                                                                             
                                                                                                       
 A conscious effort was made by India and Latin American and Caribbean countries to                    
 promote their relations and interests as developing countries. This trend was                         
 underlined by nascent awareness in Latin America that its destiny lies in closer                      
 politi- cal and economic cooperation with the rest of the developing world. In                        
 spite of the constraints imposed by local and regional compulsions, the urge for                      
 greater independence in foreign affairs continued to be widespread. Many countries                    
 of this region ac- cepted India's view of non-alignment that this movement was a                      
 symbol of true courage against military alliances and ideological                                     
                                                                                                       
 pg54                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 conformity. Seven of these countries are, full members of the non-aligned movement                    
 and four were elected at Colombo to the Coordination Bureau. Several others have                      
 closely followed the meetings of the group and developments within the non-aligned                    
 movement.                                                                                             
                                                                                                       
 At the bilateral level, India's interest in Latin America and the Caribbean region                    
 increased further. It was decided to open one more Resident Mission shortly and two                   
 Honorary Consulates- General. India now has diplomatic relations with 23 countries                    
 and Resident Missions in 12 Capitals of the region. For the first time, India and                     
 Cuba would cooperate in cultural matters and in special fields of science and                         
 technology. Three agreements were ratified-one with Argentina in the cultural field                   
 and two with Colombia in the fields of culture and trade. Detailed pro- grammes for                   
 cooperation under the cultural and science and technology agreements, signed with                     
 Mexico, in 1975, were also drawn up. A Venezuelan team of officials visited New                       
 Delhi to discuss a cultural agreement.                                                                
                                                                                                       
 Among important Indian leaders and delegations to visit Latin America and the                         
 Caribbean were the Minister of Shipping and Transport, the Minister of State for                      
 Home Affairs, who at- tended the Inter-Parliamentary Union, in Mexico City, the                       
 Spe- cial Envoy of the Prime Minister, who attended the inauguration of the Third                     
 World Centre in Mexico City, the Minister of In- formation and Broadcasting and the                   
 representatives of the Gem and Jewellery Export Promotion Council, the SAIL, India                    
 Invest- ment Centre, the Indian Aluminium Cables Ltd., Bharat Alumi- nium and                         
 MECON. Important visitors from the region, to India were Dr. Manuel Peraz Guerrero,                   
 Venezuelan Minister for Inter- national Economic Affairs; Dr. Zoilo Morinello,                        
 President of the Cuban Academy of Science and First Vice-President of the State                       
 Committee for Science and Technology ; the Hon'ble Arthur D'Hanna, Deputy Prime                       
 Minister and Minister of Finance, Bahamas ; a trade delegation from Brazil as well                    
 as Brazilian Members of Parliament and representatives of the Jamaican In- dustrial                   
 Investment Corporation.                                                                               
                                                                                                       
 pg55                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 The overall volume of India's trade and economic coopera- tion with countries in                      
 this region is still modest. However, there is sufficient potential as is shown by                    
 the joint cooperation pro- gramme in, Guyana. Various steps were taken to promote                     
 trade, including organising an industrial exhibition in Brazil. Discussions were                      
 held between the Indian and Brazilian trade officials. Ac- cording to the agreement                   
 reached during these talks, Brazil ex- pressed willingness to buy from India a wide                   
 range of steel items and engineering goods. The Indian side indicated interest in                     
 buy- ing ships, fishing trawlers and certain chemical items from Brazil. Both sides                   
 also agreed that STC, which is the canalising agency for castor oil, and the                          
 corresponding Brazilian organisation will come to an understanding regarding the                      
 export prices of this commodity. The possibilities of starting a two-way service                      
 bet- ween Argentina and India were discussed with an Argentine ship- ping line                        
 which showed interest in extending its service to Bom- bay,. The Shipping                             
 Corporation of India has a bimonthly service to the Caribbeans and one of Scindia's                   
 ships calls periodically at Colon (Panama).                                                           
                                                                                                       
 pg56                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 May 18, 1976                                                                                          
                                                                                 Top                   
 United nations And International                                                                      
 CHAPTER VIII                                                                                          
                                                                                                       
 UNITED NATIONS AND INTERNATIONAL                                                                      
                                                                                                       
 CONFERENCES                                                                                           
                                                                                                       
 Important international conferences were held during the year 1976 dealing with                       
 major political, economic and other contem- porary issues. The Fifth Conference of                    
 Heads of State/Govern- ment of non-aligned countries held in Colombo in August 1976                   
 was of exceptional importance. It reinforced the role of non-align- ment as the                       
 bulwark of an ever widening area of peace, a shield against external pressures and                    
 a catalyst of a new international economic order based on equality and justice. The                   
 Nineteenth Session of the UNESCO General Conference held in Nairobi in                                
 October-November 1976 was noteworthy for the increasing em- phasis on orienting its                   
 programmes to meet the needs of develop- ing countries in the education, cultural,                    
 information and mass media fields. The Conference of International Economic Co-                       
 operation (CIEC) opened in Paris amidst much hope and expec- tation of a dialogue                     
 among developed and developing countries in a spirit of cooperation in order to                       
 move towards the solution of pressing international economic issues. The Fourth                       
 Session of UNCTAD was held in May 1976. The International Fund for Agricultural                       
 Development (IFAD) became operative before the end of the year. The 31st regular                      
 session of the U.N. General Assembly was held in New York during September-December                   
 1976. India actively participated in all these and other interna- tional                              
 conferences.                                                                                          
                                                                                                       
 Two important meetings of non-aligned countries were held during the year                             
 preparatory to the Summit Conference at Colombo--a Conference of Foreign Ministers                    
 of 17-nation Coordi- nating Bureau of non-aligned countries at Algiers from 30 May                    
 to Jun 02, 1976 and a Conference of the Ministers of Information                                      
                                                                                                       
 pg57                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 of the non-aligned countries held in New Delhi from 8 to 13 July 1976.                                
                                                                                                       
 The Algiers Bureau Meeting reaffirmed the importance of maintaining the positive                      
 thrust of non-alignment and preserving unity and cohesion among non-aligned                           
 countries so that they could play an increasingly effective role in world affairs.                    
 It was felt that important international political and economic issues and organi-                    
 sational questions such as the, question of admission of new members, observers and                   
 guests and the mandate and composition of the Coordinating, Bureau that may come up                   
 at the Summit Con- ference should be resolved on the basis of consensus keeping in                    
 view at the same time the need not to deflect from the fundamental principles of                      
 non-alignment.                                                                                        
                                                                                                       
 The Conference of the Information Ministers of non-aligned countries held in New                      
 Delhi in July 1976 highlighted the fact that the emancipation and development of                      
 national information media was an integral part of the overall struggle for                           
 political, economic and social independence for a large majority of the people of                     
 the world who should not be denied the right to inform and be informed objectively                    
 and correctly. The Conference approved the constitution and establishment of a                        
 Press Agencies Pool of non-aligned countries and the composition of its Coordi-                       
 nation Committee. The setting up of an Inter-Governmental Coordination Council was                    
 recommended in order to effectively promote cooperation between non-aligned                           
 countries in different fields of information and mass media. The Conference also                      
 re- commended draft paragraphs for inclusion in the Political Dec- laration of the                    
 Colombo Summit stressing that a new international order in the field of information                   
 and mass-communication was as vital as a new international economic order.                            
                                                                                                       
 The Fifth Summit Conference of non-aligned countries held in Colombo from 16-19                       
 August 1976, the first to be held in Asia, was the largest ever of its kind. It was                   
 attended by 86 member countries, 10 Observer States, 12 Observer Organisa- tions                      
 and 7 Guests. The Conference adopted (1) a Political                                                  
                                                                                                       
 pg58                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 declaration, (2) an Economic Declaration and (3) An Action Programme for Economic                     
 Cooperation. In addition, 16 Resolu- tions were approved on political subjects and                    
 12 on economic subjects. The Summit was preceded by a meeting of the Bureau at                        
 officials! level from 9-11 August and by a Conference of Foreign Ministers of all                     
 non-aligned countries from 11-14 August.                                                              
                                                                                                       
 The Political Declaration emphasized the need to preserve the integrity, unity and                    
 cohesion of the movement and to adhere to its fundamental principles. The section                     
 on "Asia and non- alignment" which traced the evolution of non-alignment in Asia                      
 beginning with the Asian Relations Conference held in New Delhi in 1947 and                           
 expressed the determination of the non-aligned counties in Asia to defend and                         
 preserve their freedom by eschewing involvement in military blocs and alliances.                      
 The sec- tion on Southern Africa in the Political Declaration reflected the growing                   
 feeling that eventually resort to armed struggle may be necessary to secure the                       
 liberation from the remaining vestiges of colonialism, racism and apartheid. On                       
 disarmament, the Poli- tical Declaration called for the convening of a Special                        
 Session of the General Assembly exclusively devoted to disarmament matters which                      
 has since been accepted at the 3lst Session of the U.N. General Assembly. This                        
 would not be substitute for the World Disarmament Conference, but would consider,                     
 inter alia, the question of convening such a World Conference. The Political                          
 Declaration also reflected the consensus views, of all non-aligned countries on the                   
 need to be vigilant against the poli- tics of pressure and domination by outside                      
 powers in the internal affairs of non-aligned countries. Other issues covered were                    
 the situation in the Middle East and the question of Palestine, the role of the                       
 United Nations of the Historic victories of the countries of Indo-China, the                          
 question of Cyprus, the Indian Ocean as a Zone of peace, the admission of Angola                      
 and Vietnam to the U.N., the question of Korea, etc.                                                  
                                                                                                       
 The Colombo Summit unanimously approved all the re- commendations of the New Delhi                    
 Conference of Information                                                                             
                                                                                                       
 pg59                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 Ministers of non-aligned countries. The Political Declaration in- corporated                          
 paragraphs recommended by the New Delhi Confe- rence on cooperation in the field of                   
 information and mass media. The Economic Declaration adopted at the Colombo Summit                    
 analysed the current international economic situation and the prospects for                           
 developing countries. Disappointment was ex- pressed at the lack of progress made                     
 so far at the Paris Con- ference (CIEC) and at the lack of substantive programmes                     
 and results achieved at UNCTAD-IV. At the same time, the accent was on improving                      
 the collective bargaining position of non- aligned and developing countries by                        
 promoting mutual help and cooperation. There was also growing realisation of the                      
 need to concentrate on the implementation of the decision taken at pre- vious                         
 Conferences.                                                                                          
                                                                                                       
 The emphasis in the Action Programme for Economic Co- operation was on increasing                     
 the extent and diversity of coopera- tion among non-aligned and developing                            
 countries. This prog- ramme, while covering old and familiar fields of cooperation,                   
 namely trade, industrialisation, science and technology, monetary and financial                       
 cooperation, raw materials etc. contained new addi- tional sections on food and                       
 agriculture, fisheries, transport, tele- communications, insurance, public                            
 enterprises, health, technical cooperation and consultancy services, employment and                   
 human resources development, role of women in development, research and information                   
 system and tourism. India continued to be one of the Coordinators in the field of                     
 financial and monetary cooperation among non-aligned countries. It had also been                      
 appointed one of the Coordinators in the field Of scientific and technological                        
 development and technical coope- ration and consultancy services. India played an                     
 active role both in the deliberations as well as in the decisions finally adopted                     
 at the Conference.                                                                                    
                                                                                                       
 The Coordinating Bureau of the non-aligned countries was expanded from 17 to 25 to                    
 include 12 from Africa, 8 from Asia. 4 from Latin America and 1 from Europe. The                      
 mandate                                                                                               
                                                                                                       
 pg60                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 given to the expanded Coordinating Bureau reflected the need for continuous                           
 coordination of activities at a political level to enable the non-aligned countries                   
 to play an effective role at the U.N. and other international forums.                                 
                                                                                                       
 The Conference of Foreign Ministers of the Coordinating Bureau of Non-Aligned                         
 countries was held as scheduled from 6-11 April in New Delhi. Apart from 25 members                   
 of the Bureau. the meeting was attended by observers from several other coun-                         
 tries. The meeting marked the first occasion for a stock-taking regarding political                   
 and economic programmes adopted at the Colombo Summit. Inaugurating the Conference,                   
 the Prime Mi- nister said that for India non-alignment represented a national                         
 consensus and India would remain non-aligned in the real sense of the term. The                       
 struggle for freedom from want and freedom from fear should inspire attitudes in                      
 international affairs. He called upon non-aligned countries to forge meaningful                       
 bonds of cooperation and collaboration among themselves. The Minister of External                     
 Affairs, addressing the plenary session, reiterated India's firm commitment to the                    
 policy of non-alignment. He laid special emphasis on the removal of the last                          
 vestiges of colonialism and racialism from Africa. He called for unity and                            
 collaboration among non-aligned countries to realise their collective aspirations                     
 through self-reliance. He placed particular emphasis on the in- creasing relevance                    
 of the Non-Aligned Movement in the global effort to achieve a new economic order                      
 which would ensure equi- table principle of decision-making as well as a just                         
 distribution of resources and assets in the world economic system.                                    
                                                                                                       
 The 31st Regular Session of the UN General Assembly was held in New York from 21                      
 September to 21 December 1976. Major international political, economic, social.                       
 humanitarian, legal and other issues figured in its debates and resolutions. India                    
 played an active role in its deliberations. The membership of the World Body which                    
 stood at 144 prior to the commencement of the Session increased to 147 with the                       
 admission of three new Members Seychelles, Angola and                                                 
                                                                                                       
 pg61                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 Western Samoa. The admission of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam was, however,                       
 once again vetoed in the Security Coun- cil. On the initiative of non-aligned                         
 countries, the General Assemb- ly subsequently adopted a Resolution, with an                          
 overwhelming majority, calling for the admission of Socialist Republic of Vietnam                     
 to the U.N. and recommending that the Security Council consider the matter                            
 favourably in strict conformity with Article 4 of the Charter of die U.N. more                        
 India co-sponsored this Resolu- tion. The Commonwealth Secretariat was also granted                   
 Observer status during this Session.                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 The General Assembly re-elected Dr. Kurt Waldheim for a second five-year term on                      
 the unanimous recommendation of the Security Council.                                                 
                                                                                                       
 There were 124 items on the Agenda of the 31st Session. The General Assembly                          
 adopted in all 208 Resolutions. An interesting development which was widely                           
 welcomed was the withdrawal by the sponsors of the two conflicting draft                              
 resolutions on the Korean Question before the formal adoption of the Agenda. It                       
 will be recalled that at the previous sessions both such resolu- tions were                           
 adopted.                                                                                              
                                                                                                       
 At the request of Bangladesh a new item entitled situation arising out of a                           
 unilateral withdrawal of waters at Farakka was included in the Agenda. India                          
 opposed the inscription of the item on the agenda on the ground that it was a                         
 bilateral matter which needed to be settled by direct negotiations and any attempt                    
 to internationalise a bilateral legal-cum-technical issue may only prove                              
 counter-productive. The item was allocated to the Special Political Committee.                        
 Three meetings were devoted to the subject in the Committee-the first one (November                   
 15) in which Bangla- desh made a statement, the second one (November 16) in which                     
 India made a statement, and the third one (November 24) at which the Committee                        
 adopted a consensus statement calling upon both parties to resume bilateral                           
 negotia- tions with a view to arriving at a settlement. Bangladesh withdrew                           
                                                                                                       
 pg62                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 the draft resolution earlier tabled by it on the subject. With the adoption of the                    
 consensus statement the discussion on the item was concluded. India participated                      
 actively in the deliberations of the General Assembly on items pertaining to                          
 Colonialism and apartheid in accordance with its well-known stand in such matters.                    
 India continued to be a member of the UN Special Committee on de- colonisation (The                   
 Committee of 24), the Special Committee on Apartheid and the Council for Namibia.                     
                                                                                                       
 The policies of apartheid of the Government of South Africa and the illegal regime                    
 in Zimbabwe came under severe attack at the 31st Session. To highlight its                            
 importance apartheid was discussed in the Plenary, instead of in the Special                          
 Political Com- mittee as in earlier years. More than 100 delegations participated                     
 in the debate and as many as 11 resolutions were adopted on apartheid alone-8 of                      
 them co-sponsored by India. For the first time, the General Assembly endorsed armed                   
 struggle as a legi- timate weapon in the hands of the oppressed people of Southern                    
 Africa. It proclaimed that the Pretoria regime was illegal and reaffirmed the right                   
 of the people of South Africa to struggle by all means for their liberation.                          
 Further, the General Assembly demanded the immediate release of all persons                           
 imprisoned for their involvement in the struggle for liberation in South Africa and                   
 gave renewed call to the Security Council to impose a mandatory arms embargo                          
 against the Pretoria regime. Another Resolution condemned any collaboration with                      
 the Pretoria re- gime as being "a hostile act against the oppressed people of South                   
 Africa" and condemned actions of all States and foreign economic interests                            
 continuing to collaborate with the regime. A resolution condemning Israel for                         
 "continuing and increasing collaboration with the South African racist regime" was                    
 also approved. The Assembly authorised the Special Committee against Apartheid to                     
 organise a World Conference in Africa (Ghana) in 1977 to set forth a programme                        
 listing measures which could be taken by Governments, Specialised Agencies and                        
 other Organi- sations. Also approved without opposition was the decision to                           
                                                                                                       
 pg63                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 set up a Drafting Committee to prepare an International Conven- tion against                          
 apartheid in Sports and an appeal for generous con- tributions to the United                          
 Nations Trust Fund for South Africa which provides humanitarian assistance to                         
 victims of discrimina- tory legislation. The Assembly further rejected the                            
 proclamation of independence of Transkei--one of the Bantustans or "home- lands" of                   
 South Africa-and declared it to be invalid. The estab- lishment of Bantustans was                     
 condemned as designed to consoli- date apartheid, to perpetuate white minority                        
 domination and to dispossess the South African people of their inalienable rights,                    
 and Governments were called on to deny any form of recogni- tion to "the so called                    
 independent Transkei" and to refrain from having any dealings with it or with other                   
 Bantustans.                                                                                           
                                                                                                       
 In pursuance of decisions taken at Colombo, a Pledging Con- ference on the                            
 Non-aligned Support and Solidarity Fund for the Liberation of Southern Africa was                     
 also convened. The Govern- ment of India decided to contribute US $30,000 to this                     
 Fund. A note-worthy event was that the Special Committee against Apartheid held a                     
 Special Meeting to pay warm and eloquent tributes to India for its contribution to                    
 the world struggle against apartheid in Southern Africa.                                              
                                                                                                       
 On Namibia, 8 resolutions were adopted, all co-sponsored by India. South Africa's                     
 continuing refusal to comply with the resolutions and decisions of the UN, its                        
 continued illegal occu- pation of Namibia, its brutal repression of the Nambian                       
 people, its persistent violation of their human rights and its efforts to destroy                     
 the national unity and territorial integrity of Namibia were strongly deplored and                    
 condemned. Further, the General Assembly re-affirmed the inalienable rights of the                    
 people of Namibia to self-determination, freedom and national indepen- dence in                       
 accordance with the relevant UN Resolutions. The armed struggle of the Namibian                       
 people led by SWAPO to achieve free- dom and national independence was also                           
 endorsed. The General Assembly called for free elections in Namibia under the                         
 supervi- sion and control of the U.N. It was also decided to observe the week                         
 beginning with 27 October as a week of solidarity with the                                            
                                                                                                       
 pg64                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 people of Namibia and its liberation movements. An important development was the                      
 invitation to SWAPO to participate in the Sessions and work of the General Assembly                   
 and in the work of all international conferences, convened under the auspices of                      
 the Assembly and other Organs of the UN, in the capacity of Observer.                                 
                                                                                                       
 Two resolutions, both co-sponsored by India, were adopted on the situation in the                     
 Middle East. The resolutions condemned Israel for its continued illegal occupation                    
 of Arab territories since 1967 and called for its withdrawal as well as attainment                    
 by the Palestinian people of their inalienable rights as a prere- quisite to a just                   
 and lasting peace in the Middle East. The reso- lutions also called for the early                     
 resumption of the Geneva Peace Conference with the participation of all the parties                   
 concerned, including the PLO. On Palestine, a series of resolutions were adopted by                   
 the General Assembly. An important development was the endorse- ment by the                           
 Assembly of the recommendations of the "Com- mittee on Palestinian Rights" as a                       
 basis for resolving the Pales- tinian question.                                                       
                                                                                                       
 Resolutions on the problem of Palestine refugees called upon Governments to make                      
 generous contributions to UNRWA, and for continued assistance to persons displaced                    
 as a result of 1967 hostilities, etc. The mandate of the UNEF was extended by one                     
 year and that of UNDOF by six months.                                                                 
                                                                                                       
 In regard to the proposal that the Indian Ocean be declared a Zone of Peace, the                      
 General Assembly adopted a procedural resolution which requested the littoral and                     
 hinterland States to continue their consultations with a view to formulation a                        
 Programme of Action leading to the convening of a Conference on the Indian Ocean.                     
 It also renewed the invitation to all States, in particulars, the Great Powers, and                   
 the major maritime users of the Indian Ocean, to cooperate In a practical manner in                   
 the                                                                                                   
                                                                                                       
 pg65                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 implementation of the UN resolutions on the subject. The Resolu- tion was adopted                     
 by 106 votes in favour, none against and 23 abstentions. The question of Cyprus was                   
 also on the agenda of the 31st General Assembly and a resolution tabled by the                        
 Contact Group of Five Non-aligned Countries (Algeria, Guyana, India, Mali and                         
 Yugoslavia) was approved with 94 votes in favour, 1 against and 27 abstentions. The                   
 Resolution reaffirmed the sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and                        
 non-alignment of the Republic of Cyprus and called for the cessation of all foreign                   
 interference. Further, it requested the Secretary General for the continuation of                     
 his good offices for negotiations between the re- presentatives of the two                            
 communities.                                                                                          
                                                                                                       
 The mandate of the UN Force in Cyprus was extended by a further period of six                         
 months. It may be mentioned that the Commander of the UNFICYP, Lt. Gen. Prem Chand                    
 of India, resigned from his post after serving with distinction for a period of 7                     
 years.                                                                                                
                                                                                                       
 India supported a proposal made by the Soviet Union for concluding a World Treaty                     
 for the Renunciation of Force in international relations and co-sponsored a                           
 resolution calling upon the Secretary General to ascertain the views and                              
 suggestions of member-States on the draft Soviet Treaty for further examina- ion at                   
 the next Session. India also supported the initiative taken by the Federal Republic                   
 of Germany on the setting up of a Committee to prepare an International Convention                    
 against the taking of hostages. The resolution, amended after consultation among                      
 different groups, was adopted by consensus. A 35 member Ad-hoc Committee has been                     
 set up to draft the Convention which would come up for examination at the next                        
 Session of the General Assembly. On Western Sahara, the General Assembly postponed                    
 con- sideration of the item to the 32nd Session next year and requested the                           
 Secretary General of the OAU to inform the U.N. Secretary                                             
                                                                                                       
 pg66                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 General of the progress achieved in the implementation of the decisions of the OAU                    
 concerning the holding of an Extraordinary Summit on the questions of Western                         
 Sahara, On Timor, the General Assembly rejected the integration of East Timor with                    
 Indonesia and called upon Indonesia to withdraw all its forces from that territory.                   
 India voted against this Resolution. The Resolution on the Comorian Island of                         
 Mayotte called upon France to withdraw from Mayotte which was an integral part of                     
 Comoros.                                                                                              
                                                                                                       
 In the field of disarmament, the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament (CCD)                     
 of which India is a member since the establishment of the Committee in 1962 was in                    
 session from 17 February to 22 April and again from 22 June to 3 September 1976.                      
 The Committee appointed a Working Group for negotia- ting the text of a draft                         
 convention on the prohibition of military or any other hostile use of environmental                   
 modification techniques (ENMOD Convention) and an Ad-hoc Group of scientific ex-                      
 perts to consider international cooperative measures to detect and identify seismic                   
 events.                                                                                               
                                                                                                       
 The Working Group succeeded in evolving an agreed draft ENMOD Convention which was                    
 remitted to the 31st Session of the UN General Assembly. India co-sponsored a                         
 resolution at the 31st UN General Assembly Session referring this Convention to all                   
 States for their consideration, signature and ratification and re- questing the UN                    
 Secretary General in his designated capacity as its depository to open it for                         
 signature by all States at an early date.                                                             
                                                                                                       
 At the 31st Session of the UN General Assembly, there were as many as twenty items                    
 regarding disarmament, outer space and atomic energy on the agenda, on which a                        
 total of 23 reso- lutions were adopted. Of these, India co-sponsored 6 resolutions,                   
 all of which were adopted, four of them without a vote. India voted for 9 other                       
 resolutions, abstained on 4, and voted against 1 (that sponsored by Pakistan on the                   
 question of establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in South Asia). Three other                   
 resolutions were adopted without a vote.                                                              
                                                                                                       
 pg67                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 The decision to convene a special session of the UN General Assembly to consider                      
 disarmament was by far the most im- portant development in the field of disarmament                   
 during the 31st session. In pursuance of the recommendation of the Colombo Summit,                    
 several non-aligned countries including India co-sponsored a resolution, which was                    
 adopted and under which it was decided to hold a special session of the U.N.                          
 General Assembly devoted to disarmament in May-June 1978.                                             
                                                                                                       
 Pakistan again tabled a resolution on the question of the establishment of a                          
 nuclear-weapon-free zone in South Asia. India did not table any draft resolution                      
 during this session, as its position had been already made clear in the various                       
 state- ments made on this subject as also in the negative votes either cast or                        
 indicated on the Pakistani resolutions at the 29th and 30th Sessions, at which it                     
 had tabled alternative resolutions which had been duly adopted by the UN General                      
 Assembly. In fact, the only time when both the Indian and Pakistani resolutions                       
 were voted upon-at the 29th Session-the Indian resolution had received a larger                       
 number of affirmative votes than the Pakistani resolution. In order, however, to                      
 reiterate the unacceptability of the Pakistani proposal, India voted against the                      
 Pakistani reso- lution. In essence, India's position on the Pakistani proposal is                     
 that it is not feasible to think of establishing a nuclear-weapon- free zone in                       
 South Asia, so long as nuclear weapons exist in the region of Asia and the Pacific                    
 of which South Asia is an integral part.                                                              
                                                                                                       
 In the field of conventional disarmament, India reiterated its consistent view that                   
 any controls on conventional weapons should be comprehensive and should properly be                   
 considered in the con- text of general and complete disarmament, the highest                          
 priority being accorded to the question of the elimination of nuclear wea- pons and                   
 all other weapons of mass destruction. Consistent with this position, India                           
 succeeded in bringing about the deferment of consideration of a resolution which                      
 had been proposed on the                                                                              
                                                                                                       
 pg68                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 subject of merely controlling international transfers of conven- tional weapons                       
 without any curbs on their production, sophisti- cation and stockpiling and also                      
 without any commitment to the highest priority objective of nuclear disarmament and                   
 elimina- tion of all weapons of mass destruction.                                                     
                                                                                                       
 The 31st Session of the UN General Assembly did not regis- ter any substantive                        
 progress on the various other aspects of the question of disarmament and remitted                     
 to the CCD for further consideration and negotiation a number of issues,                              
 particularly the conclusion of a comprehensive nuclear weapon test ban and the                        
 prohibition of chemical weapons on a priority basis. These issues were again taken                    
 up by the CCD during its 1977 spring session which commenced on 15th February,                        
 1977.                                                                                                 
                                                                                                       
 The Ministry continued to coordinate with and assist the Department of Atomic                         
 Energy as well as the Department of Space in respect of the international aspects                     
 of their activities. India continued to be a member of the Board of Governors of                      
 the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) for being amongst the nine globally                     
 most advanced members of the IAEA in the field of the utilization of nuclear energy                   
 for peaceful purposes.                                                                                
                                                                                                       
 The Conference on International Economic Cooperation, which had met in Paris in                       
 December 1975, had set up four Commissions to deal with problems of energy, raw                       
 materials, development and financial affairs. India was a member of the Commission                    
 on Energy Development and Financial Affairs and was an Observer on the Commission                     
 on Raw Materials. These Commissions met at periodical intervals in Paris during                       
 1976. A mutually acceptable work programme was finalised in September and in                          
 October the four Commissions outlined the positions of the developing and developed                   
 countries on the items in the work programme. There were wide differences between                     
 the positions of the two groups on almost all the major subjects under discussion.                    
 Attempts to re- concile these differences did not succeed. The Indian delegation                      
 throughout played a moderate and constructive role. There were                                        
                                                                                                       
 pg69                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 considerable disappointment among the developing countries at the meagre results                      
 achieved so far.                                                                                      
                                                                                                       
 The Conference on Economic Cooperation among developing countries was held in                         
 Mexico in September 1976. The third ministerial meeting of the group of 77 which                      
 had met in January- February 1976 had decided that such a Conference at inter-gov-                    
 ernmental level should be held in Mexico. The Indian delegation to the Conference                     
 stressed that the stage had come when develop- ing countries should move from                         
 declaration to action and from programmes to their implementation. It worked for                      
 adoption of complete action-oriented measures and operational mechanism in this                       
 regard. The Conference identified several areas which had the potential for                           
 expanding mutual cooperation and commissioned detailed studies regarding them.                        
                                                                                                       
 On the economic side, the 31st Session of the U.N. General Assembly expressed its                     
 deep concern and disappointment at the failure of the Paris Conference on                             
 International Economic Coope- ration to achieve any concrete results. At the                          
 initiative of the Group of 77 it decided to hold, if necessary, a resumed session                     
 in the first half of 1977 to discuss question of International Eco- nomic                             
 Cooperation in the light of the outcome of the Paris dialogue. The 31st Session                       
 also called upon the Secretary-General to collect data for the formulation of a new                   
 International Development Strategy for the Third Development Decade. Further, it                      
 was decided to convene a U.N. Conference on technical cooperation among developing                    
 countries in March/April 1978 in Argentina, a Conference of Plenipotentiaries                         
 during the second half of 1977 to consider the constitution of UNIDO as a                             
 Specialised Agency and a U.N. Conference on Science and Technology for Develop-                       
 ment in 1978.                                                                                         
                                                                                                       
 The United Nations Water Conference held at Mar del Plata in Argentina in March                       
 1977 decided to designate the period 1978-1988 as a decade for international action                   
 to provide all peoples of the world with adequate drinking water and sanitation                       
 facilities.                                                                                           
                                                                                                       
 pg70                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 The World Food Conference of 1974 had recommended the creation of an International                    
 Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) to provide increased concessional                            
 financing for food production in the developing countries. This Fund, which will                      
 now become operative since the US $ 1,000 million target of initial contributions                     
 has been reached, is considered to be an important achievement of the United                          
 Nations.                                                                                              
                                                                                                       
 The 31st Session of the General Assembly, adopted a number of resolutions on social                   
 and humanitarian questions including racial discrimination world social situation,                    
 etc. India played an active role in projecting the view point of developing                           
 countries and specially in tabling resolutions on the Role of Youth, on National                      
 Experience for Social Progress, on Role of Cooperatives and in co-sponsoring many                     
 other resolutions, all of which were adopted with overwhelming majority. The                          
 Commission on the Status of Women, at its meeting in September 1976, adopted a                        
 programme for the U.N. Decade for Women (1976-85) as a follow up of the World                         
 Conference of the International Women's Year. The General Assembly also adopted a                     
 number of resolutions aimed at improving the status of women in the field of                          
 education, employment opportunities and emancipation. At the national level, a                        
 31-Member National Committee on Women has been set up to guide and advise the                         
 Central and State Governments on formulating programmes for women and ensuring                        
 their implementation. India sponsored a reso- lution in the Fifth Committee which,                    
 inter alia called for greater representation of women at all levels and                               
 particularly at the senior levels in the U.N. and its Specialised Agencies.                           
                                                                                                       
 Both during the general debate and in the Third Committee during the 31st Session                     
 of the U.N. General Assembly, India exercised its right of reply to reiterate its                     
 consistent and well- known position regarding Jammu and Kashmir being an integral                     
 part of India in response to misleading contentions made by Pakistan.                                 
                                                                                                       
 pg71                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 India's contribution to the U.N. budget has been reduced for the coming year from                     
 1.2 per cent to 0.7 per cent in accor- dance with a new scale of assessments                          
 recommended by the Com- mittee on Contributions. India played an active role in                       
 facilitating the adoption of a compromise resolution on the question concern- ing                     
 the scale of assessments. The new scale of assessments would be valid only for one                    
 year. In the meantime, the Committee on Contributions will re-examine the question                    
 taking into account new guidelines provided in the discussions at the 31st Session                    
 of the U.N.                                                                                           
                                                                                                       
 The Nineteenth Session of the General Conference of UNESCO was the first to be held                   
 in Africa and was only the second General Conference in UNESCO's thirty years of                      
 existence to be convened outside UNESCO's Headquarters in Paris (the only other                       
 Session held outside Paris was in Delhi in 1965). The UNESCO General Conference                       
 decided to consider at its Twentieth Session, two years from now, a draft                             
 Declaration on the Fundamental Principles governing the use of the mass media in                      
 strengthening peace and international understanding and in combating war                              
 propaganda, racism and apartheid. This should be the first time that an inter-                        
 national body would be considering such a Declaration on the guidelines for                           
 activity in the field of mass media. Other significant resolutions adopted at the                     
 General Conference which would add new dimensions to UNESCO's activities over the                     
 coming biennial related to the role of UNESCO in developing a climate of public                       
 opinion conducive to halting the arms race and the transition to disarmament; and                     
 to UNESCO's contribution in the establishment of a New International Economic                         
 Order.                                                                                                
                                                                                                       
 India was elected a member of the Security Council for the term 1977-78 replacing                     
 Japan whose two-year term expired at the end of 1976. India was re-elected to the                     
 Executive Board of UNESCO on which it has served since its inception with Dr. S.                      
 Gopal replacing Shri G. Parthasarathi. India was re-elected to the Human Rights                       
 Commission, the Commission on the Status of Women, the Committee on Natural                           
 Resources, ICAO Council                                                                               
                                                                                                       
 pg72                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 and Inter-Governmental Maritime Consultative Organisation (IMCO). Mr. Venkataraman                    
 was re-elected as member of the U.N. Administrative Tribunal and became its                           
 Chairman. Dr. Jagota, Legal Adviser in the Ministry of External Affairs, was                          
 elected as a member of the International Law Commission. Dr. Nagendra Singh, Judge                    
 of the International Court of Justice (ICJ) was elected as Vice-President of the                      
 Court. The 31st Session of the U.N. General Assembly also approved the                                
 re-nomination by the U.N. Secretary-General of Shri P. N. Haksar as a member of the                   
 International Civil Service Commission and of Shri B. K. Nehru as a member of the                     
 U.N. Investment Committee.                                                                            
                                                                                                       
 During 1976, the fourth (15 March to 7 May) and fifth (2 August to 17 September)                      
 sessions of the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea were held in                    
 New York. At the fourth session, discussions were held on the basis of the Single                     
 Negotiating Texts prepared by the Chairman of the three main Committees with                          
 respect to their respective subject-matter, namely, International Seabed Area and                     
 its Resources (Committee I), Law of the Sea (Committee II), and Scientific Research                   
 and Marine Pollution (Committee III). In addition to this, Ambassador H. S.                           
 Amerasinghe, President of the Conference, also submitted the Fourth Informal Single                   
 Negotiating Text on settlement of dis- putes. As a result of these discussions,                       
 these SNTs were revised.                                                                              
                                                                                                       
 The fifth session considered further the Revised Single Nego- tiating Texts.                          
 Considerable progress was made during these sessions and a consensus was reached on                   
 a 12-mile territorial sea, a 200-mile economic zone, and the continental shell                        
 extending to the outer edge of the margin with the understanding that the outer                       
 limits will be precisely defined. Some questions remained to be further discussed,                    
 namely, provisions concerning navigation through international straits, the                           
 question whether the economic zone is part of the high seas or whether the high                       
 seas start beyond the economic zone, the question of coastal State jurisdiction                       
 con- cerning the conduct of scientific research and the control of marine pollution                   
 within the economic zone and the question of settlement of disputes. As regards the                   
 resources of the international seabed                                                                 
                                                                                                       
 pg73                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 area, the technologically developed states and the Group of 77 of the developing                      
 countries continued to differ on the system of their exploitation, the financial                      
 arrangements to be entered into between the Authority and the operators in the area                   
 and the role and relationship of the principal organs of the proposed Inter-                          
 national Seabed Authority.                                                                            
                                                                                                       
 The United Nations Commission on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL) met thrice in                     
 Geneva and New York, alternatively, during 1976. It completed the final reading of                    
 the Draft Conven- tion on the Carriage of Goods by Sea and the Draft Convention on                    
 the International Sale of Goods. It also completed the second reading of the Draft                    
 Uniform Law on International Promissory Notes. It adopted the Draft Set of                            
 Arbitration Rules for optional use in ad hoc arbitration relating to international                    
 trade.                                                                                                
                                                                                                       
 The fifteenth session of the Legal Sub-Committee of the United Nations Committee on                   
 Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, was held at Geneva in May 1976. It considered                           
 questions relating to (a) draft treaty on the moon, (b) artificial earth satellites                   
 for direct television broadcasting and (c) legal implications of remote sensing of                    
 the earth from space.                                                                                 
                                                                                                       
 On the subject of a draft treaty relating to the moon, the Legal Sub-Committee was                    
 not able to reach compromise on the controversial principles that the moon and its                    
 resources are the common heritage of mankind and the exploitation of the resources                    
 of the moon should be undertaken only in accordance with the international regime                     
 to be established.                                                                                    
                                                                                                       
 On the item of elaboration of principles governing the use by States of artificial                    
 earth satellites for direct television broadcasting, the Sub-Committee was                            
 successful in formulating nine principles. These principles took care of India's                      
 own position as a country which in the not too distant future would possess                           
 advanced knowledge and be in a position to use DBS technology of its own. On the                      
 item relating to remote sensing of earth from space not much progress was made by                     
 the Sub-Committee.                                                                                    
                                                                                                       
 pg74                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 The voluminous report of the International Law Commission for 1976, was considered                    
 by the Sixth Committee of the General Assembly. It dealt with the questions of most                   
 favoured nation clause, state responsibility, law relating to international water-                    
 courses, and succession of states in matters other than treaties. On the question                     
 of most favoured nation treatment, it was urged that the article concerning the                       
 most favoured nation clause in relation to treatment under a generalized system of                    
 preferences should be strengthened by including a reference to "a differential and                    
 more favourable treatment in favour of developing countries." Regarding the                           
 application of the clause to rights and facilities extending to landlocked states,                    
 it was stated that it should be restricted to the neighbouring landlocked States                      
 and should not automatically apply to distant landlocked States.                                      
                                                                                                       
 On the question of non-navigational uses of international water- courses, India                       
 extended its support to the concept of international drainage basin on the ground                     
 that it would provide a broader framework for the equitable sharing of waters and                     
 for their opti- mum utilization by all concerned. India further emphasised that the                   
 utilization by a riparian state of its reasonable and equitable share of a river or                   
 a basin within its own territory could not be subject to veto by another riparian                     
 or co-basin state.                                                                                    
                                                                                                       
 An Indian team participated in the deliberations of the Second International                          
 Conference on Water Law and Administration (AID-II) held in Caracas from 8 to 14                      
 February, 1976. The Indian team emphasised that states should themselves evolve a                     
 legal framework for the optimum utilisation of the water resources without any                        
 external interference.                                                                                
                                                                                                       
 India was represented at the second meeting of UNEP Inter- Governmental Working                       
 Group of Experts on Natural Resources Shared by Two or More States held in Geneva                     
 in September 1976. The Group discussed principles concerning the establish- ment of                   
 a system whereby States register information on activities within their                               
 jurisdiction which may have significant environmental impact beyond their                             
 jurisdiction or control; suitable procedure                                                           
                                                                                                       
 pg75                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 for mutual warning and cooperation in case of emergencies, such as natural                            
 disasters ; settlement of disputes ; use of good Offices of UNEP ; and                                
 responsibility of States and liability for environ- mental damage concerning a                        
 shared natural resource.                                                                              
                                                                                                       
 India also participated in the third session of the Conference on the Reaffirmation                   
 and Development of International Humani- tarian Law Applicable in Armed Conflicts                     
 held in Geneva from 21 April to I 1 June, 1976. The Conference was concerned with                     
 the revision of the Geneva Conventions of 1949.                                                       
                                                                                                       
 During 1976, India concluded 74 agreements, a list of which is given in Appendix V.                   
                                                                                                       
 pg76                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 Jun 02, 1976                                                                                          
                                                                                 Top                   
 Technical And Economic Cooperation                                                                    
 CHAPTER IX                                                                                            
                                                                                                       
 TECHNICAL AND ECONOMIC COOPERATION                                                                    
                                                                                                       
 Indian emerged as a larger reservoir of trained man-power and the demand for the                      
 services of Indian doctors, engineers, technicians and other categories of trained                    
 personnel grew rapidly. It offered to share its own experience of develop- ment                       
 with fellow developing countries. ln this context, the Eco- nomic Division of the                     
 Ministry assisted in coping with the task in cooperation with the Department of                       
 Personnel and the Ministry of Labour. With a view to ensure that recruitment of                       
 Indian ex- perts for service in foreign countries is consistent with India's                          
 national interests, it was decided that organised recruitment of Indian experts by                    
 foreign governments and/or foreign agencies should be channelised through the                         
 Government of India. The Department of Personnel & Administrative Reforms was                         
 designa- ted as the agency for this parpose. Skilled, semi-skilled and unskilled                      
 labour from India will in future be recruited through licensed recruiting agencies.                   
 These recruiting agencies will be licensed and registered by the Directorate                          
 General of Employment and Training, Ministry of Labour. It was expected that these                    
 new procedures would serve to regulate the outflow of Indian manpower consistent                      
 with India's national interests and also ensure fair treatment for Indian personnel                   
 abroad.                                                                                               
                                                                                                       
 The fact that the economic content of contemporary diplomacy had grown vastly was                     
 particularly felt in India's relations with the West Asian and North African                          
 countries. To meet the situation, an Economic Wing of the WANA Division was created                   
 in September 1976.                                                                                    
                                                                                                       
 Joint Conmmissions                                                                                    
                                                                                                       
 Meetings, of several Joint Commissions with the countries in Asia, Africa, Europe                     
 and the USA were held during the year and these meetings identified new areas of                      
 potential cooperation.                                                                                
                                                                                                       
 pg77                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 Asia                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 In terms of the Joint Economic Commission with Afghanistan, India undertook to                        
 further expand the area of bilateral coopera- tion for the forthcoming 7-year                         
 Development Plan of that country. At the fourth meeting of the Joint Commission, it                   
 was agreed that India would supply equipment worth Rs. 4 lakhs to the ENT Institute                   
 and depute 4 experts to assist in its establishment.                                                  
                                                                                                       
 The third meeting of the Indo-Sri Lanka Joint Commission. was held in New Delhi in                    
 February 1976. It took some important decisions to further accelerate bilateral                       
 cooperation in the areas, of trade, agriculture and animal husbandry, and                             
 fisheries. It was agreed that the Government of India would supply machinery and                      
 equipment for the establishment of some Rural Technical Centres and Gobar Gas                         
 units. The second meeting of the Indo-Iraqi Joint Commission was. held in New Delhi                   
 from 29. March to Apr 03, 1976. Important issues discussed or decided during this                     
 meeting included bilateral trade plan for 1976, provision of training facilities in                   
 India for Iraqi nominees, deputation of experts from India and an agree- ment on                      
 the further development of air services between India. and Iraq.                                      
                                                                                                       
 A meeting of the Indo-UAE Joint Commission was held on 22 and 23 April 1976 in New                    
 Delhi when it was decided to, examine prospects of collaboration in the field of                      
 fertilisers and the setting up of a steel mill.                                                       
                                                                                                       
 Eastern Europe                                                                                        
                                                                                                       
 The third meeting of the Indo-Soviet Joint Commission on Economic, Scientific and                     
 Technical Cooperation was held in Moscow during March-April 1976. The Protocol                        
 concluded after the meeting envisaged wider economic ties in many fields and made                     
 special mention of new forms of cooperation in production on compensation basis.                      
 New fields identified for cooperation included agriculture-based products,                            
 textiles, electronics and an alumina                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 pg78                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 plant based on bauxite deposits. A broad programme was also drawn up to intensify                     
 cooperation in the field of ferrous metal- lurgy, machine-building and power, coal                    
 and mining industry, oil and gas prospecting, production and refining of petroleum,                   
 and science and technology. Both sides agreed to cooperate in third countries.                        
 Tripartite cooperation was also discussed in rela- tion to projects constructed by                    
 Soviet organisations in third countries on turn-key basis. The second meeting of                      
 the Indo-Hungarian Joint Commission for Economic, Scientific and Technical                            
 Cooperation was held in Budapest in April 1976. In the protocol concluded after the                   
 meeting, both sides agreed to take steps to strengthen coopera- tion in the fields                    
 of telecommunications and electronics, drugs and pharmaceuticals, trade exchanges,                    
 industrial cooperation, science and technology, agriculture and food processing                       
 industry, water resources development and allied subjects.                                            
                                                                                                       
 The second and third meetings of the Indo-Romanian Joint Commission for Economic,                     
 Technical and Scientific Cooperation were held in New Delhi (April 1976) and                          
 Bucharest (November- December 1976) respectively; During these meetings, both sides                   
 agreed on strengthening cooperation in the fields of petroleum and chemicals,                         
 trade, industrial cooperation, machine building, mining and metallurgy, shipping                      
 and science and technology. During the second meeting, a 3-year Executive Programme                   
 (1976-78) for cooperation in the fields of science and technology was signed.                         
                                                                                                       
 The third and fourth meetings of the Indo-Polish Joint Com- mission for Economic,                     
 Trade, Scientific and Technical Coopera- tion were held in Warsaw and New Delhi in                    
 June and December 1976 respectively. While in the Protocol signed after the second                    
 meeting the two sides agreed to expand cooperation for the development and                            
 modernisation of coal mines in India, in the Protocol following the third meeting,                    
 it was agreed to strengthen cooperation in the fields of trade exchanges,                             
 industrial coopera- tion, agriculture, fisheries and science and technology. In                       
 both                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 pg79                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 the meetings, the need for developing cooperation in third coun- tries was                            
 emphasised and specific fields were identified. The third meeting of the                              
 Indo-Bulgarian Joint Commission for Economic, Scientific and Technical Cooperation                    
 was held in New Delhi in October 1976. A Protocol was initialled at the, end of the                   
 meeting and it was later signed on 18 November during the visit of the Bulgarian                      
 President to India. In the Protocol, both sides agreed to strengthen existing                         
 economic cooperation in the fields of agriculture and food processing, machine                        
 building and heavy industry, electronics, chemicals and pharmaceuticals, science                      
 and technology, and trade. Of particular interest, was the desire expressed by both                   
 sides to expand cooperation in the setting up of rural agro-industrial complexes in                   
 India with Bulgarian assistance.                                                                      
                                                                                                       
 The 7th meeting of the Indo-Czechoslovak Joint Committee for Economic, Trade,                         
 Scientific and Technical Cooperation was held in December 1976. In the subsequent                     
 Protocol, it was agreed to increase and diversify economic cooperation in the                         
 fields of trade exchanges, industrial cooperation, electronics and science and                        
 technology. Czechoslovakia expressed its desire for importing from India a number                     
 of heavy engineering goods. With Czechoslovak collaboration, the HMT will                             
 manufacture Z-5711 tractors in India. A team of Indian experts would visit                            
 Czechoslovakia to study possibilities of industrial cooperation and imports by                        
 India in certain identified areas such as textile industry, metallurgy, power-                        
 generation, ship-building, cement plant, etc. The two countries would also                            
 cooperate in joint ventures in third countries.                                                       
                                                                                                       
 Western Europe                                                                                        
                                                                                                       
 The second meeting of the Indo-Swedish Joint Commission was held in Stockholm in                      
 October 1976. Three Working Groups were set up on trade and tourism, industrial                       
 cooperation, and science and technology. Detailed discussions were held in the res-                   
 pective fields and efforts were made to identity areas wherein Indian exports to                      
 Sweden could be stepped up. The Working Group on                                                      
                                                                                                       
 pg80                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 Industrial Cooperation identified new product lines of coopera- tion, special                         
 emphasis being placed on agro-processing industries. As a new dimension to                            
 Indo-Swedish industrial cooperation, the possibility of Indian sub-contracting in                     
 Joint ventures in theird countries was considered good. In the field of science and                   
 techno- logy, progress on the three on-going projects on oil seed protein                             
 concentrates, enzyme engineering and detonics research were reviewed and 12                           
 additional areas of cooperation were identi- fied.                                                    
                                                                                                       
 The United States                                                                                     
                                                                                                       
 The scheduled meeting of the Indo-US Joint Commission, to be held in October in                       
 Washington, was postponed because of the US Presidential elections. However, the                      
 Sub-Commissions met as scheduled during the year. The Economic and Commercial                         
 Sub-Commission met in March 1976. It was preceded by the first meeting of the                         
 Indo-US Business Council which was held in Feb- ruary. Discussions centered round                     
 bilateral trade and coopera- tion as well as the general climate for multilateral                     
 economic cooperation. The sub-Commission on Education and Culture met in New York                     
 in May 1976. The meeting discussed the Indo- American Fellowship and Visitorship                      
 Programme in the context of the principles and levels of exchange, and certain                        
 guidelines were laid down Two seminars were organised by the Joint Museum                             
 Committee. An Indo-US Workshop on Solar and Wind Energy was held in New Delhi in                      
 August 1976.                                                                                          
                                                                                                       
 Indian Technical and Economic Cooperation Programme                                                   
                                                                                                       
 The ITEC Programme expanded considerably and the ex- penditure incurred during the                    
 year was estimated at Rs. 508 lakhs, as against Rs. 400 lakhs spent in the previous                   
 year. A country-wise break-up of Indian experts on deputation and foreign trainees                    
 undergoing training in India is given at Appen- dix VI. The Programme developed                       
 substantially and there was increasing demand in foreign countries for training                       
 facilities in                                                                                         
                                                                                                       
 pg81                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 India, including on self-financing basis. In some cases foreign trainees received                     
 funds from third countries. The number of Indian experts going abroad under direct                    
 contract showed a phenomenal increase in recent year. The Government of India                         
 evolved a uniform and regulated procedure for their recruitment which will                            
 safeguard both the interests of the experts and those of the receiving countries.                     
                                                                                                       
 Economic and Technical Cooperation                                                                    
                                                                                                       
 The volume of economic and technical cooperation between India and the developing                     
 as well as the developed countries appeared significant.                                              
                                                                                                       
 Asia                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 (i) India's neighbours                                                                                
                                                                                                       
 At the recent fourth meeting of the Indo-Afghan Joint Commission, satisfaction was                    
 expressed over the working of the Indian technical and economic assistance                            
 programme under which cooperation is being extended in various fields. During the                     
 Indo- Afghan Trade Review talks held in September 1976 it was agreed that there                       
 should be a growth of 18 per cent in trade dur- ing 1976-77, over the exchanges                       
 during 1974-75.                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
 A sum of Rs. 4.20 crores was assigned for the supply of commodities and equipment                     
 to Bangladesh under the existing government-to-government assistance programme. The                   
 Industrial Development Bank of India continued to extend some commer- cial credit                     
 for the supply of capital goods to Bangladesh. A sum of Rs. 20 lakhs was committed                    
 under the Indo-Bangladesh Cultu- ral Cooperation Agreement. The Indo-Bangladesh                       
 Trade Agree- ment of 1973 which expired on 27 September, 1976 was renewed for a                       
 further period of three years.                                                                        
                                                                                                       
 A Memorandum of Understanding was signed between the Governments of India and the                     
 Socialist Republic of the Union of Burma for the establishment of 16 Pilot Plants                     
 for the manu- facture of machine tools, chemicals, straw and hard board, food                         
                                                                                                       
 pg82                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 processing, etc. Linked training programmes were also organis- ed for the Burmese                     
 nominees. The Government of India assisted the Maldives in setting up a fish                          
 canning plant. Three Indian teachers and one Indian medical officer were deputed to                   
 work in the Maldives.                                                                                 
                                                                                                       
 Training was imparted to Sri Lanka nominees in the field of small scale industries.                   
 Arrangements are also underway to provide training facilities in hydropower                           
 generation, laboratory glassware industry and mica mining. Indian experts in sugar                    
 technology, mica mining and animal husbandry were deputed to Sri Lanka.                               
                                                                                                       
 (ii) East and South East Asia                                                                         
                                                                                                       
 Bilateral technical cooperation between India and Indonesia received added stimulus                   
 with the visit of a high-level official Indo- nesian delegation to India. Useful                      
 discussions were held during the visit. India responded to the wishes of Loas to                      
 share its technolo- gical experiences and affirmed its willingness to cooperate in                    
 that country's post-war reconstruction. Medicines and irrigation pumps were                           
 supplied to Loas under an emergency aid programme. Training facilities were                           
 extended in bicycle assembly and arti- ficial limbs' manufacture. The                                 
 Director-General of the Indian Council for Agricultural Research led a delegation                     
 to Hanoi in September-October 1976 to discuss matters relating to technical                           
 cooperation in the field of agriculture.                                                              
                                                                                                       
 A trade agreement was signed with Australia in August 1976, While formalising                         
 bilateral trade, it provided for a continuing forum for-identifying opportunities                     
 of increased economic and industrial cooperation between the two countries.                           
 Proposals for setting up joint ventures, including in third countries were consi-                     
 dered.                                                                                                
                                                                                                       
 pg83                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 (iii) West Asia and North Africa                                                                      
                                                                                                       
 In Iran the Indian commercial and parastatal organisations did well in the                            
 commercial field. Iran continued to recruit medical and paramedical personnel from                    
 India and 223 such experts were sent during the year.                                                 
                                                                                                       
 The Engineering Projects India Limited won contract for the setting up of a water                     
 filtration plant at Umm Qasr (Iraq) worth Rs. 12 crores, and a mechanical training                    
 workship, worth appro- ximately Rs. 10 crores. The Oil and Natural Gas Commission                     
 continued its exploratory work in surveying and drilling for petro- leum in Iraq.                     
 Rail India Technical and Economic Services (RITES) negotiated with the Iraqi                          
 Government for the construc- tion of a part of the Baghdad-Husaibah rail link.                        
 Various private Indian organisations also won contracts for civil construction and                    
 supply of industrial equipment to Iraq. During the visit of the Crown Prince of                       
 Jordan to India in November 1976, agreements on economic technical cooperation as                     
 well as science and technology were initialled between India and Jordan. These                        
 agreements covered exchanges of experts, training facilities, collaboration in the                    
 fields of industrial organi- sation and patents, development of tourism and the                       
 exchange of information on science and technology. Three economic dele- gations                       
 from Jordan visited India during the year.                                                            
                                                                                                       
 The Kuwait Fund for Arab Economic Development gave a loan of KD 15 million to                         
 assist in financing Kalinadi Hydro Electric Project (Stage 1) in Karnataka. The                       
 Engineering Projects India Limited secured a contract worth Rs. 230 crores, for the                   
 construction of 5,000 houses, together with ancillary structures, at Haldan,                          
 Kuwait. Two Indian firms obtained sub-contracts for thermal insulation and                            
 mechanical erection works connected with the expansion of Doha power plant.                           
                                                                                                       
 The Projects and Equipment Corporation won a turn-key pro- ject, worth Rs. 8                          
 crores, for the installation of transmission towers and lines in the UAE. The                         
 Engineering Construction Corporation                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 pg84                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 was awarded a sub-contract, worth Rs. 28 crores, for the civil works involved in                      
 the construction of the new Abu Dhabi Inter- nation airport. Gammons India Private                    
 Limited won a Rs. 32 crores sub-contract for the civil work involved in the                           
 construc- tion of the Sharjah lnternation airport. Private Indian entrepre- nuers                     
 also succeeded in a number of joint ventures in different parts of the UAE. The                       
 Indian Telephone Industries were awarded a Rs. 2 crore contract by Oman Telephones                    
 Company for the installation of a 3000 line telephone exchange.                                       
                                                                                                       
 An economic delegation from the PDRY visited India and it signed the first ever                       
 Indo-PDRY Cultural Exchange Programme. valid for a period of 2 years. This provided                   
 for various educational and training facilities in India for the PDRY nomi- nees,                     
 for exchange in the field or radio and television, and cultural troupes, and also                     
 for cooperation in the field of archaeo- logy. 30 University teachers from India                      
 were selected on direct contract basis by the PDRY Government for services ion the                    
 University of Aden. During the year, Somalia recruited 15 teachers and professors                     
 for Mogadishu University on a direct contract basis.                                                  
                                                                                                       
 The International Airport Authority of India won a contract for the construction of                   
 an airport at Ghat (Libya) for a value of about Rs. 38 crores. The Bharat Heavy                       
 Electricals Limited were awarded a contract of the value of Rs. 102 crores for the                    
 extension of Tripoli West power generating station. The National Building                             
 Construction Corporation and the Libyan National Housing Cor- poration formed a                       
 joint company to execute projects, parti- cularly in the construction of 1300                         
 housing units in Ben Walid and Ghat, a hospital in Ghat and also to provide experts                   
 and training facilities in India. Kamani Engineering Corporation won a contract of                    
 a total value of approximately Rs. 28 crores for the construction of 220 KV                           
 transmission lines.                                                                                   
                                                                                                       
 pg85                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 An economic delegation from Morocco visited India to dis- cuss the furthering of                      
 economic relations between the two count- ries. During the visit, it was agreed to                    
 examine the possibility of concluding, agreements on science and technology, and                      
 economic and technical cooperation.                                                                   
                                                                                                       
 Africa (South of the Sahara)                                                                          
                                                                                                       
 India and Kenya collaborated in various fields including deve- lopment of small                       
 scale and agro-based industries. During the visit of Uganda's Minister of Industry                    
 and Man- power in June 1976, a Memorandum of Understanding on Econo- mic, Technical                   
 and Scientific Cooperation was signed. It covered cooperation in setting up small                     
 and medium scale industries and rehabilitation of sugar and textile industries,                       
 power generation, minerals and other joint ventures. In September, a NIDC team                        
 visited Uganda for related surveys.                                                                   
                                                                                                       
 In April 1976, the Minister of State for Industry visited Tan- zania and signed a                     
 Memorandum of Understanding for providing consultancy services in setting up 52                       
 small scale industrial units in Tanzania. India gifted machinery and equipment for                    
 4 of these units under the ITEC Programme. In July 1976, the Special Assis- tant                      
 for Economic Affairs to the President of Tanzania visited India and signed a                          
 Memorandum of Understanding for coopera- tion in the fields of shipping and oil.                      
 About 250 Tanzanian nationals were under training at various institutes in India                      
 during the year. Indian experts were deputed to Tanzania to help in some                              
 development projects. India gifted machinery and equipment worth Rs. 10 crores for                    
 the Zanzibar Industrial Estate.                                                                       
                                                                                                       
 Academic and medical personnel were deputed to the Ethio- pian institutes, and                        
 Ethiopian nominees were provided training in handloom technology and                                  
 mass-communication media in India. A symbolic contribution of Rs. 50,000 was made                     
 towards the building of a University campus in Botswana. A team from Botswana                         
 visited India in October 1976 to recruit engineers, teachers, telecommunication                       
 experts, accountants, etc.                                                                            
                                                                                                       
 pg86                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 During the visit of the Foreign Minister of Lesotho to India in August 1976, an                       
 agreement on economic, technical and scien- tific cooperation was signed. Lesotho's                   
 Minister of Commerce and Industry visited India in October and held discussions                       
 with the Ministers of Industry, Tourism and Civil Aviation, as well as with NIDC,                     
 RITES and the Development Commissioner for Small Scale Industries. Scholarships                       
 were given to Lesotho nominees for various courses in India.                                          
                                                                                                       
 The Secretary-General of the Zambian National Council for Scientific Research                         
 visited India in September-October 1976. He visited the national laboratories, and                    
 industrial concerns in Bombay, Bangalore, Madras and Delhi and also interviewed                       
 scien- tists for recruitment. The Special Assistant to the President of Zambia came                   
 to India in November 1976 to study the working of small, medium and agro-based                        
 village industries. Several teams from Zambia visited India to recruit engineers,                     
 doctors and ac- countants for Zambian parastatal organizations. During the visit of                   
 the Deputy Minister of External Affairs to Mozambique, an agreement on scientific,                    
 technical and eco- nomic cooperation was signed. As a follow up, a delegation from                    
 Mozambique arrived in India in November 1976 to recruit doctors, teachers,                            
 accountants, civil engineers and experts in rail- ways, civil aviation and                            
 tele-communication.                                                                                   
                                                                                                       
 49 Indian experts are on deputation to Mauritius under the ITEC Programme and                         
 requests for 13 more are under considera- tion. The Mahatma Gandhi Institute was                      
 formally inaugurated during the Prime Minister's visit to Mauritius in October                        
 1976. A Rail India Technical and Economic Services team visited Ghana in May 1976                     
 at the invitation of the Government of Ghana to propose improvements in the railway                   
 system. An agreement to provide technical expertise was concluded and implemented.                    
                                                                                                       
 A three-member delegation from Cameroon visited India in September 1976 to study                      
 the progress made by India in different aspects of its economic development                           
 particularly in the field of small scale industries.                                                  
                                                                                                       
 pg87                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 India provided services of two experts from MECON to assess proposals received by                     
 Nigeria for setting up two 10-million ton direct reduction steel plants. In                           
 recognition of the excellent ser- vices rendered by MECON, the Nigerian Ministry of                   
 Industry appointed this organisation as their official consultants.                                   
                                                                                                       
 Latin America                                                                                         
                                                                                                       
 Economic and technical relations between India and the Latin American countries are                   
 of more recent origin. India signed four trade agreements, two agreements on                          
 science and techno- logy and one on cooperation in the peaceful uses of atomic                        
 energy with the Latin American countries. Efforts were made to establish joint                        
 ventures and particular success was achieved in Guyana. Delegations sponsored by                      
 the STC, FICCI, PEC, EEPC and the All India Manufacturers Organisa- tion had                          
 visited Latin American countries earlier and had identi- fied projects for which                      
 there were export potentials, such as railway equipment, bulk handling and mining                     
 equipment, cotton textile and sugar mill machinery, power distribution equipment,                     
 etc. An Indian Industrial Exhibition was organised in Brazil. SCI recently                            
 introduced services to Panama, Guyana, Trinidad, Jamaica, Barbados and Surinam.                       
 Talks have been held with the Argentine national shipping line ELMA on extending                      
 its service to Bombay.                                                                                
                                                                                                       
 Western Europe                                                                                        
                                                                                                       
 During the first half of 1976, in spite of world-wide reces- sion, India was able                     
 to increase exports to the EEC. However, the Indo-EEC exchanges in trade and                          
 industrial collaboration do not adequately reflect the economic potential. A Sugar                    
 Agreement was concluded for the supply of 25,000 tons per annum to the Community by                   
 India with price guarantees and supply conditions on par with the Sugar Protocol of                   
 the Lome Convention. Negotiations were concluded with the EEC for an agreement on                     
 trade in textile products. The decisions taken at                                                     
                                                                                                       
 pg88                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 the third session of the Indo-EEC Joint Commission were ins- trumental in                             
 establishing and strengthening business level con- tacts on a sectoral basis. There                   
 was now greater awareness in the Community about the potential of developing                          
 industrial cooperation with India and earlier reservations gave way to an agreement                   
 to take concrete action within the framework of the Indo-EEC Joint Commission.                        
                                                                                                       
 During the visit of the British Secretary of State for Trade to India in January                      
 1976, an agreement was signed to set up an Indo-British Joint Committee on Economic                   
 Cooperation and Trade in order to discuss issues of bilateral economic relations as                   
 well as industrial cooperation, technological collaboration and investment. The                       
 Committee met in London in June 1976 and reviewed a variety of industries which                       
 provided the possibility of further collaboration and long-term supply                                
 arrangements. During the first half of 1976, Indian exports to the FRG amounted to                    
 Rs. 139 crores, representing an increase of 63 per cent over the figures for the                      
 corresponding period in 1975. How- ever, in dealing with India's adverse balance of                   
 trade it is neces- sary to further improve our exports. There were encouraging                        
 prospects of further development in Indo-FRG cooperation. The agreement covering                      
 West German financial assistance for 1976-77 provides for an amount of DM 362                         
 million on favour- able terms. The FRG Minister for Economic Cooperation and a                        
 business delegation made useful visits to India.                                                      
                                                                                                       
 During the visit of the French Prime Minister to India in January 1976, the                           
 following three agreements were signed : an agreement on collaboration in the field                   
 of power generation and distribution; exchange of letters to raise the level of the                   
 Indo-- French Joint Committee on Economic and Technical Coopera- tion to                              
 Ministerial level; and an agreement on collaboration in the field of                                  
 tele-communication.                                                                                   
                                                                                                       
 In order to explore the possibilities of trade between India and Portugal, an                         
 Indian trade delegation visited that country                                                          
                                                                                                       
 pg89                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 in February 1976. In December, a Portuguese delegation, led by the Secretary of                       
 State for Foreign Trade and including rep- resentatives of the Ministries of                          
 Industry and Technology and Shipping, visited India. At the conclusion of the                         
 talks, a Trade, Economic, Industrial and Technological Agreement was ini- tialled.                    
                                                                                                       
 The first Indo-Spanish Joint Committee meeting was held in Madrid from 1 to 5 July                    
 1976. Wide ranging discussions with the Spanish authorities and private importers                     
 and exporters were held and ways and means of improving and diversifying trade                        
 exchanges between the two countries were studied. Agree- ment was also reached on                     
 industrial co-operation in ship-building and auxiliary industries, mining                             
 equipment, chemicals and phar- maceuticals, electrical components, railway                            
 equipments and auto- mobile ancillaries. Possibilities of joint ventures were also                    
 considered.                                                                                           
                                                                                                       
 During the visit of the Minister of External Affairs to Turkey (March-April 1976),                    
 an agreement on cooperation in the field of science and technology was signed. A                      
 Joint Committee has already been established under the Indo-Turkish Trade Agree-                      
 ment of September 1973.                                                                               
                                                                                                       
 The United States                                                                                     
                                                                                                       
 There was growing realisation in the USA that Indian public and private sector                        
 engineering firms can offer effective assistance to US contracting firms either as                    
 partners in joint ventures or as sub-contractors by providing design-engineering                      
 and skilled and semi-skilled manpower in addition to quality construction                             
 materials, fabricated items and equipment at very attractive rates. Several items                     
 of interest to India did not find a place in the GSP. Exports of cotton textile                       
 were hampered because of quotas, and tariff and non-tariff barriers. The first                        
 meeting of the Indo-US Joint Business Council in February 1976 in New Delhi                           
 resulted in useful dialogue. Both sides felt that more frequent direct contacts                       
 between the business communities of the two countries were called for.                                
                                                                                                       
 pg90                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 Apr 03, 1976                                                                                          
                                                                                 Top                   
 External Publicity                                                                                    
 CHAPTER X                                                                                             
                                                                                                       
 EXTERNAL PUBLICITY The External Publicity Division continued to work for pro-                         
 moting a correct understanding and appreciation of develop- ments within the                          
 country and of India's foreign policy. This called for close contacts with Indian                     
 and foreign press and with various Ministries and Departments of the Government. It                   
 also involved production and supply of books, films, photographs, articles,                           
 pamphlets and exhibition material to Indian Missions for utilization in connection                    
 with their publicity efforts.                                                                         
                                                                                                       
 The international media showed keen interest in India's domestic and foreign                          
 policies, particularly in the several positive developments in the country's                          
 external relations with the imme- diately neighbouring countries. Advantage was                       
 taken of this in- terest to project to the media publicity material in the form of                    
 telegraphic despatches, radio transmissions, pamphlets and other publications                         
 produced in India. Continuous efforts were made both at headquarters and though                       
 Indian Missions to project the policies and activities of the Government of India.                    
 In addition, the Joint Secretary for External Publicity, in his capacity as the                       
 official spokesman, held regular briefings for Press correspondents in Delhi.                         
 Meetings were also arranged between foreign corres- pondents and                                      
 Ministers/Secretaries of some other Ministries to enable the correspondents to get                    
 an authoritative and correct view of the activities of those Ministries. There was,                   
 however, a divergence in assessment of developments in the country between several                    
 of these foreign correspondents and the Government and external censorship was                        
 imposed for some months. This was, how- ever, lifted some time in the middle of                       
 1976.                                                                                                 
                                                                                                       
 The Indian Missions made efforts to project a correct image of India and its                          
 policies through TV/Radio interviews, speaking engagements and suitable contacts                      
 with representatives of the                                                                           
                                                                                                       
 pg91                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 press, intellectuals, political leaders and others. The External Publicity Division                   
 rendered assistance to the Missions through supply of appropriate publicity                           
 literature in Indian and other languages. The Ministry's regular publicity work                       
 continued under the following heads.                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 Press Relations                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
 The Press Relations section catered to the need's of 73 visiting journalists and 48                   
 television teams. It also provided assistance to 18 Indian journalists going                          
 overseas on professional visits, some on Cultural Exchange Programmes. Fifteen                        
 forign journalists visited India as guests of the Government of India. In addition                    
 to the Press releases put out in cooperation with the Press Information Bureau, the                   
 Division also issued 230 press releases on various subjects, material for which was                   
 generally supplied by Indian Missions and the Territorial Divisions of the                            
 Ministry. Representatives of mass media, both Indian and foreign, made use of these                   
 releases, as well as of the transmission unit of the Division and All India Radio.                    
                                                                                                       
 The Transmission Unit regularly sent out two newscasts per day to Indian Missions.                    
 These conveyed information on all deve- lopments taking place in India, with                          
 particular stress on those which were engaging the attention of the world press.                      
 Items in- cluded not only matter requiring immediate publicity, but also background                   
 information on various issues.                                                                        
                                                                                                       
 Audio Visual Publicity                                                                                
                                                                                                       
 India participated in 28 film festivals/film weeks with some selected feature and                     
 documentary films. These took place in Ankara, Port Louis, Tehran, Ottawa, Karlovy                    
 Vary, Accra, Buenos Aires, Cannes, Tashkent, Tunis, Cairo, Santiago, Brasilia,                        
 Kinshasa, Pusan, Bangkok, Shiraz, Manila, Panama, Sofia, Chi- cago, Ulan Bator,                       
 Belgrade, Moscow, Berlin and Melbourne. In                                                            
                                                                                                       
 pg92                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 most cases films were obtained in cooperation with the Ministry of Information and                    
 Broadcasting. Special compilation films were produced on the President of                             
 Tanzania's visit to India and the Prime Minister's visit to the Soviet Union. Six                     
 prints in Swahili and English on the former visit were presented to the Tanzanian                     
 Government. Seven prints of documentary films, on small-scale industries were also                    
 presented to the Tanzanian Government.                                                                
                                                                                                       
 The following audio-visual equipment was sanctioned                                                   
                                                                                                       
 (i) 16 mm film projectors for Missions at Bonn, Cairo, Lisbon, Laos, Lima,                            
 Dar-es-Salaam, Tananarive, Peking and Pyongyang. A 16 mm India-made projec- tor for                   
 presentation to the Rabindarnath Tagore School in Mexico through the Mission there.                   
                                                                                                       
 (ii) Cinema van for the Mission in Bangkok.                                                           
                                                                                                       
 (iii) Radio Receiving set for the Mission in Dar-es-Salaam.                                           
                                                                                                       
 (iv) Tape-recorder for Indian Missions at Addis Ababa and Warsaw.                                     
                                                                                                       
 (v) One stereo-electrophone for the Mission at Dacca. Over 100 gramophone records                     
 of Indian classical, vocal, instrumental and popular film music were supplied to                      
 different Missions.                                                                                   
                                                                                                       
 Over 40,000 photographs including about 3,000 in big size on various                                  
 subjects-developmental activities, tourism, visits of VIPs, etc.-and 317 colour                       
 slides depicting Indian progress in heavy industry were sent to Indian Missions.                      
                                                                                                       
 Exhibition and Cultural Work                                                                          
                                                                                                       
 For putting up exhibitions in Ottawa, Damascus, Rangoon, Suva, Kinshasa,                              
 Copenhagen, The Hague, Paris, Vientiane, Lima and Kathmandu, Indian Missions/Posts                    
 in these places were sup- plied with photographs, album pages and postal stamps,                      
 books,                                                                                                
                                                                                                       
 pg93                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 ourist folders, black and white positives, artistic repro- ductions, and other                        
 relevant publicity material. Many Missions were also assisted in organising                           
 Children's Day Painting Compe- tition on 14 November.                                                 
                                                                                                       
 Print Publicity                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
 The production of attractive publicity material was stepped up at Headquarters and                    
 in the Missions for appropriate distribu- tion. A illustrated book "India :                           
 Portrait of People" received wide acclaim for its artistic excellence and                             
 effectiveness in pro- jecting a correct and balanced image of India. Another                          
 effective publication "India--Questions and Answers" intially brought out in                          
 English was subsequently produced in French, Spanish, German and Arabic. A book                       
 entitled "United States and India", to mark the bicentennial of the United States,                    
 made a favour- able publicity impact in that country. Special publicity literature                    
 in English on "Islamic Treasures in India" and "Industrial Prog- ress in India" and                   
 in French on "India and the African Libera- tion Struggle" was produced for wide                      
 distribution. Besides these, a number of other pamphlets were brought out by the                      
 Division and material provided for the production of pamphlets through the Ministry                   
 of Information and Broadcasting. Notable among these were pamphlets produced on the                   
 occasion of the visit of the Prime Minister to the Soviet Union and on the visit of                   
 President Kaunda of Zambia to India. A Pamphlet "India-An Introduction" was                           
 produced in French and another "Bharat" in Bengali. Two pamphlets explaining, in a                    
 compre- hensive manner, the correct position on the "Farakka Question" were                           
 published in different languages for wide distribution.                                               
                                                                                                       
 The production of regular publicity material at Headquarters included "Foreign                        
 Affairs Record" (Monthly), "Indian and Foreign Review" (Fortnightly) and "Courrier                    
 de L'Inde" (Fort- nightly in French). Steps were initiated to further improve the                     
 format and contents of "Courrier de L'Inde" to bring it on par with its English                       
 counterpart "Indian and Foreign Review" which received a National Award for                           
 excellence in publication. Besides                                                                    
                                                                                                       
 pg94                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 these, attractive publications in Russian, Arabic, Spanish, Swahili and Bengali                       
 were produced by some of the Indian Missions con- cerned. Pamphlets in Thai, on                       
 different aspects of India, were produced by the Missions concerned for                               
 distribution in the appro- priate area.                                                               
                                                                                                       
 The Division also distributed through Indian Missions over 1 00,000 phamplets on                      
 the various facets of the country's national life. These were procured from DAVP,                     
 Publications Division, ITDC and the Ministry of Health and Family Planning.                           
                                                                                                       
 About 200 articles on socioeconomic progress in India were supplied to the Missions                   
 for use in their weekly/fortnightly/ monthly bulletins/press releases etc.                            
                                                                                                       
 About 4,000 books on Indian history, philosophy, religion, art, culture and recent                    
 developments were supplied to Indian Missions for their libraries and for                             
 presentation to local nationals. Indian Missions were also supplied more than 100                     
 newspapers/ periodicals for their reading rooms and for distribution. About 150                       
 books were sent to the Mission in Bucharest for presentation to the President. In                     
 addition, maps of India, Tourist pamphlets, special issues of leading Indian                          
 journals were also supplied.                                                                          
                                                                                                       
 A large number of enquiries by foreign scholars and general public on various                         
 aspects of the Indian history, economy and other aspects were attended to and                         
 material collected from various sources to help them.                                                 
                                                                                                       
 pg95                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 Jan 01, 1976                                                                                          
                                                                                 Top                   
 Cultural Relations                                                                                    
 CHAPTER XI                                                                                            
                                                                                                       
 CULTURAL RELATIONS The Indian Council for Cultural Relations remained engaged in                      
 the twin task of promoting and interpreting abroad Indian Culture in its widest                       
 sense as well as in establishing, reviving and strengthening cultural ties between                    
 India and other countries. This was done through a variety of activities such as                      
 sponsoring the exchange of scholars, writers, artists and youth delegations,                          
 organizing lectures, film festivals and exhibitions, and carrying on the                              
 publication and book-presentation programmes.                                                         
                                                                                                       
 During the period under review, the Council looked after 70 distinguished visitors                    
 from abroad. Similarly, the Council sent out 35 Indian scholars, writers, artistes,                   
 etc. to foreign countries on goodwill-cum-lecture tours. As an annual feature,                        
 cultural troupes were sent for Indepen- dence Day celebrations to Afghanistan,                        
 Bhutan, Nepal, Iran, Mauritius and Seychelles. Besides, the Council also sent :                       
                                                                                                       
 (i) a delegation of scholars and performing artists to U.K. to participate in the                     
 Tagore Symposium and Festival at Dartington Hall, (ii) Kathak dancer Sitara Devi                      
 and her troupe and the Bharat Natyam Dancers Dhananjyans to U.S.A., (iii) the                         
 Darpana Puppet troupe to the Milan Fair and (iv) folk dancers and singers to U.S.A.                   
 in connection with the bi-centennial cele- brations.                                                  
                                                                                                       
 The Council organized some fine exhibitions within India in collaboration with some                   
 of the local Embassies and institutions which were as follows : (i) Photographic                      
 exhibition of Miche- langelo's works; (ii) Modern Porcelain and Glass Works from                      
 G.D.R.; (iii) Modem Slovak Graphic Art from Czechoslovakia;                                           
                                                                                                       
 pg96                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 (iv) Tapestry from U.S.S.R.; (v) African arts and crafts; (vi) Engraving from maps                    
 and scene of Rome called 'Romeographica'; (vii) Toys comprising dolls, plush                          
 animals, electric train, dolls' houses and children books from G.D.R. The Council                     
 sent 28 paintings of 8 young Indian artists to Menton Biennale and also                               
 participated in the Biennale at Cagnes-Sur-Ner (France). Other significant                            
 participations of this period were sending an exhibition of Urdu and English                          
 language books to the Pakistani book fair, sending of 50 reproductions of Indian                      
 painting from Ajanta to Modern Times to Zaire and 30 paintings by children between                    
 7 and 16 years of age to Hungary to participate in the International Children's                       
 Competition.                                                                                          
                                                                                                       
 The Jawaharlal Nehru Award for International Understand- ing for the year 1974 was                    
 presented to Dr. Raul Prebisch at a formal ceremony held at Vigyan Bhavan on Apr                      
 26, 1976. The Jury of the Award also announced the names of the reci- pients of the                   
 Award for 1975 and 1976. They are Dr. Jonas Salk, an eminent scientist of U.S.A.                      
 and Dr. Guiseppe Tucci an eminent Indologist of Italy, respectively. The Award was                    
 presented to Dr. Jonas Salk on 10 January 1977. Council organised a festival of                       
 French film., in Delhi, Madras and Pondicherry during the period under review.                        
                                                                                                       
 A number of music and dance performances were organised by the Council at Azad                        
 Bhavan in collaboration with other cul- tural organisations. Mention may be made of                   
 performances of Kuchipudi dance by Swapan Sundari, concerts by the Brown                              
 University, Helsinki University chorus, concerts by George Neerwein and the Bombay                    
 Chamber Orchestra, Piano recital by Edith Peinemann and Helmut Berth, Barmberg                        
 Woodwind Quintet, Swiss Chamber ballet etc. The Council also organised a fortnight                    
 long Indo-German festival in Calcutta, during March 1976. The programmes included                     
 dance, recital, film-shows, dramas, exhibition of sculpture and drawings etc.                         
                                                                                                       
 pg97                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 Ambassador Joe Appiah of Ghana delivered the Azad Memo- rial Lecture on "The Role                     
 of Democracy and Law in Develop- ing Societies" on 20 February 1976. An Indo-German                   
 Seminar on education systems in the two countries and questions relating to foreign                   
 students and Indo-FRG cooperation in the fields of higher education, scientific                       
 research and technology was orga- nised by the Council in November 1976.                              
                                                                                                       
 The Council is actively involved in the welfare of foreign students studying in                       
 India. Because of growing demand, this year, the Council organised six summer camps                   
 in Kashmir, Darjeeling and South India and a number of study tours to various parts                   
 of the country. Similarly, the Council arranged orientation programmes for foreign                    
 students, school teachers and professors who come to India. The Council also                          
 organized the "Experience India 1976" project.                                                        
                                                                                                       
 Another important activity of the Council was to look after delegations of foreign                    
 youth from abroad under the exchange of youth delegations programme. During                           
 October-November, two such delegations, a delegation of 5 Mexican youths and                          
 another 50-member youth delegation from over 30 countries, visited India under the                    
 auspices of the Council. The Indian Centre of Africa of the Council continued to                      
 function for the benefit of students and scholars interested in African affairs.                      
 The Centre organised in collaboration with various African associations a number of                   
 functions to celebrate the national days of African countries.                                        
                                                                                                       
 The documents relating to the standing instructions were signed by the Foreign                        
 Secretary and the Director General of the British Council regarding the management                    
 of the British Council's establishments outside Consular towns within India by the                    
 ICCR for the next five years.                                                                         
                                                                                                       
 pg98                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 Similarly, a Memorandum of Understanding was signed by the Soviet Embassy and the                     
 Council for the running of the House of Soviet Culture at Trivandrum by the ICCR.                     
 The other general activities of the Council during the period under review were as                    
 follows :                                                                                             
                                                                                                       
 (i) Maintenance of Chairs of Indian Studies in Poland, Afghanistan, G.D.R.,                           
 Yugoslavia, Romania, Guyana Senegal, Bulgaria, Mexico, Indonesia, and Trinidad.                       
                                                                                                       
 (ii) Under the presentation programme, books and ob- jects of art were sent to                        
 universities and institutions in the following countries : Afghanistan, Austria,                      
 Bulgaria, Fiji, U.S.A., Switzerland, Hungary, Mauri- tius Philippines, Guyana,                        
 Indonesia, Mexico, Malaysia, Japan, Algeria, Oman, Belgium.                                           
                                                                                                       
 (iii) Maintenance of Indian Cultural Centres in Fiji, Guyana, San Francisco, and                      
 teachers of Indian music and dance in Afghanistan, Mauritius and Trinidad.                            
                                                                                                       
 (iv) Organising essay competitions in foreign countries.                                              
                                                                                                       
 (v) Participation in the international Koran reading com- petition held annually in                   
 Kaula Lumpur. The scheme of nominating self-financing foreign students from                           
 developing countries of Asia and Africa in medical and engineer- ing seats was                        
 continued during this year. The selection from among the applicants is done,                          
 primarily on the basis of merit, by a Selec- tion Committee.                                          
                                                                                                       
 During 1976, admissions of 303 foreign students (excluding students from Nepal &                      
 Bhutan) to Engineering and Medical courses were arranged as against 250 (excluding                    
 students from Nepal & Bhutan) during 1975. Out of these, 229 were for engi- neering                   
 and 74 for medical courses. Countrywise breakup is given at Appendix VII.                             
                                                                                                       
 pg99                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 Apr 26, 1976                                                                                          
                                                                                 Top                   
 Protocol Matters                                                                                      
 CHAPTER XII                                                                                           
                                                                                                       
 PROTOCOL MATTERS One of the noteworthy developments which which took place during                     
 1976-77 in the context of India's relations with its neigh- bours was the                             
 resumption of diplomatic relations between India and Pakistan. H. E. Mr. S. Fida                      
 Hassan, Ambassador of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, presented his credentials                     
 to the President on Jul 24, 1976.                                                                     
                                                                                                       
 Diplomatic relations between China and India were restored at the ambassadorial                       
 level during this period. H. E. Mr. Chan Chao-Yuan became Ambassador of the                           
 People's Republic of Chinna with effect from 20 September 1976. Three countries                       
 nominated their first Ambassadors to India in this period. His Excellency Mr.                         
 Mohammed Ibrahim Egal, Ambassador of the Somali Democratic Republic, assumed charge                   
 on 23 July 1976, while His Excellency Mr. Ahmed Rageb Fitur and His Excellency Mr.                    
 Petur Thorsteinsson, Ambassadors of the Libyan Arab Republic and Iceland, took up                     
 their posts on 15 and 20 November 1976, respectively. The envoy of Iceland will be                    
 resident at Reykjavik (Iceland).                                                                      
                                                                                                       
 As a result of the decision to re-establish diplomatic relations between Portugal                     
 and India at Ambassadorial level, His Excel- lency Dr. Luis Gaspar da Silva, who                      
 was appointed Ambassador of Portugal, presented his credentials on 19 July 1976.                      
 Following the reunification of North and South Vietnams their Embassies in India                      
 merged to become the Embassy of the Social- ist Republic of Vietnam. His Excellency                   
 Mr. Nguyen Van Sinh, the former Ambassador of the Republic of South Vietnam, took                     
 over as, the first Ambassador of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam.                                   
                                                                                                       
 pg100                                                                                                 
                                                                                                       
 Jul 24, 1976                                                                                          
                                                                                 Top                   
 Passport, Visa And Consular Services                                                                  
 CHAPTER XIII                                                                                          
                                                                                                       
 PASSPORT, VISA AND CONSULAR SERVICES The year 1976 witnessed a 50 per cent                            
 increase, over the previous year, in the number of passport applications received                     
 by the Regional Passport Offices in India.                                                            
        Year  Passport applications received.                                                          
                                                                                                       
        1974                     3,47,449                                                              
        1975                     4,72,324                                                              
        1976                     7,02,840                                                              
 The increase is mainly attributable to the increasing employ- ment opportunities in                   
 the Gulf region. During the year, the Regional Passport Office, Madras, was                           
 bifurcated and a separate Regional Passport Office was opened by Shri Bipinpal Das,                   
 Deputy Minister, in Hyderabad on Sep 15, 1976. The total sanctioned strength of the                   
 Central Passport and Emigration Organisation at the end of 1976 was as follows:                       
                                                                                                       
       Regional Passport Officers           --          9                                              
       Assistant Passport Officers          --         10                                              
       Public Relation Officers             --         11                                              
       Superintendents/Protectors of                                                                   
       Emigrants                            --         24                                              
       Non-gazetted clerical staff          --        422                                              
       Class III (Non-clerical Jeep                                                                    
       Drivers                              --          2                                              
       Class IV Staff-Record sorters,                                                                  
       Daftry, Gestetner Operators,                                                                    
       Watchmen, Sweepers, Peons,                                                                      
       Messengers and Farash.               --        125                                              
                                                                                                       
       TOTAL                                          603                                              
 pg101                                                                                                 
                                                                                                       
 One of the highlights of the year was the Conference of the Regional Passport                         
 Officers in New Delhi between 21 and 24 September 1976. Alongwith the officials of                    
 the Ministry of External Affairs and the Regional Passport Officers, the Confer-                      
 ence was also attended by officials of the various Ministries and Departments of                      
 the Government of India dealing with passport and emigration matters. The                             
 Conference provided an opportunity to the Passport Officers to discuss, in view of                    
 the increase in workload, the problems of simplifying procedures, staffing and                        
 organisation so that the public is provided with an efficient, prompt and courteous                   
 service. Following the Conference, the Ministry of External Affairs are examining                     
 measures to improve systems in order to assist the Rigional Passport Offices in                       
 renter- ing better service to the public. The Ministry has also taken up the                          
 question of amending the Passports Act, 1967, in the light of recommendations made                    
 a the Conference.                                                                                     
                                                                                                       
 During the year, Indian firms participated in increasing numbers in development                       
 projects in the Gulf region and Africa. With this increasing participation which                      
 has involved the tem- porary emigration, in large numbers, of Indian workers                          
 abroad, it became necessary to ensure their protection as also to hasten up the                       
 process of granting passports to them. Suitable steps were taken to liberalise the                    
 procedures involved in the issue of passports to Indian workers going abroad, as                      
 also to simplify existing emigration formalities. The Ministry of Labour wag made                     
 the focal point for the recruitment and despatch of skilled, unskilled and                            
 semi-skilled workers abroad and for the licensing of Indian recruiting agents. As a                   
 consequential step, the Emigration Act, 1922, is shortly to be amended suitably.                      
                                                                                                       
 As more and more Indian firms participate in projects abroad, it has become                           
 necessary for Indian Missions to know more about their activities so that they can                    
 protect adequately the interests of Indian workers abroad and monitor the progress                    
 of the various projects. With this end in view, the Indian Missions have been                         
 requested to collect, on a continuing basis, facts relating to Indian participation                   
 in projects abroad.                                                                                   
                                                                                                       
 pg102                                                                                                 
                                                                                                       
 The number of ordinary, diplomatic and official passports issued or serviced, and                     
 other miscellaneous services rendered during the year 1976, is given below (1975                      
 figures in brackets)                                                                                  
 Ordinary passports:           5,73,527  (4,52,437)                                                    
 Diplomatic passports:           941          (800)                                                    
 Official passports:            4,469      (3,031)                                                     
 Miscellaneous services                                                                                
 rendered on passports:        92,577    (1,04,212)                                                    
 Diplomatic and Official                                                                               
 passports services:           2,615       (2,264)                                                     
 The number of visas                                                                                   
 issued to foreigners                                                                                  
 (diplomats and other                                                                                  
 staff of foreign                                                                                      
 Missions in India):         3,473        (3,043)                                                      
 The revenue earned by the Regional Passport Offices register- ed a significant                        
 increase during the year. In 1975, it was Rs. 162 lakhs, while in 1976, it was Rs.                    
 213 lakhs. The corresponding figures for expenditure were Rs. 58 lakhs in 1975 and                    
 Rs. 61 lakhs in 1976, yielding a surplus of Rs. 104 lakhs in 1975 and Rs. 152 lakhs                   
 in 1976.                                                                                              
                                                                                                       
 Consular Section coordinates Consular functions of Indian Missions abroad. Besides                    
 extending financial assistance to 34 stranded Indians abroad, 179 destitude Indians                   
 were repatriated to India. 47 cases of arrests and deportation were dealt with. 233                   
 requests for the registration of persons as Indian citizens were processed in                         
 consultation with the Ministry of Home Affairs. 55 cases of deaths of Indians                         
 abroad alongwith 48 cases of estates of deceased Indians were looked into. Apart                      
 from looking after the interests of Indians abroad, in general, foreign Missions in                   
 India were also assisted in tracing the whereabout of missing foreigners in India;                    
 in the disposal of dead bodies of foreigners and their estates. 120 requests from                     
 foreign missions in India for verifying various documents originating in India were                   
 enter- tained. 36,356 judicial, commercial and educational documents were                             
 authenticated to facilitate their production abroad.                                                  
                                                                                                       
 pg103                                                                                                 
                                                                                                       
 Sep 15, 1976                                                                                          
                                                                                 Top                   
 Administration And Organisation                                                                       
 CHAPTER XIV                                                                                           
                                                                                                       
 ADMINISTRATION AND ORGANISATION                                                                       
                                                                                                       
 Shri Y. B. Chavan and Shri Bipinpal Das respectively the Minister and Deputy                          
 Minister of External Affairs relinquished charge on Mar 28, 1977 because of the                       
 change in government following the results of the general elections. Shri Atal                        
 Bihari Vajpayee assumed charge as Minister of External Affairs the same day. Shri                     
 G. Parthasarathi continued as Chairman, Policy Planning, with the status of Cabinet                   
 Minister up to 26 March 1977.                                                                         
                                                                                                       
 During the year, there were several changes at the level of Additional Secretary                      
 and above. On the retirement of Shri Kewal Singh, Shri J. S. Mehta, Secretary                         
 (East), assumed charge as Foreign Secretary from 1 April 1976. From the same day,                     
 Shri M. A. Vellodi, who was on deputation with the Department of Space, took over                     
 as Secretary (East). On the retirement of Shri B. K. Sanyal, Shri V. K. Ahuja                         
 assumed charge as Secretary (Economic Relations) from 1 June 1976. Sarvashri K. L.                    
 Dalal, J. C. Ajmani and Thomas Abraham assumed charge as Additional Secretary from                    
 1 April, 1 April and 1 June 1976 respectively. Shri Ajmani relinquished charge on 8                   
 February 1977 and Shri Romesh Bbandari took over as Additional Secretary with                         
 effect from the same date.                                                                            
                                                                                                       
 During the year under review, 20 officers were on deputation to other                                 
 Ministries/Departments and International Organisations.                                               
                                                                                                       
 The Foreign Service needs to reassess priorities continuously, taking into account                    
 changes in the international scene and the fresh requirements, in consequence, of                     
 diplomatic activity. Re- cognising these considerations, and as part of the process                   
 requir- ed by the, Cadre Rules, review of the IFS cadre was completed                                 
                                                                                                       
 pg104                                                                                                 
                                                                                                       
 during the year and the recommendations made by the Cadre Re- view Committee were                     
 approved. A separate Interpreters' Cadre is also being constituted in the                             
 functional interests of the Ministry. The Headquarters, of the Ministry was                           
 organised in 19 Divi- sions (of which five are specialist Divisions) with a total                     
 strength of 521 officers and 1754 non-gazetted staff. There were 129 resi- dent                       
 Missions/Posts abroad (including five Special Offices com- prising the                                
 Representative in Bhutan, Permanent Representatives to the U.N. in New York and                       
 Geneva, Ambassadorial Missions to E.E.C. and European Coal & Steel Community, and                     
 P.M.I. to International Organisation in Vienna) with a total strength of 619                          
 Diplomatic Officers and 2470 non-diplomatic Staff, including local employees. India                   
 has concurrent representation in 49 coun- tries. Thus, with resident and concurrent                   
 accreditation as above, India was represented in most of the countries in the                         
 world.                                                                                                
                                                                                                       
 Embassies in Islamabad and Male (Maldives) under the charge of a Resident                             
 Ambassador and C.D.A. respectively were opened during the year. A Consulate General                   
 in Chicago (U.S.A.) was established during the year. The Consulate General in Ho-                     
 Chi-Minh City (formerly Saigon) closed down with effect from 31 July 1976. The year                   
 witnessed two major reforms in the field of Finance and Accounts. The Internal                        
 Finance and Associate Finance of the Ministry were integrated with effect from I                      
 June 1976. The scheme of departmentalisation of accounts was introduced in the                        
 Ministry with effect from I October 1976, thereby relieving the Comptroller and                       
 Auditor General of the responsibilities for com- piling the accounts of the                           
 Ministry of External Affairs.                                                                         
                                                                                                       
 This is the second year of the working of the Supply Wings, High Commission of                        
 India, London and Embassy of India, Wash- ington, after the transfer of their                         
 administrative and budgetary con- trol from the Department of Supply to the                           
 Ministry of External Affairs. A number of steps with accent on functional                             
 efficiency and economy were taken during the period to streamline their                               
 functioning.                                                                                          
                                                                                                       
 pg105                                                                                                 
                                                                                                       
 The expenditure of the Ministry during the financial year, 1976-77 is estimated to                    
 be of the order of Rs. 107,69.69 lakhs (excluding loans to Bangladesh and Bhutan                      
 amounting to Rs. 10,75.00 lakhs), details of which are given below:-                                  
                                                                                 Top                   
                                              R.E. 1976-77                                             
                                              Rs. in lakhs                                             
                                                                                                       
 Headquarters                                      512.81                                              
 Missions/Posts abroad                            2232.95                                              
 Supply Wings                                      137.65                                              
                                                                                                       
 Other Items:                                                                                          
                                                                                                       
 Contribution to the U.N., Commonwealth                                                                
 Secretariat and other International Insti-                                                            
   tutions                                        395.75                                               
 Central Passport and Emigration Organisa-                                                             
   tion                                            87.62                                               
 Other Miscellaneous Items                       3012.15                                               
                                                                                                       
 Subsidies and Aid:                                                                                    
                                                                                                       
 Subsidy to Bhutan                               2347.50                                               
 Aid to Nepal                                    1056.44                                               
 Aid to other developing countries in Asia                                                             
   and Africa                                     650.00                                               
 Aid to Bangladesh                               288.17                                                
                                                                                                       
 Social Security & Welfare                        48.65                                                
                                                                                                       
                           Total               10769.69                                                
 Details of sub-head wise expenditure on Headquarters, Mis- sions/Posts abroad and                     
 on External Publicity are given in Appen- dix VIII.                                                   
                                                                                                       
 pg106                                                                                                 
                                                                                                       
 Economy was the over-riding consideration of the Ministry's organisation and                          
 administration, and the imperative need for the optimum use of resources led to                       
 special efforts on the part of the Ministry to contain expenditure and increase                       
 output. The Minis- try's functioning both at home and abroad was, accordingly,                        
 close ly reviewed. However, due to inflationary trends, an increase in outlay was                     
 unavoidable in respect of foreign allowances, rents and salaries of local                             
 employees. This increase was partly offset by effecting economies in other spheres.                   
                                                                                                       
 During the year, the Foreign Service Inspectors carried out inspections of Indian                     
 Missions in Colombo, Thimpu and Male. While constantly trying to meet the genuine                     
 demands of our per- sonnel abroad, effective vigil is kept on a continuing basis to                   
 maintain economy and austerity. Special measures continue to be taken by the                          
 Ministry to streamline administration by rationalising the work methods.                              
                                                                                                       
 The Parliamentary Committee on the Welfare of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes                   
 examined the subject of Reservations for, and employment of, Scheduled Castes and                     
 Scheduled Tribes in the Ministry of External Affairs, its attached and subordinate                    
 offices, including Indian Missions abroad. Oral evidence was tendered before the                      
 Committee on 27 September 1976. Exhaustive material and extensive data on the                         
 subject were provided to the Committee to enable it to examine the implementation                     
 of reserva- tion orders by the Ministry.                                                              
                                                                                                       
 In the context of world-wide escalation of rents, the Ministry decided to acquire                     
 buildings abroad for providing office accommo- dation and residences for Heads of                     
 Mission and staff. During the year, the Ministry spent nearly Rs.1 crore to acquire                   
 property abroad, and bought office-cum-residence of Consulate General in Medan                        
 (Indonesia), High Commissioner's residence in Kings- ton (Jamaica), Chancery                          
 building in Mexico, High Commissio- ner's residence and residences for two officers                   
 in Lusaka (Zambia). Construction of the Chancery buildings in Bangkok and Lusaka                      
 are expected to commence soon. The Ministry own Chancery                                              
                                                                                                       
 pg107                                                                                                 
                                                                                                       
 buildings in 14 countries, residences of Heads of Mission in 58 countries and                         
 residences for staff personnel in 11 countries and Chanceries-cum-residences in 3                     
 countries. The Welfare Unit of the Ministry continued to look after the general                       
 welfare of all the officials serving at Headquarters and Missions abroad.                             
 Assistance was rendered to large number of officials in arranging admissions of                       
 their children in educational institutions.                                                           
                                                                                                       
 Financial assistance out of the Staff Benefit Fund was provid- ed to the bereaved                     
 families of officials, and to other officials in cases of prolonged illness.                          
 Employment opportunities were also provided to the direct dependants of the                           
 deceased officials.                                                                                   
                                                                                                       
 The Departmental Canteen was inaugurated by the Deputy Minister on 13 April 1976.                     
 Hindi is being progressively used in the official work of the, Ministry, the                          
 Regional Passport Offices and Indian Missions abroad. Instructions of the Ministry                    
 of Home Affairs relating to the use of Hindi for official purposes were implemented                   
 and re- mained under periodical review by the Official Language Imple- mentation                      
 Committee. Under the 'Scheme for the Propagation of Hindi Abroad', Hindi books,                       
 charts, linguaphone records and other teaching aids are supplied to Indian Missions                   
 abroad to enable them to cater to the needs of the people of Indian origin, as also                   
 foreigners, who wish to learn Hindi.                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 The Second World Hindi Convention was held in Mauritius from 28 to 30 August 1976.                    
 Delegates from a large number of countries attended the Convention. The Indian                        
 delegation com- prising 25 non-officials and 6 official members was led by Dr.                        
 Karan Singh, Minister for Health and Family Planning. The Sub-Committee of Kendriya                   
 Hindi Samiti in the Ministry of External Affairs has decided to honour foreign                        
 Hindi writers and literatures as a means of rewarding and encouragement for use of                    
 Hindi and an Award Committee has been constituted for this purpose.                                   
                                                                                                       
 pg108                                                                                                 
                                                                                                       
 Mar 28, 1977                                                                                          
 Appendix I Major International Conferences/Meetings/Seminars                                          
 APPENDIX I                                                                                            
                                                                                                       
 Major International Conferences/Meetings/Seminars etc. organised by Inter-                            
 Governmental Organisations at which Government of India was represented in 1976-77                    
 S.No.  Title of Conference etc.(with venue & dates)           Foreign Exchange                        
                                                                                                       
                                                             component of                              
                                                             expenditure in Rs                         
                                                                                                       
 -------------------------------------------------------------------------------                       
                                                                                                       
 1              2                                                 3                                    
 -------------------------------------------------------------------------------                       
                                                                                                       
        Asian African Legal Consultative Committee                                                     
                                                                                                       
 1.     17th Session, Kuala Lumpur, 28 June-Jul 05, 1976      Rs. 8,448.95                             
 2.     18 Session Baghdad, 19-26 February 1977                                                        
                                                                                                       
        Asian Development Bank                                                                         
                                                                                                       
 1.     9th Annual Meeting, Jakarta, 16-28 April 1976         Rs. 7720.00                              
 2.     Meeting of the Consultative Committee for Agri-                                                
        cultural Survey, Manila, 26 September-2 October                                                
        1976                                                       Nil                                 
                                                                                                       
        Association of Iron Ore Exporting Countries                                                    
                                                                                                       
        Meeting of the General Body London, 20-23 April                                                
        1976, Meeting of                                     Rs. 1,826.00                              
                                                                                                       
        Association for Science Cooperation in Asia                                                    
                                                                                                       
        5th Inter-Governmental Meeting, Bangkok, 14-21                                                 
        April 1976                                                                                     
                                                                                                       
        Colombo Plan                                                                                   
                                                                                                       
        Seminar on Prevention of Narcotics Offences,                                                   
        Tokyo, 16 September-23 October 1976                      Nil                                   
                                                                                                       
        Commonwealth Secretariat                                                                       
                                                                                                       
 1.     Meeting on South China Sea Cable and Indian                                                    
        Ocean Telecommunications Project, Hongkong,                                                    
        27 April-1 May 1976                                  Rs. 1,200.00                              
 2.     Meeting of the Commonwealth Senior Officials,                                                  
        Canberra, 26-28 May 1976                             Rs. 7,549.00                              
 3.     Meeting of Standing Committee of Telecommunica-                                                
        tions Council, Sydney, 1-4 June 1976                                                           
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------------                          
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
                         APPENDIX I-contd.                                                             
                                                                                                       
 -------------------------------------------------------------------------------                       
                                                                                                       
 1              2                                                     3                                
 -------------------------------------------------------------------------------                       
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
 4.  Meeting of Finance Ministers, Hongkong, 28                                                        
     September-1 October 1976                                    Rs. 15,000                            
                                                                                                       
 5.  3rd Conference of Commonwealth Postal Adminis-                                                    
     trations, Colombo, 4-13 October 1976                       Rs. 7245.00                            
                                                                                                       
 6.  7th Education Conference, Accra, 9-18 March                                                       
     1977                                                    Not available;                            
                                                                                                       
     Conference on International Economic Cooperation                                                  
                                                                                                       
     Meeting in Paris, 20-26 October 1976                     Rs. 2000. 000                            
                                                                                                       
     Customs Cooperation Council                                                                       
                                                                                                       
 1.  47/48th Sessions, Brussels, 14-18 June 1976              Rs. 30,453.00                            
                                                                                                       
 2.  9th Session of the Harmonised System Committee,                                                   
     Brussels, 28 June-9 July 1976                           Rs. 20,701.000                            
                                                                                                       
 3.  10th Session of the Harmonised System Committee                                                   
     Brussels, 20 September-1 October 1976                     Rs. 6,263.00                            
                                                                                                       
     Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific                                           
                                                                                                       
 1.  2nd Session of the Committee on Industry, Housing                                                 
     and Technology, Bangkok, 31 August-6 Septem-                                                      
     ber 1976                                                      Rs. 3430                            
                                                                                                       
 2.  2nd Session on Foreign Investment and Tax Admini-                                                 
     stration held under the aegis of ESCAP, Tokyo,                                                    
     27 September-9 October, 1976                                      Nil                             
                                                                                                       
 3.  3rd Session of the Committee on Natural Resources,                                                
     Bangkok, September 1976                                        Rs. 600                            
                                                                                                       
 4.  2nd Round Table Conference of ESCAP, Bangkok,                                                     
     7-11 December 1976                                     Expenditure borne                          
                                                                     by UN                             
                                                                                                       
     Food & Agriculture Organisation                                                                   
                                                                                                       
     1st Meeting of the Member Countries of the FAO                                                    
     on World Food Security, Rome, 5-9 April 1976               Rs. 9353.90                            
                                                                                                       
 2.  1st Session of World Food Programme Committee                                                     
     on Food Aid Policies, Rome, 26 April-7 May 1976          Rs. 20,553.00                            
                                                                                                       
 3.  Preparatory Meeting for the 2nd Session of World                                                  
     Food Council, Rome, 10-19 May 1976                       Rs. 12,262.00                            
                                                                                                       
 4.  2nd Session of World Food Council, Rome,                                                          
     14-16 June 1976                                           Rs. 59,824.0                            
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------------                          
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
                         APPENDIX I-contd.                                                             
                                                                                                       
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------------                         
                                                                                                       
 1                    2                                              3                                 
 -------------------------------------------------------------------------------                       
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
 5.  Technical Conference on Acquaculture, Kyoto,                                                      
     Japan, 26 May-2 June 1976                                       Nil                               
                                                                                                       
 6.  Planipotentiary Conference for the Establishment                                                  
     of IFAD, Rome, 6-13 June 1976                            Rs. 58,642.00                            
                                                                                                       
 7.  1st Session of the Preparatory Committee of the                                                   
     IFAD, Rome, 26 September-1 October, 1976                  Rs. 4,812.00                            
                                                                                                       
 8.  2nd Session of the Preparatory Committee of the                                                   
     IFAD, Rome, 11-18 December 1976                            Rs. 3000.00                            
                                                                                                       
 9.  1st Session of Regional Commission on Animal                                                      
     Production & Health, Bangkok, 7-11 June 1975               Rs. 1871.00                            
                                                                                                       
 10. 3rd Session of Commission on Fertilizer, Rome,                                                    
     8-11, June 1976                                            Rs. 6868.70                            
                                                                                                       
 11. Meeting of the Inter-Governmental Group on                                                        
     Hard Fibres, Rome, 17-19 June 1976                          Rs. 315.00                            
                                                                                                       
 12. Preparatory Meeting for the Inter-Governmental                                                    
     Group on Hard Fibres, Geneva, 6-10 December,                                                      
     1976                                                                                              
                                                                                                       
 13. Inter-governmental group on Hard Fibres, New                                                      
     Delhi, 14-19 March 1977                                                                           
                                                                                                       
 14. 69th Session of the FAO Council, Rome, 12-16                                                      
     July 1976                                                 Rs. 16076.00                            
                                                                                                       
 15. 70th Session of the FAO Council, Rome, 29                                                         
     November-10 December 1976                                Rs. 23,605.25                            
                                                                                                       
 16. 13th Session of Regional Conference of the FAO                                                    
     for Asia & Far East, Manila, 5-13 August, 1976           Rs. 38,517.00                            
                                                                                                       
 17. Round Table Discussion on Regional Approaches                                                     
     to Fisheries Development, Norway, 30 August-4                                                     
     September 1976                                          All expenditure met                       
                                                                                                       
                                                                     by FAO                            
                                                                                                       
 18. Meeting of Inter-governmental group on Jute                                                       
     Kenafe and Allied Fibres, Rome, 18-20                                                             
     October, 1976.                                             Rs. 2825.00                            
                                                                                                       
 19. 20th Session of Desert Locust Control Committee,                                                  
     Rome, 25-29 October, 1976                                     Rs. 1966                            
                                                                                                       
 20. 4th Session of Committee on Forest Development                                                    
     & 3rd Session of Committee on Forestry, Rome,                                                     
     15-27 November 1976                                        Rs. 5664.00                            
                                                                                                       
 21. 6th Session of Marine Environment Protection                                                      
     Committee, London, 29 November-3 December                                                         
     1976                                                       Rs. 2027.00                            
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------------                          
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
 pg111                                                                                                 
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
                         APPENDIX I-contd.                                                             
                                                                                                       
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------------                         
                                                                                                       
 1            2                                                    3                                   
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------------                         
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
 22. Meeting of the FAO on Restructuring, Rome,15-26                                                   
     November 1976                                             Rs. 13605.00                            
                                                                                                       
     International Council on Archives                                                                 
                                                                                                       
     8th Congress, Washington , 27 September-                                                          
     1 October, 1976                                           Rs. 4,160.00                            
                                                                                                       
     International Civil Aviation Organisation                                                         
                                                                                                       
 1.  4th Meeting of the Middle East/South East Asia                                                    
     Communications/Meteorological Regional Plann-                                                     
     ing Group, Bangkok, 18-26 May 1976                         Rs. 2419.70                            
                                                                                                       
 2.  22nd Session of Legal Committee, Montreal, 19                  (esti-                             
     October-12 November 1976                               Rs. 13850.00 mated)                        
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
     International Commission on Irrigation & Drainage                                                 
                                                                                                       
     1st Regional Conference for Asia and Africa,                                                      
     Tashkent, USSR, 7-15 September 1976                        Rs. 4728.80                            
                                                                                                       
     International Federation for Information Processing                                               
                                                                                                       
     South East Asia Regional Computer Conference                                                      
     (SEARCC), Singapore, 6-9 September                       Not available                            
                                                                                                       
     International Labour Organisation                                                                 
                                                                                                       
 1.  200th Session of the Governing Body of ILO,                                                       
     Geneva, May-June 1976                                                                             
                                                                                                       
 2.  201st Session of the Governing Body of ILO,                                                       
     Geneva, 16-19 November 1976                                                                       
                                                                                                       
 3.  202nd Session of Governing Body of ILO,                                                           
     Geneva, 1-4 March 1977                                                                            
                                                                                                       
 4.  61st Conference of ILO, Geneva, 2-23June 1976                                                     
                                                                                                       
 5.  Tripartite World Conference on Employment,                                                        
     Income Distribution, Social Progress and the                                                      
     International Division of Labour, Geneva, 4-17                                                    
     June 1976                                                                                         
                                                                                                       
 6.  8th Regional Conference of ILO, Colombo, 30                                                       
     September-9 October 1976                                                                          
                                                                                                       
 7.  62nd Session of International Labour (Maritime)                                                   
     Conference, Geneva, 13-29 October 1976                                                            
                                                                                                       
 8.  7th Session of the Committee on Work on Planta-                                                   
     tion, Geneva, 8-16 December 1976                                                                  
 --------------------------------------------------------------------------                            
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
 pg112                                                                                                 
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
                         APPENDIX I-contd.                                                             
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------------                           
 1            2                                                    3                                   
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------------                          
                                                                                                       
     International Lead & Zinc Study Groud                                                             
                                                                                                       
     20th Session of the International Lead & Zinc Study                                               
     Group and the meetings of the Committees of the                                                   
     Group, Geneva, 4-13 November 1976                     Rs. 12,000 (approx.)                        
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
     Intergovernmental Maritime Consultative Organisations                                             
                                                                                                       
 1.  34th Session of Maritime Safety Committee, Lon-                                                   
     don, 3-7 May 1976                                              Nil                                
                                                                                                       
 2.  35th Session of Maritime Safety Committee, Lon-                                                   
     don, 4--8 October 1976                                         Nil                                
                                                                                                       
 3.  5th Session of Maritime Environment Protection                                                    
     Committee, London, 24--28 May 1976                         Rs. 2386.00                            
                                                                                                       
 4.  6th Session of Maritime Environment Protection                                                    
     Committee, London, 29 November-3 Dec-                                                             
     ember 1976                                                    Rs. 2027                            
                                                                                                       
 5.  36th Session of Council, London, 7-11 June 1976            Rs. 6328.00                            
                                                                                                       
 6.  37th Session of Council, London, 5-9October 1976                                                  
                                                                                                       
 7.  8th Session of Subcommittee on Standards of                                                       
     training and watch-keeping, London, 14-18 June                                                    
     1976                                                       Rs. 4772.00                            
                                                                                                       
 8.  9th Session of Subcommittee on Standards of                                                       
     Training and watch-keeping, London, 13--17 Dec-                                                   
     ember 1976                                                 Rs. 3600.00                            
                                                                                                       
 9.  29th Session of Legal Committee, London, 28 June                                                  
     --2 July 1976                                                    Nil                              
                                                                                                       
 10. 30th Session of Legal Committee, London, 6-10                                                     
     September 1976                                                   Nil                              
                                                                                                       
 11. 31st Session of Legal Committee, London, 13-17                                                    
     September 1976                                                   Nil                              
                                                                                                       
 12. 16th Session of Sub-committee on Radio Commu-                                                     
     nication, London, 19-23 July 1976                          Rs. 4772.00                            
                                                                                                       
 13. 1st Consultative meeting of Contracting Parties to                                                
     the London Dumping Convention London, 20--24                                                      
     September 1976                                                  Nil                               
                                                                                                       
 14. 13th Session of Committee on Technical Cooperation                                                
     London, 4-5 October 1976                                   Rs. 7338.00                            
                                                                                                       
 15. International Conference on Limitation of the                                                     
     Liability for Maritime Claims, London, 1-19                                                       
     November 1976                                              Rs. 5962.00                            
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------------                           
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
 pg113                                                                                                 
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
                         APPENDIX I-contd.                                                             
                                                                                                       
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------------                          
 1                        2                                         3                                  
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------------                          
                                                                                                       
 16. 19th Session of Sub-Committee on Fire Protection,                                                 
     London, 23-27 November 1976                                    Nil                                
                                                                                                       
     International Monetary Fund/international Bank                                                    
     for Reconstruction and Development                                                                
                                                                                                       
 1.  Meeting of Aid India Consortium, Paris, 27-28May                                                  
     1976                                                     Rs. 19,393.00                            
                                                                                                       
 2.  Annual Meeting of IMF/IBRD, Manila, 2-8 Octo-                                                     
     ber 1976                                                                                          
                                                                                                       
     International Telecommunication Satellite System                                                  
                                                                                                       
     Meeting of INTELSAT Operation Representative                                                      
     for Indian Ocean Area and the Seminar on Earth                                                    
     Station Technology, Munich, W. Germany, 8-18                                                      
     June 1976                                                 Rs. 7,452.00                            
                                                                                                       
     International Telecommunication Union                                                             
                                                                                                       
 1.  International Radio Consultative Committee                                                        
     Geneva, 3 May-6 June 1976                                Rs. 12,172.42                            
                                                                                                       
 2.  Seminar on Satellite Broadcasting in the 1 GHz                                                    
     band, Kyoto, Japan, 10-18 September 1976                                                          
                                                                                                       
     International Wheat Council                                                                       
                                                                                                       
     Meeting of International Wheat Council, London,                                                   
     29 November-2 December 1976                                  Rs. 3,480                            
                                                                                                       
     Non-Aligned Group                                                                                 
                                                                                                       
 1.  Meeting of the Coordination Bureau, Algiers, 30                                                   
     May-2 June 1976                                          Rs. 22,530.00                            
                                                                                                       
 *2. Conference of Non-Aligned Countries on News                                                       
     Agencies Pool, New Delhi 8-13 July 1976                    Rs. 4,93,269                           
                                                                                                       
 3.  Conference of the Heads of States/Governments of                                                  
     Non-Aligned Countries, Colombo, 16-19 August                                                      
     1976                                                   Rs. 4,73,696.00                            
                                                                                                       
     United Nations Conference on Trade and Development                                                
                                                                                                       
 1.  4th UNCTAD, Nairobi, 3-28 May 1976 .                                                              
                                                                                                       
 2.  2nd Preparatory Meeting and Conference on Eco-                                                    
     nomic Cooperation among Developing Countries,                                                     
     Mexico,9-11 September 1976 and 13-21 Sept-                                                        
     ember 1976 respectively                                                                           
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------------                         
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
 pg114                                                                                                 
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
                         APPENDIX I--contd.                                                            
                                                                                                       
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------------                         
                                                                                                       
 1                  2                                               3                                  
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------------                         
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
     United Nations Development Programme                                                              
                                                                                                       
     22nd Session of the Governing Council, Geneva,                                                    
     14 June-4 July 1976                                      Rs. 8,245.00                             
                                                                                                       
     United Nations Economic and Social Council                                                        
                                                                                                       
 1.  12th Meeting of Regional Group of the United                                                      
     Nations Advisory Committee on the Application                                                     
     of Science & Technology to Development for Asia                                                   
     and the Pacific, Bangkok, 13--22 April 1976              Not available                            
                                                                                                       
 2.  25th Session of the Commission on the Status of                                                   
     Women, Geneva, 13 September-1 October 1976               Rs. 23,395.00                            
                                                                (Approx.)                              
                                                                                                       
 *3. 19th Session of the UN Statistical Commission,                                                    
     New Delhi, 8-19 November 1976         . . .                    Nil                                
                                                                                                       
 *4. UN project on International Comparison of                                                         
     National Accounts Aggregates-Regional meeting                                                     
     of Asian Participating Countries, New Delhi, 6-11                                                 
     December 1976                                             Rs. 5,000.00                            
                                                                                                       
 5.  Meeting of the Operational Heads of the Narcotics                                                 
     Law Enforcement Agencies for East Region,                                                         
     Manila, 15-19 November 1976                                    Nil                                
                                                                                                       
 6.  1st Session of the Inter-Governmental Working                                                     
     Group of UN Commission on Transnational Cor-                                                      
     porations, New York, 10-14 January 1977                  Not available                            
                                                                                                       
 7.  Meeting of the Bureau of the Commission of                                                        
     Human Rights, Geneva, 30 January-5 February                                                       
     1977                                                     Rs. 24,055.00                            
                                                                (Approx.)                              
                                                                                                       
 8.  33rd Session of the UN Commission on Human                                                        
     Rights, Geneva, 7 February-11 March 1977                 Rs. 56,641.00                            
                                                                 (Approx.)                             
                                                                                                       
 9.  UN Regional Seminar on Participation of Women                                                     
     in Political. Economic and Social Development                                                     
     with special emphasis on Machinery to Accelerate                                                  
     the Integration of Women in Development, Kath-                                                    
     mandu, 15-22 February 1977                                                                        
                                                                                                       
     United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural                                               
     Organization                                                                                      
                                                                                                       
 *1. International Conference on Education and Train-                                                  
     ing of Engineers and Technicians, New Delhi, 20-                                                  
     26 April 1976                                                   Nil                               
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------------                         
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
 pg115                                                                                                 
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
                         APPENDIX I--contd.                                                            
                                                                                                       
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------------                         
                                                                                                       
 1                   2                                              3                                  
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------------                         
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
 *2. International Seminar on Himalayan Geology,                                                       
     New Delhi, September 1976                                     Nil                                 
                                                                                                       
 3.  19th General Conference, Nairobi, 26 October-30                                                   
     November 1976                                             Rs. 3,00,000                            
                                                                (Estimated)                            
                                                                                                       
 *4. Meeting of Experts on Urban Problems, and Edu-                                                    
     cation on Town Planning, Chandigarh, 6-11                                                         
     December 1976                                                   Nil                               
                                                                                                       
 5.  Meeting of the Experts on Regional Cooperation                                                    
     in Cultural Activities in Asia, Tokyo, 7-11 De-                                                   
     cember 1976                                                     Nil                               
                                                                                                       
 6.  2nd Meeting of Government Experts on Double                                                       
     Taxation of Copyright Royalties Remitted from                                                     
     One Country to Another, convened jointly by                                                       
     UNESCO/WIPO (World Intellectual Property                                                          
     Organization), Paris, 8--17 December 1976                 Rs. 3,015.00                            
                                                                                                       
     United Nations Environmental Programme                                                            
                                                                                                       
     2nd Session of the Inter-governmental Working                                                     
     Group of Experts on Natural Resources shared by                                                   
     Two or More States, Geneva, 22--30 September                                                      
     1976                                                        Rs. 463.82                            
                                                                                                       
     United Nations General Assembly                                                                   
                                                                                                       
 1.  Law of the Sea Conference, New York, 5 April-5                                                    
     May 1976                                                 Rs. 17,884.60                            
                                                                                                       
 2.  5th Session of the UN Conference on the Law of                                                    
     the Sea, New York, 2 August - 17 September 1976          Rs. 17,800.00                            
                                                                                                       
 3.  9th Session of the United Nations Commission                                                      
     on the International Trade Law (UNCITRAL),                                                        
     New York, 12 April-7 May 1976         .                  Rs. 38,623.70                            
                                                                                                       
 4.  8th Session of Working Group of UNICTRAL on                                                       
     the International Sale of Goods 4-14 January 1977                                                 
                                                                                                       
 5.  Diplomatic Conference on the Re-affirmation and                                                   
     Development of International Humanitarian Law                                                     
     Applicable in Armed Conflicts, Geneva 21 April-                                                   
     11 June 1976                                                                                      
                                                                                                       
 6.  Meeting of the Legal Sub-Committee of the Com-                                                    
     mittee on Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, Geneva,                                                   
     3-28 May 1976                                            Rs. 9,126.21                             
                                                                                                       
 7.  Meeting of the Committee on Peaceful Uses of                                                      
     Outer Space, New York, 23-25 June 1976                                                            
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------------                         
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
 pg116                                                                                                 
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
                          APPENDIX I-contd.                                                            
                                                                                                       
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------------                         
                                                                                                       
 1                       2                                         3                                   
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------------                         
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
 8.  Regional Preparatory Meeting for the UN Water                                                     
     Conference, Bangkok, 26 July-2 August 1976               Not available                            
                                                                                                       
 9.  31st Session of the UNGA, New York, 21 Septem-                                                    
     ber-22 December 1976                                    Rs. 873,151.58                            
                                                                                                       
 10. Conference of Plenipotentaries on Territorial Asy-                                                
     lum, Geneva, 10 January-4 February 1977                                                           
                                                                                                       
     United Nations Children's Fund                                                                    
                                                                                                       
     Meeting of Executive Board, New York, 17-28                                                       
     May 1976                                                 Rs. 21,985.O2                            
                                                                                                       
     United Nations Industrial Development Organiza-                                                   
     tion                                                                                              
                                                                                                       
 1.  Round Table Meeting on Industrialisation of Agri-                                                 
     culture, Sofia, 20-24 May 1976                         Rs. 12,299 (Estimate                       
 d)                                                                                                    
                                                                                                       
 2.  Meeting of the Inter-governmental Committee on                                                    
     the Whole to draft Constitution for UNIDO as a                                                    
     Specialised Agency, Vienna, 28 June-9 July 1976         Rs. 25,597.50                             
                                                                                                       
     Universal Postal Union                                                                            
                                                                                                       
 1.  Meeting of the Executive Committee, Pattaya, Thai-   Rs. 2,391.82 Cost of                         
                                                                                                       
     land, 1-4 November 1976                              one return air-fare                          
                                                          amounting to Rs.                             
                                                          3,430 will be reim-                          
                                                          bursed by the AOPU                           
                                                                                                       
 2.  Meeting of the Consultative Council of UPU,                                                       
     Berne, 8-20 November 1976                                Rs. 12,392.50                            
                                                                                                       
     World Health Organisation                                                                         
                                                                                                       
 1.  29th World Health Assembly, Geneva, 3-17 May                                                      
     1976                                                                                              
                                                                                                       
 *2. 29th Session of the WHO Regional Committee for                                                    
     South East Asia, Srinagar, 14-20 September 1976                                                   
                                                                                                       
     World Intellectual Property Organisation                                                          
                                                                                                       
     7th Session of the Administrative Bodies, Geneva,                                                 
     27 September-5 October, 1976                        Rs. 17,500,(Approx.)                          
                                                                                                       
     World Meteorological Organisation                                                                 
                                                                                                       
 1.  9th Air Navigation Conference and 6th Session                                                     
     of Commission for Aeronautical Meteorology,                                                       
     Montreal, 1 April-14 May 1976                             Rs. 4,472.00                            
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------------                         
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
 pg117                                                                                                 
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
                         APPENDIX I-contd.                                                             
                                                                                                       
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------------                         
                                                                                                       
 1                          2                                      3                                   
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------------                         
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
 2.  Planning Meeting for Monsoon-77, Colombo,                                                         
     17-21 May 1976                                            Rs. 6,819.75                            
                                                                                                       
 3.  5th Session of Commission for Hydrology, Ottawa,                                                  
     5-17 July 1976                                            Rs. 5,152.00                            
                                                                                                       
 4.  2nd Scientific Conference on Weather Modifica-                                                    
     tion at Boulder, Colorado, USA, 2-6 August 1976           Rs. 1,335.00                            
                                                                                                       
 5.  7th Session of WMO Commission for Basic Sys-                                                      
     tems Working Group on Global Telecommunica-                                                       
     tion, Geneva, 6-17 September 1976                         Rs. 3,953.00                            
                                                                                                       
 6.  Extra-ordinary Session of Commission for Basic                                                    
     Systems, Geneva, 1-12 November 1976                      Not available                            
                                                                                                       
 7.  7th Session of Commission for Marine Meteoro-                                                     
     logy, Geneva, 29 November-10 December 1976               Not available                            
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------------                         
                                                                                                       
     *IN India                                                                                         
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
 pg118                                                                                                 
                                                                                                       
  Jul 05, 1976                                                                                         
 Appendix II Major International Conference/Meetings/Seminars                                          
 APPENDIX II                                                                                           
                                                                                                       
 Major International Conference/Meetings/Seminars organised by non- Governmental                       
 Organisations, at which India was represented with Govern- ment assistance in                         
 1976-77                                                                                               
 S. No.  Title of Conference etc. (with venue &           Foreign Exchange                             
                        dates)                            component of ex-                             
                                                          penditure in Rs.                             
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------------                         
                                                                                                       
 1                      2                                        3                                     
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------------                         
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
 1.  16th World Congress of International Union of                                                     
     Forestry Research Organisation, Oslo, 20 June-                                                    
     Jul 02, 1976                                                                                      
                                                                                                       
 2.  18th International Conference on Social Welfare,                                                  
     San Juan, Puerto Rico, 18-24 July 1976                                                            
                                                                                                       
 3.  33rd World Conference of the International Fede-                                                  
     ration for Housing Planning, Helsinki, 9-13 August                                                
     1976                                                         Rs. 2409                             
                                                                                                       
 4.  26th Pugwash Conference, Muhlhausan, GDR,                                                         
     26-31 August 1976                                       Not available                             
                                                                                                       
 5.  Conference of International Broadcasting Insti-                                                   
     tutes, Kyoto, Japan, 28 August-7 September 1976      IBI paid the ex-                             
                                                          penses                                       
                                                                                                       
 6.  Symposium of Asian Productivity Organisation                                                      
     on Farms Water Management, Tokyo, 7-13 Sep-                                                       
     tember 1976                                          All expenses met                             
                                                               by FAO                                  
                                                                                                       
 7.  18th Session of the Governing Body of Asian Pro-                                                  
     ductivity Organisation, Tokyo Manila, 17-20 May,                                                  
     1976                                                    Not available                             
                                                                                                       
 8.  Meeting of Committee of the International Co-                                                     
     operative Alliance on Agricultural & Fisheries etc.,                                              
     20-27 September 1976                                    Not available                             
                                                                                                       
 9.  26th Congress of the International Cooperative                                                    
     Alliance, Paris 28 September-1 October 1976                  Nil                                  
                                                                                                       
 10. 18th Meeting of the International Cooperative                                                     
     Alliance Council for South-East Asia, Tehran, 5-11                                                
     November 1976                                                Nil                                  
                                                                                                       
 11. 60th Annual Session of the International Dairy                                                    
     Federation, Quebec (Canada), 29 September-                                                        
     8 October 1976                                          Rs. 31,889.23                             
                                                                                                       
 12. General Assembly of the International Organisa-                                                   
     tion for Standardization, Geneva, 20-24 September                                                 
     1976                                                         Nil                                  
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------------                         
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
 pg119                                                                                                 
                                                                                                       
 Jul 02, 1976                                                                                          
 Appendix III Miscellaneous International Conference                                                   
 APPENDIX III                                                                                          
                                                                                                       
 Miscellaneous International Conference etc. in 1976-77 at which Government of India                   
 was represented or at which India was represented with Government of India's                          
 assistance                                                                                            
 Sl.  Title of Conference etc. (with venue & dates)       Foreign Exchange                             
 No.                                                      component of ex-                             
                                                          penditure in Rs.                             
 --------------------------------------------------------------------------                            
 1                  2                                              3                                   
 --------------------------------------------------------------------------                            
                                                                                                       
 1.  JOC Study Conference on the Development of                                                        
     Numerical Models for the Tropics, Exeter, UK,                                                     
     4-Apr 10, 1976                                           Rs. 1741                                 
                                                                                                       
 2.  1st Conference of Ministers and Senior Officials                                                  
     responsible for Physical Education and Sports,                                                    
     Paris, 5-10 April 1976                                   Rs. 32818.82                             
                                                                                                       
 3.  Conference on Evaluation and Research in Educa-                                                   
     tional Television & Radio, Milton Keyness, UK,                                                    
     9-13 April 1976                                                                                   
                                                                                                       
 4.  International Law Conference, Rome, 9-14 May                                                      
     1976                                                     Rs. 2,744.77                             
                                                                                                       
 5.  Hyog and International Conference, Kobe, Japan,                                                   
     18-22 May 1976                                              Rs. 13368                             
                                                                                                       
 6.  Meeting on the establishment of International                                                     
     Maritime Satellite System, 25 May-30 July 1976            Rs. 1848.00                             
                                                                                                       
 7.  Conference on Inter-Ocean 76, Dusseldorf (FRG),                                                   
     June 1976                                         Rs. 11623 (Approx).                             
                                                                                                       
 8.  Session of the International Geological Congress                                                  
     and meeting of the Commission for Geological                                                      
     Map, Sydney, 15--28 August 1976                       Rs. 2,30,640.00                             
                                                                                                       
 9.  International Maritime Satellite System Confer-                                                   
     ence 3rd Session for discussion with British Post                                                 
     Office, London on telecommunications matters 29                                                   
     August-18 September 1976                                Rs. 4,740. 00                             
 --------------------------------------------------------------------------                            
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
 pg120                                                                                                 
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
                         APPENDIX III-concld.                                                          
                                                                                                       
 --------------------------------------------------------------------------                            
 1                        2                                         3                                  
 --------------------------------------------------------------------------                            
                                                                                                       
 10. 8th General Assembly of Eastern Regional Orga-                                                    
     nisation for Public Administration (EROPA) and                                                    
     the regionwise conference on Asian Development                                                    
     strategies and the role of public enterprises, Tehran,                                            
     Iran 16-23 October 1976                               Foreign Exchange                            
                                                              of 9347 Ris                              
                                                                                                       
 11. World Wildlife Fund : 4th International Congress,                                                 
     San Francisco, 28 November-1 December 1976                      --                                
                                                                                                       
 12. Working meeting of the participating countries in                                                 
     the International Development Research Centre,                                                    
     Chiangmai, Thailand, 11-20 January 1977                         Nil                               
 --------------------------------------------------------------------------                            
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
 pg121                                                                                                 
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
 Apr 10, 1976                                                                                          
 Appendix IV International Organisations                                                               
 Jan 01, 1976                                                                                          
                                                                                                       
                             APPENDIX IV                                                               
                                                                                                       
 International Organisations of which INDIA became a Member or ceased to                               
                    be a Member during the year 1976-77                                                
 -------------------------------------------------------------------------------                       
 --                                                                                                    
 Sl.  Name of International Organisation         Name of International Organisa-                       
                                                                                                       
 No.  of which India became a Member             tion of which India ceased to                         
                                                                                                       
      during the year 1976-77                    be a Member during the year                           
                                                    1976-77                                            
 -------------------------------------------------------------------------------                       
 ---                                                                                                   
                                                                                                       
 1.   Jute International                         1(A) International Association                        
                                                                                                       
                                                     of Survey of Statisticians,                       
  The                                                                                                  
                                                      Hague.                                           
                                                                                                       
 2.   International Agricultural Aviation                                                              
      Centre, Cornfield Institute of Tech-                                                             
      nology, England.                                                                                 
 -------------------------------------------------------------------------------                       
 -----                                                                                                 
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
 pg122                                                                                                 
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
 Jan 01, 1976                                                                                          
 Appendix V Treaties/Conventions/Agreements concluded of renewed by India                              
   APPENDIX V                                                                                          
                                                                                                       
   Treaties/Conventions/Agreements concluded of renewed by India with other                            
                        countries in 1976*                                                             
                                                                                                       
                  (*This list is not exhaustive)                                                       
 -------------------------------------------------------------------------------                       
 -----                                                                                                 
 Sl.  Title of Convention/Treaty/     Date of         Date of     Date on     Re                       
 -                                                                                                     
 No.          Agreement               signature       ratifica-   which       ma                       
 rks                                                                                                   
                                                      tion        entered                              
                                                                  into force                           
 -------------------------------------------------------------------------------                       
 -----                                                                                                 
 1                     2                  3              4           5                                 
  6                                                                                                    
 -------------------------------------------------------------------------------                       
 ------                                                                                                
                                                                                                       
      Multilateral                                                                                     
                                                                                                       
      International Coffee Agreement 1976                                                              
                                                                                                       
 1.   International Coffee Agree-                                Provision-                            
      ment 1976 :                                                ally in                               
      India deposited the Instru-                                force                                 
      ment of Ratification on                                    1-10-76.                              
      Sep 20, 1976.                                                                                    
                                                                                                       
      European Economic Community                                                                      
                                                                                                       
 2.   Exchange of Letters between      7-4-76                                                          
      the Government of India                                                                          
      and the European Economic                                                                        
      Community regarding EEC                                                                          
      Food Aid-163,000 Metric                                                                          
      tons of Common Wheat-                                                                            
      1975 Programme.                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 3.   Exchange of Letters between     28-9-76                                                          
      the Government of India                                                                          
      and the European Economic                                                                        
      Community regarding EEC                                                                          
      Food Aid-1976-5,000 Me-                                                                          
      tric tons of skimmed milk                                                                        
      powder.                                                                                          
                                                                                                       
 4.   Exchange of Letters between     28-9-76                                                          
      the Government of India and                                                                      
      the European Economic                                                                            
      Community regarding EEC                                                                          
      Food Aid-1976-Cereals                                                                            
      programme-175.000 Metric                                                                         
      tons of Common Wheat.                                                                            
 -------------------------------------------------------------------------------                       
 -----                                                                                                 
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
 pg123                                                                                                 
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
 14 M of EA/76-9                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
                               APPENDIX V-contd.                                                       
                                                                                                       
 -------------------------------------------------------------------------------                       
 ----                                                                                                  
 1                      2                     3          4           5                                 
 6                                                                                                     
 -------------------------------------------------------------------------------                       
 ----                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
      International Development Association                                                            
                                                                                                       
 5.   Credit No. 616 in Develop-           26-2-76                                                     
      ment Credit Agreement                                                                            
      (Eleventh Industrial Im-                                                                         
      ports Program Credit) bet-                                                                       
      ween India and International                                                                     
      Development Association.                                                                         
                                                                                                       
      United Nations Convention on                                                                     
      Psychotropic Substances 1971 :                                                                   
                                                                                                       
 6.   United Nations Convention                       23-4-75    16-8-76                               
      on Psychotropic Substances                                                                       
      1971.                                                                                            
                                                                                                       
      Convention on International Trade                                                                
      in Endangered Species of Wild                                                                    
      Fauna and Flora                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 7.   Convention on International           9-7-74              18-10-76                               
      Trade in Endangered Species                                                                      
      of Wild Fauna and Flora-                                                                         
      1973.                                                                                            
                                                                                                       
      India-Sri Lanka-The Maldives                                                                     
      Agreement                                                                                        
                                                                                                       
 7A.  Agreement between India,            Sri Lanka              31-7-76                               
      Sri Lanka and the Maldives          23-7-76                                                      
      concerning the determi-             India                                                        
      nation of the tri-junction          24-7-76                                                      
      point between the three             Maldives                                                     
      countries in the Gulf of            31-7-76                                                      
      Mannar.                                                                                          
                                                                                                       
      Bilateral                                                                                        
                                                                                                       
      Austria                                                                                          
                                                                                                       
 8.   Agreement on Capital Re-              8-4-76                8-4-76                               
      payment between the Gov-                                                                         
      ernment of India and the                                                                         
      Austrian Federal Govern-                                                                         
      ment for a credit of 52.43                                                                       
      Austrian Shillings.                                                                              
                                                                                                       
      Bangladesh                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
 9.   Agreement relating to the            23-7-76                1-8-76                               
      Exchange of Postal Par-                                                                          
      cels between the Government                                                                      
      of India and the Govern-                                                                         
      ment of People's Republic of                                                                     
      Bangladesh.                                                                                      
 -------------------------------------------------------------------------------                       
 ----                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
 pg124                                                                                                 
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
                              APPENDIX V-contd.                                                        
                                                                                                       
 -------------------------------------------------------------------------------                       
 ----                                                                                                  
 1            2                              3           4           5                                 
 6                                                                                                     
 -------------------------------------------------------------------------------                       
 ----                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
      Canada                                                                                           
                                                                                                       
 10.  Exchange of Letters between          1-2-76                                                      
      the Government of India                                                                          
      and Canada for amending                                                                          
      the Canadian Development                                                                         
      Loan Agreement dt. 27th                                                                          
      October, 1967 for C $1 1.00                                                                      
      million for import of Equip-                                                                     
      ment, Services, etc. for Idukki                                                                  
      Hydro Electric Project in                                                                        
      Kerala.                                                                                          
                                                                                                       
 11.  Exchange of Letters between         25-2-76                                                      
      the Governments of India                                                                         
      and Canada for amending                                                                          
      the Canadian Development                                                                         
      Loan Agreement dt. 9th                                                                           
      August, 1973 for C $1.2 mil-                                                                     
      lion for import of Equipment                                                                     
      for KUNDAH Hydel Pro-                                                                            
      ject (Stage IV) in Tamil                                                                         
      Nadu.                                                                                            
                                                                                                       
 12.  Exchange of Letters between         16-6-76                16-6-76                               
      the Governments of India                                                                         
      and Canada for the import                                                                        
      of wheat from Canada worth                                                                       
      approximately Forty Million                                                                      
      Canadian Dollars (C $40.00                                                                       
      million) n the form of a                                                                         
      Grant.                                                                                           
                                                                                                       
 13.  Exchange of Letters between         16-6-76                16-6-76                               
      the Government of India                                                                          
      and the Government of Ca-                                                                        
      nada regarding the Canadian                                                                      
      Assistance or rapeseed oil                                                                       
      worth six million Canadian                                                                       
      dollars (C $6.0 million) in                                                                      
      the form of a Grant.                                                                             
                                                                                                       
 14.  Exchange of Letters between         29-6-76                                                      
      the Governments of India                                                                         
      and Canada for amending                                                                          
      the terminal date of Loan                                                                        
      Agreement dt. 12th August,                                                                       
      1971 relating to the purchase                                                                    
      in Canada of bulk fertilizer                                                                     
      equipment for the ports of                                                                       
      Kandla and Haldia.                                                                               
                                                                                                       
 15.  Exchange of Letters between          1-9-76                                                      
      the Government of India                                                                          
      and the Government of                                                                            
      Canada regarding amend-                                                                          
      ment to Section 4.03 of the                                                                      
 -------------------------------------------------------------------------------                       
 ----                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 pg125                                                                                                 
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
                            APPENDIX V-contd.                                                          
                                                                                                       
 -------------------------------------------------------------------------------                       
 ----                                                                                                  
 1                  2                    3          4               5                                  
 6                                                                                                     
 -------------------------------------------------------------------------------                       
 ----                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
      Canadian Development Loan                                                                        
      Agreement dt. 16th March,                                                                        
      1973.                                                                                            
                                                                                                       
 16.  Exchange of Letters between      15-9-76                                                         
      the Governments of India                                                                         
      and Canada for amending                                                                          
      the agreement between India                                                                      
      and Canada dt. 23rd August,                                                                      
      1968 for development of a                                                                        
      sub-loan relating to the pur-                                                                    
      chase in Canada of diesel                                                                        
      locomotive components and                                                                        
      spare parts for the Railway                                                                      
      Board.                                                                                           
                                                                                                       
 17.  Exchange of Letters between      15-9-76                                                         
      the Governments of India                                                                         
      and Canada for amending                                                                          
      the agreement dt. 30th July,                                                                     
      1969 between India and                                                                           
      Canada for a development                                                                         
      of a sub-loan relating to the                                                                    
      purchase in Canada of a                                                                          
      747 flight simulator for Air                                                                     
      India.                                                                                           
                                                                                                       
 18.  Exchange of Letters between      1-10-76                                                         
      the Governments of India                                                                         
      and Canada for amending                                                                          
      the agreement concluded                                                                          
      between India and Canada on                                                                      
      27th May, 1968 for develop-                                                                      
      ment of a sub-loan relating                                                                      
      to the purchase in Canada of                                                                     
      Equipment, Materials and                                                                         
      services for a ground station                                                                    
      for a communication satellite                                                                    
      system.                                                                                          
                                                                                                       
 19.  Exchange of Letters between     15-10-76                                                         
      the Governments of India                                                                         
      and Canada for amending                                                                          
      the terminal date of develop-                                                                    
      ment loan agreement dt. 27th                                                                     
      October 1967 relating to the                                                                     
      purchase of equipment and                                                                        
      services for the Idukki                                                                          
      Hydro-Electric Power Project.                                                                    
                                                                                                       
 20.  Development Loan Agree-         27-10-76                                                         
      ment between the Govern-                                                                         
      ments of India and Canada                                                                        
      for C $10.0 million for im-                                                                      
      port of Potash fertilizer from                                                                   
      Canada.                                                                                          
 -------------------------------------------------------------------------------                       
 -                                                                                                     
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
 pg126                                                                                                 
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
                              APPENDIX V-contd.                                                        
                                                                                                       
 -------------------------------------------------------------------------------                       
 --                                                                                                    
 1                 2                      3               4           5        6                       
                                                                                                       
 -------------------------------------------------------------------------------                       
 --                                                                                                    
                                                                                                       
 21.  Exchange of Letters between     27-10-76                                                         
      the Governments of India                                                                         
      and Canada for amending                                                                          
      the Letters exchanged bet-                                                                       
      ween the Governments of                                                                          
      India and Canada on 16th                                                                         
      June, 1976 relating to the                                                                       
      purchase in Canada of rape-                                                                      
      seed oil under the Canadian                                                                      
      grant 1976-77.                                                                                   
                                                                                                       
 22.  Exchange of Letters between      1-12-76                                                         
      the Governments of India                                                                         
      and Canada for amending                                                                          
      the amounts specified in the                                                                     
      Memorandum of Under-                                                                             
      standing dt. 30-12-1972 to                                                                       
      cover the additional cost of                                                                     
      providing field installation                                                                     
      assistance in setting up of                                                                      
      the Satellite Earth Station                                                                      
      near Dehra Dun.                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
      Cuba                                                                                             
                                                                                                       
 23.  Memorandum of Under-             22-7-76                                                         
      standing between the Go-                                                                         
      vernment of the Republic of                                                                      
      India and the Government                                                                         
      of the Republic of Cuba.                                                                         
                                                                                                       
      Federal Republic of Germany                                                                      
                                                                                                       
 24.  Exchange of Letters between      22-1-76                   22-1-76                               
      the Government of India                                                                          
      and the Government of the                                                                        
      Federal Republic of Ger-                                                                         
      many regarding the supply                                                                        
      of fertilizer for the Almora                                                                     
      Project in pursuance of the                                                                      
      Agreement of 31st December,                                                                      
      1971.                                                                                            
                                                                                                       
 25. Exchange of Letters between       20-2-76                   20-2-76                               
      the Government of India and                                                                      
      the Government of the Fed-                                                                       
      eral Republic of Germany                                                                         
      regarding extension of the                                                                       
      assignment of the Specialist                                                                     
      in Fruit Processing at the                                                                       
      Indo-German Agricultural                                                                         
      Development Project Mandi                                                                        
      (H.P.).                                                                                          
 -------------------------------------------------------------------------------                       
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
 pg127                                                                                                 
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
 14 M of EA/76-10                                                                                      
                                                                                                       
                             APPENDIX V-contd.                                                         
                                                                                                       
 -------------------------------------------------------------------------------                       
 ----                                                                                                  
 1               2                       3               4             5                               
 6                                                                                                     
 -------------------------------------------------------------------------------                       
 ----                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 26.  Agreement between the Go-        24-6-76                     24-6-76                             
      vernment of India and the                                                                        
      Government of the Federal                                                                        
      Republic of Germany con-                                                                         
      cerning Financial Assistance                                                                     
      in 1976 DM 362,000,000                                                                           
      (three hundred and sixty two                                                                     
      million Deutsche Mark.)                                                                          
                                                                                                       
 27.  Supplementary Agreement          25-6-76                                                         
      between the Government of                                                                        
      India and KREDITANS-                                                                             
      TALT FUR WIEDERAUF-                                                                              
      BAU for DM 140 million                                                                           
      for Debt Relief 1976-77.                                                                         
                                                                                                       
 28.  Arbitration Agreement bet-       25-6-76                                                         
      ween the Government of                                                                           
      India and KREDITANS-                                                                             
      TALT FUR WIEDERAUF-                                                                              
      BAU with reference to Article                                                                    
      VIII.  Paragraph (5), of the                                                                     
      Supplementary Agreement dt.                                                                      
      25th June, 1976.                                                                                 
                                                                                                       
 29.  Loan Agreement between           25-6-76                                                         
      the Industrial Credit & In-                                                                      
      vestment Corporation of                                                                          
      India Ltd. and KREDITAN-                                                                         
      STALT FUR WIEDERAU-                                                                              
      FBAU for DM 10,000,000.                                                                          
                                                                                                       
 30.  Arbitration Agreement bet-       25-6-76                                                         
      ween the Industrial Credit &                                                                     
      Investment Corporation of                                                                        
      India Ltd. and KREDITAN-                                                                         
      STALT FUR WIEDERAU-                                                                              
      FBAU with reference to                                                                           
      Article X, paragraph (6), of                                                                     
      the Loan Agreement dt.                                                                           
      25th June, 1976.                                                                                 
                                                                                                       
  31.  Guarantee Agreement bet-        25-6-76                                                         
      ween the Industrial Credit and                                                                   
      Investment Corporation of                                                                        
      India Ltd. and KREDIAN-                                                                          
      STALT FUR WIEDERAU-                                                                              
      FBAU with reference to Loan                                                                      
      Agreement dt. 25th June,                                                                         
      1976.                                                                                            
 -------------------------------------------------------------------------------                       
 ----                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
 pg128                                                                                                 
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
                            APPENDIX V-contd.                                                          
                                                                                                       
 -------------------------------------------------------------------------------                       
 ----                                                                                                  
 1                  2                      3              4           5                                
 6                                                                                                     
 -------------------------------------------------------------------------------                       
 ----                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 32.  Arbitration Agreement with        25-6-76                                                        
      reference to Article IV, para-                                                                   
      graph (7), of the Guarantee                                                                      
      Agreement dt. 25th June                                                                          
      1976 between the Industrial                                                                      
      Credit and Investment Cor-                                                                       
      poration of India Ltd. and                                                                       
      KREDITANSTALT FUR                                                                                
      WIEDERAUFBAU.                                                                                    
                                                                                                       
 33.  Loan Agreement between            25-6-76                                                        
      the Industrial Finance Cor-                                                                      
      poration of India and                                                                            
      KREDITANS LT FUR                                                                                 
      WIEDERAUF for DM                                                                                 
      15,000,000.                                                                                      
                                                                                                       
 34.  Arbitration Agreem bet-           25-6-76                                                        
      ween the Industrial Finance                                                                      
      Corporation of India and                                                                         
      KREDITANSTALT FUR                                                                                
      WIEDERAUFBAU with                                                                                
      reference to Article X, para-                                                                    
      graph (6), of the Loan Agree-                                                                    
      ment dt. 25th June, 1976.                                                                        
                                                                                                       
 35.  Guarantee Agreement bet-          25-6-76                                                        
      ween the Industrial Finance                                                                      
      Corporation of India and                                                                         
      KREDITANSTALT FUR                                                                                
      WIEDERAUFBAU with                                                                                
      reference to Laon Agree-                                                                         
      ment dt. 25th June, 1976.                                                                        
                                                                                                       
 36.  Arbitration Agreement with        25-6-76                                                        
      reference to Article IV, para-                                                                   
      graph (7), of the Guarantee                                                                      
      Agreement dt. 25th June,                                                                         
      1976 between the Industrial                                                                      
      Finance Corporation of India                                                                     
      and KREDITANSTALT                                                                                
      FUR WIEDERAUFBAU.                                                                                
                                                                                                       
 37.  Exchange of Letters between       15-9-76                   15-9-76                              
      the Government of India                                                                          
      and the Government of the                                                                        
      Federal Republic of Germany                                                                      
      regarding supply of 3,400                                                                        
      tonnes of fertilizer to the                                                                      
      Indo-German Agricultural                                                                         
      Development Project, Mandi                                                                       
      (H.P.)                                                                                           
 -------------------------------------------------------------------------------                       
 ----                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
 pg129                                                                                                 
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
                           APPENDIX V-contd.                                                           
                                                                                                       
 -------------------------------------------------------------------------------                       
 ----                                                                                                  
 1             2                          3            4            5        6                         
                                                                                                       
 -------------------------------------------------------------------------------                       
 ----                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 38.  Exchange of Letters between      16-11-76                 16-11-76                               
      the Government of India                                                                          
      and the Government of the                                                                        
      Federal Republic of Germany                                                                      
      regarding extension of the                                                                       
      Agreement for the Indo-Ger-                                                                      
      man Agricultural Develop-                                                                        
      ment Project, Nilgiris, Tamil                                                                    
      Nadu.                                                                                            
                                                                                                       
 39.  Exchange of Letters between      28-12-76                 28-12-76                               
      the Government of India and                                                                      
      the Government of the Fed-                                                                       
      eral Republic of Germany                                                                         
      regarding extension of the                                                                       
      Agreement for the Indo-                                                                          
      German Agricultural De-                                                                          
      velopment Project, Almora                                                                        
      (U.P.)                                                                                           
                                                                                                       
      France                                                                                           
                                                                                                       
 40.  Protocol between the Go-          15-1-76                  15-1-76                               
      vernment of the Republic of                                                                      
      India and the Government of                                                                      
      the Republic of France re-                                                                       
      garding the Debt Relief.                                                                         
                                                                                                       
 41.  Financial Protocol between        19-2-76                  19-2-76                               
      the Government of India and                                                                      
      the Government of France                                                                         
      for General Credit-1976-77.                                                                      
                                                                                                       
 42.  Financial Protocol between        19-2-76                  19-2-76                               
      the Government of India and                                                                      
      the Government of France                                                                         
      for Special Credit-1976-77.                                                                      
                                                                                                       
 43.  Protocol Agreement between         9-3-76                   9-3-76                               
      the Government of India                                                                          
      and the Government of                                                                            
      France for Food Aid Grant                                                                        
      of 30,000 tons of wheat.                                                                         
                                                                                                       
 44.  Exchange of Letters between        9-3-76                                                        
      the Government of India and                                                                      
      the Government of France                                                                         
      regarding financing of Indian                                                                    
      Economic Development Pro-                                                                        
      jects.                                                                                           
 -------------------------------------------------------------------------------                       
 ----                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
 pg130                                                                                                 
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
                          APPENDIX V-contd.                                                            
                                                                                                       
 -------------------------------------------------------------------------------                       
 ----                                                                                                  
 1               2                          3             4           5                                
   6                                                                                                   
 -------------------------------------------------------------------------------                       
 ----                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
      Iraq                                                                                             
                                                                                                       
 45.  Loan Agreement between              6-5-76                    6-5-76                             
      the Government of India and                                                                      
      the Government of Iraq                                                                           
      amounting upto $33,300,000                                                                       
      (Thirty three million & three                                                                    
      hundred thousand US Dol-                                                                         
      lars) to cover partial value of                                                                  
      Iraqi crude oil supplies du-                                                                     
      ring the period from 1st May,                                                                    
      1976 until end of December,                                                                      
      1976.                                                                                            
                                                                                                       
      Italy                                                                                            
                                                                                                       
 46.  Exchange of Letters between         6-4-76                    6-4-76                             
      the Governments of India                                                                         
      and Italy for the Grant of                                                                       
      Debt Relief Assistance for the                                                                   
      year 1974-15 to a maximum                                                                        
      of 5.250 (5 billion and 250                                                                      
      million) Italian Lira.                                                                           
                                                                                                       
      Japan                                                                                            
                                                                                                       
 47.  Agreement between the                                                                            
      Government of India and            31-3-76                                                       
      the Japan Leprosy Mission                                                                        
      for Asia (JAIMA) for taking                                                                      
      over a Leprosy Treatment,                                                                        
      Rehabilitation, Training and                                                                     
      Research Centre established                                                                      
      at Agra by Japan Leprosy                                                                         
      Mission for Asia on 30th                                                                         
      May, 1963.                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
 48.  Loan Agreement No. ID-CI           31-3-76                                                       
      Loan Agreement concerning                                                                        
      Commodity Loan to the                                                                            
      Government of India bet-                                                                         
      ween the Overseas Economic                                                                       
      Co-operation Fund, Japan                                                                         
      and the President of India.                                                                      
                                                                                                       
 49.  Agreement on scientific Ex-        28-6-76                   28-6-76                             
      changes between the Indian                                                                       
      National Science Academy                                                                         
      and the Japan Society for                                                                        
      the Promotion of Science.                                                                        
 -------------------------------------------------------------------------------                       
 ----                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
 pg131                                                                                                 
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
                            APPENDIX V-contd.                                                          
                                                                                                       
 -------------------------------------------------------------------------------                       
 ----                                                                                                  
 1               2                       3               4             5                               
    6                                                                                                  
 -------------------------------------------------------------------------------                       
 ----                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
      Jordan                                                                                           
                                                                                                       
 50.  Trade and Economic Agree-        24-2-76                      24-2-76                            
      ment between the Govern-                                                                         
      ment of the Republic of                                                                          
      India and the Government                                                                         
      of the Hashemite Kingdom                                                                         
      of Jordan.                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
      Korea                                                                                            
                                                                                                       
 51.  Agreement between the             5-3-76                      30-8-76                            
      Government of the Republic                                                                       
      of India and the Government                                                                      
      of the Republic of Korea on                                                                      
      Cooperation in the fields of                                                                     
      Science and Technology.                                                                          
                                                                                                       
      Nepal                                                                                            
                                                                                                       
 52.  Exchange of Utters between      24-12-76                                                         
      the Government of India and                                                                      
      the Government of Nepal                                                                          
      regarding the renovation and                                                                     
      extension of Chandra Canal,                                                                      
      Pumped Canal and Western                                                                         
      Kosi Canal distribution sys-                                                                     
      tem in Nepal.                                                                                    
                                                                                                       
      Netherlands                                                                                      
                                                                                                       
 53.  Exchange of letters between      14-6-76                                                         
      the Government of India and                                                                      
      the Government of Nether-                                                                        
      lands for 5,000 tons of wheat                                                                    
      within the framework of the                                                                      
      Food Aid Convention com-                                                                         
      mitments for the year 1975-                                                                      
      76.                                                                                              
                                                                                                       
      Norway                                                                                           
                                                                                                       
 54.  Exchange of Letters between       26-10-76                   26-10-76                            
      the Government of India and                                                                      
      the Government of Norway                                                                         
      for a financial grant not                                                                        
      exceeding Norwegian Kronor                                                                       
      1.2 million for financing of                                                                     
      fees for services to be                                                                          
      rendered by M/s. Shipping                                                                        
      Research Services, Oslo, for                                                                     
      preparation of a Detailed                                                                        
      Project Report on a Central                                                                      
      Marine Design and Research                                                                       
      Organization in India.                                                                           
 -------------------------------------------------------------------------------                       
 ----                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
 pg132                                                                                                 
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
                            APPENDIX V-contd.                                                          
                                                                                                       
 -------------------------------------------------------------------------------                       
 ----                                                                                                  
 1                 2                      3           4             5          6                       
                                                                                                       
 -------------------------------------------------------------------------------                       
 ----                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 55.  Memorandum of Agreement          5-11-76                   5-11-76                               
      between the Government of                                                                        
      India and M/s. Shipping Re-                                                                      
      search services, Oslo, for                                                                       
      preparation of a Detailed                                                                        
      Project Report on a Central                                                                      
      Marine Design and Research                                                                       
      Organization to be set up                                                                        
      in India.                                                                                        
                                                                                                       
      Pakistan                                                                                         
                                                                                                       
 56.  Agreement between the            16-7-76                   20-7-76                               
      Government of India and the                                                                      
      Government of the Islamic                                                                        
      Republic of Pakistan relating                                                                    
      to Air Services.                                                                                 
                                                                                                       
      Sri-Lanka                                                                                        
                                                                                                       
 56A. Agreement between India          23-3-76     6-4-76        10-5-76                               
      and Sri Lanka on the                         4-5-76                                              
      Maritime Boundary bet-                                                                           
      ween the two countries                                                                           
      in the Gulf of Manaar                                                                            
      and the Bay of Bengal                                                                            
      and related matters.                                                                             
                                                                                                       
      Sweden                                                                                           
                                                                                                       
 57.  Agreement between the            20-5-76                   20-5-76                               
      Government of India and                                                                          
      the Government of Sweden,                                                                        
      for furthering economic and                                                                      
      social development in India.                                                                     
                                                                                                       
      Turkey                                                                                           
                                                                                                       
 58.  Agreement between the             2-4-76                   16-9-76                               
      Government of the Republic                                                                       
      of India and the Government                                                                      
      of the Republic of Turkey on                                                                     
      Cooperation in the fields of                                                                     
      Science and Technology.                                                                          
                                                                                                       
      Union of Soviet Socialist Republics                                                              
                                                                                                       
 59.  Consular Convention bet-        29-11-73    19-1-76         4-7-76      In                       
 stru-                                                                                                 
      ween the Government of the                                              me                       
 nt                                                                                                    
      Republic of India and the                                               of                       
                                                                                                       
      Government of the Union of                                              Ra                       
 tifi-                                                                                                 
      Soviet Socialist Republics.                                             ca                       
 tion                                                                                                  
                                                                              Ex                       
 ch-                                                                                                   
                                                                              an                       
 ged                                                                                                   
                                                                              on                       
  4th                                                                                                  
                                                                              Ju                       
 ne,                                                                                                   
                                                                              19                       
 76.                                                                                                   
 -------------------------------------------------------------------------------                       
 -------                                                                                               
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
 pg133                                                                                                 
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
                           APPENDIX V-contd.                                                           
                                                                                                       
 -------------------------------------------------------------------------------                       
 ----                                                                                                  
 1                 2                      3            4           5       6                           
 -------------------------------------------------------------------------------                       
 ----                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
      United Kingdom                                                                                   
                                                                                                       
 60.  Exchange of Letters between       6-1-76                  6-1-76                                 
      the Government of India and                                                                      
      the- Government of the                                                                           
      United Kingdom for estab-                                                                        
      lishing an Indo-British Eco-                                                                     
      nomic Committee.                                                                                 
                                                                                                       
 61.  Exchange of Letters between      11-2-76                                                         
      the Government of India and                                                                      
      the Government of the                                                                            
      United Kingdom regarding                                                                         
      amendment to the United                                                                          
      Kingdom/India Mixed Pro-                                                                         
      ject Grant 1975.                                                                                 
                                                                                                       
 62.  Exchange of Notes between        19-2-76                                                         
      the Government of India and                                                                      
      the Government of the                                                                            
      United Kingdom regarding                                                                         
      food grant of 50,400 metric                                                                      
      Tons of wheat.                                                                                   
                                                                                                       
 63.  Memorandum of Under-             12-7-76                                                         
      standing between the                                                                             
      Government of India and                                                                          
      the Government of the                                                                            
      United Kingdom concerning                                                                        
      the provision of British                                                                         
      Technical Assistance for the                                                                     
      Indo-British Ground Water                                                                        
      Exploration Project in the                                                                       
      Upper Catchment of the                                                                           
      Betwa River Basin in parts                                                                       
      of Madhya Pradesh and                                                                            
      Uttar Pradesh.                                                                                   
                                                                                                       
 64.  Exchange of Letters between       2-8-76                                                         
      the Government of India and                                                                      
      the Government of the                                                                            
      United Kingdom concerning                                                                        
      arrangements for the United                                                                      
      Kingdom/India Capital                                                                            
      Investment Loans and                                                                             
      Grants.                                                                                          
                                                                                                       
 65.  Exchange of Letters between       1-9-76                                                         
      the Governments of India                                                                         
      and the United Kingdom                                                                           
      regarding amendment to                                                                           
      the "United Kingdom/India                                                                        
      Durgapur Loan 1970".                                                                             
 -------------------------------------------------------------------------------                       
 ----                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
                            APPENDIX V-contd.                                                          
                                                                                                       
 -------------------------------------------------------------------------------                       
 ----                                                                                                  
 1              2                          3             4             5                               
  6                                                                                                    
 -------------------------------------------------------------------------------                       
 ----                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
 66.  Exchange of Letters between       1-9-76                                                         
      the Governments of India                                                                         
      and the United Kingdom                                                                           
      regarding amendment to the                                                                       
      "United Kingdom/India                                                                            
      Capital Investment Loan                                                                          
      1974".                                                                                           
                                                                                                       
 67.  Exchange of Letters between       1-9-76                                                         
      the Governments of India                                                                         
      and the United Kingdom                                                                           
      regarding amendment to "the                                                                      
      relevant Exchange of Notes"                                                                      
      concerning Investment Loans                                                                      
      and Grants.                                                                                      
                                                                                                       
      United States of America                                                                         
                                                                                                       
 68.  Agreement between the                                                                            
      Government of India and the                                                                      
      Government of the United                                                                         
      States of America for sales of                                                                   
      Agricultural Commodities.                                                                        
                  and                   3-5-76                    3-5-76                               
      Agreed Minutes between the                                                                       
      two Governments regarding                                                                        
      the Public Law 480 Title 1,                                                                      
      Agreement for Fiscal Year-                                                                       
      1976 dt. 3rd May, 1976.                                                                          
                                                                                                       
      Vietnam                                                                                          
                                                                                                       
      (The Socialist Republic of)                                                                      
                                                                                                       
 69.  Agreement between the           10-11-76                  10-11-76                               
      Government of the Republic                                                                       
      of India and the Government                                                                      
      of the Socialist Republic of                                                                     
      Vietnam on the Exchange                                                                          
      of Letter Post Items and                                                                         
      Parcels and Tele-Communi-                                                                        
      cation Services.                                                                                 
                                                                                                       
      Joint Communiques                                                                                
                                                                                                       
      Pakistan                                                                                         
                                                                                                       
 70.  Joint Statement issued in Islamabad on 14th May, 1976 with the objective                         
                                                                                                       
      of resuming normalization of relations between the two countries as                              
      envisaged in the Simla Agreement, 1972.                                                          
                                                                                                       
 71.  Joint Communique issued in New Delhi on 7th October, 1976 on the                                 
      conclusion of talks concerning the Salal Hydro Electric Project.                                 
                                                                                                       
 72.  Joint Communique issued in Islamabad on 21st October, 1976 on the                                
      conclusion of talks concerning the Salal Hydro Electric Project.                                 
 -------------------------------------------------------------------------------                       
 ----                                                                                                  
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
                              APPENDIX V-concld.                                                       
                                                                                                       
 Statement showing the number of Indian experts deputed to various countries                           
                          under ITEC Programme (1976)                                                  
                                                                                                       
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------------                           
 Sl.  Name of country                                          Experts in                              
 No.                                                             position                              
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------------                          
                                                                                                       
 1.  Afghanistan                                                    124                                
 2.  Ethiopia.                                                        2                                
 3.  Fiji                                                             5                                
 4.  Ghana                                                            3                                
 5.  Guyana                                                          10                                
 6.  Indonesia                                                        5                                
 7.  Maldives                                                         4                                
 8.  Mauritius                                                       49                                
 9.  PDRY (Aden)                                                     12                                
 10. Senegal                                                          1                                
 11. Somalia                                                          1                                
 12. Sri Lanka                                                        5                                
 13. Tonga                                                            2                                
 14. Cyprus                                                           1                                
 15. Malta                                                            3                                
 16. Zambia                                                           1                                
 17. Barbados                                                         1                                
 18. Laos                                                             1                                
                                                                  ---------                            
                                                 TOTAL              230                                
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------------                           
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
 pg136                                                                                                 
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
 Sep 20, 1976                                                                                          
 Appendix VI Trainees from developing countries                                                        
 Jan 01, 1976 APPENDIX VI-contd. Trainees from developing countries receiving                          
 training in India (1976-77) under ITEC Programme                                                      
 Sl.   Name of country                                         Number                                  
 No.                                                                                                   
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------------                           
                                                                                                       
 1.   Afghanistan                                                   5                                  
 2.   Cyprus                                                        1                                  
 3.   Ethiopia                                                      2                                  
 4.   Ghana                                                         1                                  
 5.   PDRY                                                          2                                  
 6.   Maldives                                                     12                                  
 7.   Sri Lanka                                                    14                                  
 8.   Sudan                                                         8                                  
 9.   Tanzania                                                   232*                                  
 10.  Zambia                                                        4                                  
 11.  Burma                                                         6                                  
 12.  D.R.V.N.                                                     16                                  
 13.  Laos                                                          1                                  
 14.  Trinibab and Tobago                                           6                                  
 15.  Thailand                                                      1                                  
 16.  Egypt                                                         2                                  
 17.  Nigeria                                                       4                                  
 18.  Iraq                                                          5                                  
 19.  Zimbabwe                                                      2                                  
 20.  Guyana .                                                      2                                  
 21.  Algeria                                                       1                                  
 22.  Brazil                                                        1                                  
 23.  Ecuador                                                       1                                  
 24.  Mauritius                                                     1                                  
 25.  Mexico                                                        1                                  
 26.  Libya                                                         1                                  
 27.  Zaire                                                         1                                  
 28.  Argentina                                                     1                                  
                                                                -------                                
                                                 TOTAL            340                                  
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------------                           
 *167 of these trainees are under a grant received by Tanzania from Sweden;-                           
 all the arrangements for training are, however, made by India.                                        
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
 pg137                                                                                                 
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
 Jan 01, 1976                                                                                          
 Appendix VII > Distribution of Reserved Medical/Engineering                                           
 Jan 01, 1976                                                                                          
                                                                                                       
                               APPENDIX VII                                                            
                                                                                                       
        Distribution of Reserved Medical/Engineering seats during 1976-77                              
                                                                                                       
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------------                           
 Sl.  Name of the country                 Engineering       Medical                                    
 No.                                      seats             seats                                      
                                          allotted          allotted                                   
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------------                           
 1.   Rhodesia                                3                -                                       
 2.   Kenya                                  15                3                                       
 3.   Malawi                                Nil                1                                       
 4.   South Africa                            2                3                                       
 5.   Tanzania                               15                3                                       
 6.   Uganda                                  5                1                                       
 7.   Zambia                                  2                1                                       
 8.   Lesotho                               Nil                1                                       
 9.   Sudan                                   2                -                                       
 10.  Nigeria                                 1                1                                       
 11.  Mauritius                              21               18                                       
 12.  Afghanistan                             6                1                                       
 13.  PDRY                                    1                1                                       
 14.  Iran                                   40                5                                       
 15.  Iraq                                    7              Nil                                       
 16.  Jordan                                 26                1                                       
 17.  Kuwait                                  3              Nil                                       
 18.  U.A.E.                                  1                1                                       
 19.  Lebanon                                 2                -                                       
 20.  Syria                                   1              Nil                                       
 21.  Bahrain .                               1                -                                       
 22.  Fiji                                    4                2                                       
 23.  Malaysia                               38               15                                       
 24.  Singapore                               1                -                                       
 25.  Thailand                                5                3                                       
 26.  Sri Lanka                              21                7                                       
 27.  Guyana                                  2                3                                       
 28.  West Indies                             -                2                                       
 29.  Hungary                                 1                -                                       
 30.  Bangladesh                              3              Nil                                       
 31.  Maldives                              Nil                1                                       
                                           -------          -----                                      
                         TOTAL               229              74                                       
 -------------------------------------------------------------------------                             
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
 pg138                                                                                                 
                                                                                                       
 Jan 01, 1976                                                                                          
 Appendix VIII Expenditure on Headquarters and Missions/Posts abroad                                   
 Jan 01, 1976 APPENDIX VIII Expenditure on Headquarters and Missions/Posts abroad                      
 during 1976-77 The expenditure during 1976-77 on Headquarters Ministry is. of the                     
 order of Rs. 5,12,81 lakhs; a sum of Rs. 181.11 is establish- ment charges, a sum                     
 of Rs. 50.41 lakhs for Dearness Allowance a sum of Rs. 205.77 lakhs for publicity,                    
 cables, diplomatic bags service etc., a sum of Rs. 74.35 lakhs for travelling                         
 expenses and a sum of Rs. 1. 17 lakhs for Departmental Canteen. The expenditure on                    
 Missions/Posts abroad including special Mission in Thimpu is Rs. 2232.95 lakhs out                    
 of which a sum of Rs. 1021.64 lakhs is spent on Establishment Charges including                       
 Foreign and other compensatory allowances, a sum of Rs. 201.59 lakhs on passages                      
 for transfers and local tours, Rs. 52.61 lakhs for Publicity Contingencies and Rs.                    
 957. 11 lakhs for official and residential accommodation, P&T charges and other                       
 office contin- gencies. The average annual expenditure per Mission comes to Rs.                       
 18.3 lakhs. The expenditure mentioned above (viz. Rs. 2745.76 lakhs=Rs. 512.81                        
 lakhs + 2232.95 lakhs) as per details below on Headquarters and Missions/ Posts                       
 abroad includes expenditure on External Publicity programme acti- vities. The                         
 break-up of this expenditure is as under:-                                                            
 (a) Headquarters                                            (Rs. in lakhs)                            
     (i)   Salaries(officers 28, staff 53)                        10.00                                
     (ii)  Travelling Expenses                                     4.25                                
     (iii) Publicity Contingencies Charges                        93.56                                
                                                               ----------                              
                                                                 107.81                                
                                                                                                       
 (b) Missions/Posts abroad                                                                             
     (i)   Salaries (officers 51, staff 258)                      43.77                                
     (ii)  Foreign Allowance, Compensatory Allowance              28.31                                
     (iii) Passages and Travelling Expenses                        6.01                                
     (iv)  Publicity Contingencies                                52.61                                
     (v)   Other Charges including renting of residential                                              
           accommodation and other Office Contingencies           16.90                                
                                                                ---------                              
                                                                 147.60                                
                                                                ---------                              
 TOTAL EXTERNAL PUBLICITY                                        255.41                                
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------------                           
   The expenditure on External Publicity as detailed Above comes to 9.3%                               
 of the expenditure on Headquarters and Missions/Posts abroad.                                         
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
 pg139                                                                                                 
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
                           APPENDIX VIII-concld.                                                       
                                                                                                       
                                                                (In lakhs of                           
                                                                  Rupees)                              
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------------                         
                                                                                                       
                                Establish-   Travell-    Office        Total                           
                                ment         ing Ex-     Expenses                                      
                                Charges      penses                                                    
 ------------------------------------------------------------------------------                        
                                                                                                       
 Secretariat                                                                                           
                                                                                                       
   Headquarters                  221.52       70.10       113.38      405.00                           
   External Publicity Division    10.00        4.25        93.56      107.81                           
                                 ------       -----       -----       -------                          
       TOTAL                     231.52       74.35       206.94      512.81                           
                                 ------       -----       ------      -------                          
 Overseas Establishment                                                                                
                                                                                                       
 (a) Missions/Posts abroad                                                                             
     (excluding Publicity                                                                              
     Wings)                      949.56      195.58       940.21     2085.35                           
 (b) Publicity Wings              72.08        6.01        69.51      147.60                           
                                -------      ------      -------     --------                          
       TOTAL                    1021.64      201.59      1009.72     2232.95                           
                                -------      ------      -------     --------                          
       GRAND TOTAL              1253.16      275.94      1216.66     2745.76                           
 ------------------------------------------------------------------------------                        
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
 pg140                                                                                                 
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
 Jan 01, 1976                                                                                          
 Appendix IX List of India Missions/Posts                                                              
 Jan 01, 1976                                                                                          
                                                                                                       
                               APPENDIX IX                                                             
                                                                                                       
         List of India Missions/Posts opened in the Year 1976-77                                       
                                                                                                       
 -------------------------------------------------------------------------------                       
                                                                                                       
 Country                       Location                    Remarks                                     
 -------------------------------------------------------------------------------                       
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
 Pakistan                      Islamabad                   Embassy                                     
                                                                                                       
 Maldives                      Male                        Embassy                                     
                                                                                                       
 U.S.A.                        Chicago                     Consulate                                   
                                                           General                                     
 -------------------------------------------------------------------------------                       
 -                                                                                                     
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
 pg141                                                                                                 
                                                                                                       
External website that  External website    External website    External website    External website    
opens in a new window  that opens in a new that opens in a new that opens in a new that opens in a new 
                       window              window              window              window              

    Address : Patiala House, Annexe - BNew Delhi                              
   -110001                                           Page last updated on: 09 
    Telephone: 23389073, 23382694, 23073685;                  December, 2013  
   Fax: 23386340, 23387700;Feedback :            Site designed and maintained 
   dirlibmea.gov.in                                  by: National Informatics 
    Officer In-charge:-                                         Centre (NIC), 
    (c)Content Owned by MEA Library Ministry of   DeitY, MoCIT, Government of 
   External Affairs, Government of India                               India. 
   Terms & Conditions | Privacy Policy |         Visitors:                    
   Copyright Policy | Hyperlinking Policy |      
   Accessibility Statement | Help                

   java script is required for this page
   MEAs App twitter Facebook Google plus YouTube flickr
   loading
