1967-68

Content
REPORT
1967-68
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS
NEW DELHI

MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS
ANNUAL REPORT 1967-68.
C O R R I G E N D U M
Appendix VII - Indian Missions/posts Abrea--(i)

Under "EMBASSIES" (b) Non--resident
pages 130-131.

Add. 24 Uruguay - Ambassador resident in
Buenos Aires.
25 Vatican - Ambassador resident in
Berne.
(ii) Under "HIGH COMMISSIONS - Resident"
pages 131-132.
Add. 18 Mauritius

..... Port Louis.

(iii) Under "GOMMISSIONS (a) Resident"
page 133.
Delete 3 Mauritius

..... Fort Louis

(iv) Under "CONSULATES - Resident"
pages 135-136.
S.No. 18 Panama:-- Read "Panama City" for
"Bandar Abbas".
--------line -- to 12
--ete the existing lines and read:-

-----lifting of the embargo on Supplies
----spares for, armaments by the U.S.
-----ernment also proved helpful to
---istan. On Apr 12, 1967 the
Government of the United States announced
its policy to sell spares for equipment
already supplied on cash purchase basis to
the countries in this Sub-continent.
considering that Pakistan was the main
beneficiary of this policy, the Government
of India protested to the U.S. Government
--tating that the new policy was bound to
--eactivate the entire war machine of
--istan and hence was likely to pose a
--re threat to peace in this area."
CONTENTS
PAGES
Introduction

v-viii

I.

India's Neighbours

1-21

II.

States in Special Treaty Relations
India

with

22-26

III. South-East Asia

27-32

IV.

East Asia

33-36

V.

West Asia and North Africa

37-43

VI.

Africa, South of the Sahara

44-46

VII.

Eastern and Western Europe

47-58

VIII. The Americas

59-63

IX.

United Nations and International
ferences

Con-

X.

External Publicity

71-75

XI.

Technical and Economic Cooperation

76-80

64-70

XII. Passport and Consular Services

81-89

XIII. Organisation and Administration

90-97

32 E.A.-1
(iii)
APPENDICES
NUMBER
I.

International Conferences,

PAGES
Congresses,

II.

Symposia etc., in which India participated
in 1967-68

98-106

International Organizations of which India
is a member

107-112

III. Foreign Diplomatic Missions in India

113-114

IV.

Foreign Consular Offices in India

115-119

V.

Distinguished Visitors from abroad

120-122

VI.

Visits of Indian Dignitaries to foreign
countries and other Deputations/Delegations sponsored by the Ministry of External
Affairs

123-126

VII. Indian Missions/Posts abroad
INDIA
URUGUAY

ARGENTINA

SWITZERLAND

127-137

MAURITIUS

Apr 12, 1967

INTRODUCTION
INTRODUCTION
OVER the last two decades India's foreign policy has been
one of building bridges of friendship and co-operation with
countries regardless of their economic or political system.
We have consistently sought the consolidation of world
peace and the creation of conditions for economic progress
in vast areas of Asia and Africa, newly emerging from colonial domination and striven to promote international cooperation amongst all countries. In order to achieve this,
we chose for ourselves the path of non-alignment and
peaceful co-existence even when such a policy was suspect
or misunderstood. We recognised that the world situation
has changed over the years. The cold war in Europe has
eased and yet conflicts and tensions in Asia have increased.
But the broad strategy of our foreign policy has proved
valid even in the face of these great changes. More and
more countries are upholding or practising the principle
of peaceful co-existence. During the year under report we
have pursued the policy in the confidence that it continues
to serve our national interest and the larger cause of world
peace.

USA

PANAMA

PAKISTAN

Our bilateral relations with our immediate neighbours,
barring Pakistan and China, have been characterised by
trust and co-operation. Even with Pakistan, in the spirit
of the Tashkent Declaration, we have been able to achieve
some small measure of progress towards normalisation of
our relations. We shall persevere in these efforts despite
a somewhat discouraging response from Pakistan. With
China, our relations have shown no signs of improvement.
The persisting hostility of the Government of the People's
Republic of China towards the Government and the people
of India is unwarranted and cannot but be regretted and
(v)
(vi)
deplored. Notwithstanding our desire for friendship, the
Government of India remain vigilant against threats to our
security, territorial integrity and the principles and the
institutions which the people of India cherish. At the same
time, the Government of India will not give up hope that
China and Pakistan will also realise that, on the principle
of peaceful co-existence, there is need and advantage in
improving relations with India for their own benefit and
that of stability in Asia.
But for these exceptions our relations with other countries were further consolidated during the course of the
year. During her successful visit to Ceylon, the Soviet
Union, Poland, Rumania, Bulgaria, Yugoslavia and the
U.A.R., the Prime Minister had very useful discussions with
the leaders of these friendly countries. The Deputy Prime
Minister visited Canada, the U.S.A., Brazil, Venezuela,
Trinidad and Tobago as well as Japan and Nepal. He
availed himself of this opportunity to apprise the various
Government leaders of India's economic problems and also
informed them of the progress we have achieved in the last
two decades. We have also had the privilege of receiving
in our midst important leaders from several friendly countries. These visits bring abundant confirmation of the
importance they attach to their relations with India.
During the last few years there has been a welcome
development by way of growing economic intercourse between countries with differing political and economic
systems and ideologies as in the continent of Europe. At
the same time, the ever-widening gulf between the developed and the developing countries has widened. This is a
matter of great concern since one of the pre-conditions for
international peace and understanding is economic justice
in the community of nations and its absence carries the
seeds of tension and conflict from which none could remain

(vii)
immune. Recently, India has been host to the Second U.N.
Conference on Trade and Development. The achievements
of the Conference have not come up to our expectations;
nevertheless, the Conference has provided a forum for exchange of ideas between the developing and the developed
countries and the common purpose would, it is hoped, be
translated into concrete methods of increasing the commercial and economic exchanges between, the two groups of
countries.
India believes that multilateral co-operation among
countries is imperative for economic development and progress of the various world regions. Therefore, the Government of India welcome the formation of such regional economic groupings and have indicated their own willingness
to participate in such ventures which would be in the wider
interest of the Asian countries. We have made further
headway in developing tripartite co-operation between
India, Yugoslavia and the U.A.R.
While other continents have continued to progress in
peace, the scene of tension has shifted to Asia. The conflict in Vietnam shows no signs of abatement. West Asia,
the scene of a major crisis last June, still continues to suffer
from the consequences of that conflict. The Government
of India are convinced that these serious problems must be
resolved peacefully and as quickly as possible.
During the last two decades, the people of India have
borne the burden of economic development with fortitude.
At the same time we have reason to be gratified at the
support given and understanding shown by various friendly
countries notably the U.S.A. and the U.S.S.R. The assistance which we have received from countries with diverse
political systems is an acknowledgment of the validity of
our national aspirations for economic growth and development as well as of our role in the international field.
(viii)
The Government of India are fully conscious that economic progress is essential for securing political stability in
any country and our foreign relations must serve this
objective. The Government of India are convinced that
adherence to a policy of peaceful co-existence and co-operation with other friendly countries are essential. While we
shall remain dedicated to our cherished policy we shall not
yield to any pressure nor shall we relax our vigilance in the
defence of our integrity and the promotion of our national
interests abroad.

INDIA
USA CHINA PAKISTAN UZBEKISTAN MALI BULGARIA POLAND YUGOSLAVIA BRAZIL
CANADA VENEZUELA JAPAN NEPAL TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC
VIETNAM
Apr 12, 1967

INDIA'S NEIGHBOURS
CHAPTER I
INDIA'S NEIGHBOURS
AFGHANISTAN
THE traditional friendship and co-operation between
India and Afghanistan continued during the year under
review. The Royal Afghan Government valued India's
friendship and assistance and continued to seek Indian cooperation notwithstanding the RAG's efforts to normalise
its relations with Pakistan.
At the invitation of the President of the Ariana Afghan
Airlines, the Chairman of the Indian Airlines Corporation
visited Kabul in April, 1967. He announced that the IAC
would soon start a new weekly air service between Amritsar and Kabul, in addition to the Srinagar-Kabul service
which was to be inaugurated in May. The Afghan authorities requested for the services of Indian pilots and
engineers for the new internal services in Afghanistan by
the Bakhtan Airlines. The Amritsar-Kabul services were
begun in September, 1967.
An Afghan trade delegation, led by the President of
Foreign Trade in the Afghan Ministry of Commerce, visited
New Delhi in July, 1967. As a result of the talks. the existing trade agreement between India and Afghanistan was
extended for another year while the ceiling for the barter
of goods was raised to Rs. 7.5 crores.
The RAG appreciated India's determination to pursue
the project for a Children's Hospital in Kabul despite the
difficulties posed by the closure of the overland route. In
this connection, the visit of an Indian delegation of
engineers and architects in November was given wide
publicity.

32 E.A.-2
<pg1>
<pg2>
The Government of India's efforts to persuade Pakistan to reopen the overland route between India and Afghanistan have not yet borne fruit. This enforced closure of
the route gives Pakistan unfair advantage over India in
the matter of trade and economic collaboration with
Afghanistan. Though there were some proposed joint
Pak-Afghan ventures, mostly in the private sector, the,
RAG was still keen to obtain from India technical aid and
expertise.
As in previous years, an Indian delegation took part in
the annual Jashan celebrations in Afghanistan held in
the last week of August, 1967.
BURMA
The traditional friendship and co-operation between
India and Burma continued during the year under review.
The Minister of External Affairs paid an official visit to
Rangoon from 20 to 23 January, 1967 and discussed matters
of mutual interest.
An Indian delegation visited Rangoon on Feb 17, 1967
and held discussions with representatives of the
Government of Burma as a result of which the Indo-Burma
Boundary Agreement was signed on 10 March, 1967. Both
Governments have ratified the Agreement and the Instruments of Ratification were exchanged in New Delhi on 30
May, 1967. A Burmese Delegation visited India in October,
1967 to discuss further details about the first meeting of the
Joint Boundary Commission to be held shortly.
A collection of Indian books on cultural and economic
subjects was presented to the Director of Information, Government of the Union of Burma, in March, 1967 by the
Indian Ambassador as part of the Cultural Exchange Programme.
<pg3>
A 4-Member Delegation from the Information Department, Burma visited India for a fortnight in June, 1967.
A football team sponsored by the All-India Football
Federation visited Burma in November, 11067 and a Burmese
Football team visited India in January, 1968.
The Government of India sent textiles worth Rs. 5,000 to

the Government of Burma as a token help to the cyclone
victims. The Government of India also presented to the
Government of Burma Indian made surgical instruments
worth Rs. 15,000.
A Delegation of three Burmese medical officers visited
India to attend the W.H.O. Medical Education Workshop
from 1 to 5 January, 1968. Thereafter till 16 January, 1968,
the three Burmese doctors visited medical institutions in
New Delhi, Bombay, Poona and Calcutta.
Secretary, Ministry of External Affairs visited Rangoon
in January, 1968 and discussed matters of common concern.
In response to an invitation from the Prime Minister of
India, the Chairman of the Revolutionary Council of the
Union of Burma, General Ne Win, accompanied by Madame
Ne Win and Madame Daw Khin Mae Aye and officials paid
an informal unofficial visit to India from 15 to 23
March, 1968. General Ne Win bad a friendly exchange of
views with the President, Prime Minister and other Ministers of the Government of India on various matters and
visited some institutions of scientific and industrial
importance and places of cultural interest.
CEYLON
A Bill for grant of Ceylon citizenship to stateless persons of Indian origin covered by the Indo-Ceylon Agreement of 1964 was passed by the Ceylonese Parliament and
<pg4>
became law on 20 June, 1967. The Government of Ceylon
is framing regulations under this Act and after these are
passed by the Legislature, notifications inviting applications for grant of Indian and Ceylon citizenship will be
issued. The Government of India's Department of Rehabilitation is making arrangements for the rehabilitation of
the repatriates who will be returning to India under the
agreement.
In response to an invitation from the Prime Minister
of Ceylon, Prime Minister Indira Gandhi paid a goodwill
visit to Ceylon from 18 to 21 September, 1967. She received a warm and enthusiastic welcome from the government and people of Ceylon. The Prime Minister had
friendly discussions with the Ceylon Prime Minister and
other dignitaries. The Governments of India end Ceylon
reaffirmed their determination to continue to work closely
together and in co-operation with other countries to secure
effective implementation of the recommendations of the
United Nations with a view to reducing the widening gap

between the developed and the developing nations.
The two Prime Ministers reiterated their belief in the
principles embodied in the Charter of the United Nations
and their determination to work together and in co-operation with other nations to combat racialism and the remnants of colonialism, They also agreed that all international problems should be settled through peaceful negotiations and not through resort to force.
The Governor-General of Ceylon, His Excellency Mr.
W. Gopallawa, accompanied by Madame Gopallawa and
senior officials of the Government of Ceylon paid a goodwill visit to India from 21 October to 2 November, 1967.
They visited important places of Buddhist pilgrimage in
India and Nepal including Lumbini, the birth place of
Lord Buddha, Sarnath, Bodh Gaya and Nalanda. They
<pg5>
also visited Hindustan Aeronautics Ltd. at Bangalore,
the Indian Agricultural Research Institute in Delhi and
the Okhla Industrial Estates. The Governor-General expressed his deep appreciation at the efforts made by the
Government of India for the maintenance of ancient
monuments and also of the advance made by India in the
industrial and technological fields.
Mr. Philip Gunawardena, Ceylon's Minister for Industries, paid a brief visit to Delhi in August. He met the
Ministers and officials of the Ministries of Industry and
Commerce and discussed subjects of mutual interest.
Mr. T. S. Fernando, a senior Judge of the Supreme
Court in Ceylon, and other senior jurists from that country attended the Afro-Asian Legal Consultative Conference held in New Delhi in December.
To help the victims of floods in Ceylon, the Government
of India made a gift of sarongs and sarees worth Rs. 10,000
to the Government of Ceylon.
NEPAL
Our relations with Nepal continued to be friendly and
cordial during the period under review. His Majesty the
King of Nepal stopped over in Delhi for one night (14-15
May) on his way back to Kathmandu after making a
number of State visits to European countries. During this
stop-over, he greeted the new Indian President, and met
the Prime Minister. Other prominent visitors from Nepal
were the Deputy Prime Minister of Nepal who visited
Delhi in the middle of September and the Foreign Secretary, Shri J. N. Singha (presently Nepalese Ambassador

to India), who paid an official visit to India from 18 to 21
May, 1967. Shri Singha called on the Foreign Minister
and the Deputy Minister for External Affairs.
<pg6>
The Deputy Prime Minister of India, Shri Morarji
Desai, paid a goodwill visit to Nepal from 22 to 24 October,
1967. He was accorded a warm and affectionate welcome
by the Government and people of Nepal. He was received
in audience by His Majesty the King of Nepal. He visited
places of historic and cultural importance, and addressed
several important social and cultural gatherings.
The talks between the Deputy Prime Minister of India
and the Prime Minister and the Deputy Prime Minister of
Nepal were marked by a spirit of cordiality, mutual trust
and sympathetic understanding of each other's problems.
The two Deputy Prime Ministers reiterated their firm
support and unflinching dedication to the principles of
peaceful co-existence, non-alignment, international cooperation and peace.
At the invitation of the Chairman of the Rashtriya
Panchayat of Nepal, an Indian Parliamentary delegation
of 10 members led by Shri N. Sanjiva Reddy, Speaker of
the Lok Sabha, visited Nepal from 1 to 6 September, 1967.
This goodwill visit was appreciated by the Press and the
Chairman and Members of the Rashtriya Panchayat of
Nepal as a further step in strengthening the close and
friendly ties between India and Nepal. Among the other
Indian visitors to Nepal was the Shankaracharya of
Shringeri Math.
The Inter-Governmental Joint Committee of the representatives of HMG Nepal and the Government of India,
which was constituted under the "Memorandum of
Understanding on matters arising out of the Treaty of
Trade and Transit (1960)", signed in Kathmandu on 27
December, 1966, to consult each other to review mutual
difficulties, held its first meeting in Delhi from 22 to 29
March, 1967.
<pg7>
A meeting of the Indo-Nepal Border Trade Committee
was held at Raxaul on 11-12 September, 1967.
As in the previous years, a number of Nepalese students
were admitted to courses in various institutions in India
for higher studies in engineering, medicine and other
fields, both on scholarship and on a self-financing basis.
Admissions were arranged for most of them. Facilities for

the training of Nepalese military personnel in various
defence establishments continued to be provided.
On return from their State visit to the U.S.A., Their
Majesties the King and Queen of Nepal stopped over in
New Delhi on 9 and 10 December, 1967, en route to Kathmandu. The Royal visitors were treated as guests of the
Government of India and stayed in Rashtrapati Bhavan.
Their Majesties called on the President and were entertained to a lunch by him, before their departure for
Kathmandu on 10 December, 1967. The Prime Minister
called on Their Majesties on the day of their departure for
Kathmandu.
After successful completion of his assignment as India's
Ambassador to Nepal, Shri Shriman Narayan relinquished
charge of his post on 18 December, 1967. He was succeeded by Shri Raj Bahadur who presented his credentials on
8 January, 1968.
There was further progress in the projects undertaken
in Nepal with Indian co-operation. During the year under
report, the following projects were successfully completed:
(1) Dunduva Irrigation Project.
(2) Walter Supply, Nepalganj.
(3) Water Supply, Bhairawa.
(4) Water Supply, Pokhra.
<pg8>
(5) Hardinath Irrigation Project.
(6) Manusamara Irrigation Project.
(7) Water Supply, Janakpur.
(8) Water Supply, Rajbiraj,
(9) Trisuli Power House Transmission Line and.
Balaju Sub-Station.
(10) Phewatal Dam.
(11) Janakpur Airport.
(12) Hithaura Forestry Institute.
(13) University Library.

The projects mentioned at items 1 to 10 were handed over
to HMG Nepal during the year.
Another land-mark in Indo-Nepal economic co-operation was the signing of an Agreement between the two
Governments on 17 July, 1967, for the setting up of a
carrier trunk telephone line between Kathmandu and
Raxaul and a domestic telephone exchange at Birganj in
Nepal. Under this Agreement, overhead tele-communication alignments would be constructed between Kathmandu and Raxaul at an estimated cost of Rs. 94.5 lakhs.
India would also provide facilities, at additional cost, for
the training of Nepalese personnel in the tele-communication field.
India has offered to assist Nepal in a scheme to establish a Medical College and Hospital in Kathmandu. A
medical team consisting of 5 leading Nepalese doctors, led
by Shri Mana Mohan Lal Singh, Joint Secretary in the
Ministry of Economic Planning, HMG, visited India in
this connection from 13 to 26 September, 1967, at the invitation of the Government of India. The team made a
study tour of various colleges and institutes in Delhi,
Bombay, Goa and Varanasi.
<pg9>
PAKISTAN
The year under review was marked by some slight progress towards the normalization of relations between India
and Pakistan. In response to the persistent efforts of the
Government of India to bring about the implementation
of the unfulfilled provisions of the Tashkent Declaration,
the Government of Pakistan expressed their willingness
in January, 1967 to discuss the question of full restoration of telecommunications services. The Government of
India urged, in vain, the Government of Pakistan to agree
to widen the scope of the discussions so as to include the
restoration of all communications by air, road, rail and
river. A meeting was eventually held between the representatives of the telecommunications administrations of
the two countries, in Karachi in October, 1967. It was
decided at this meeting to restore these services to the
pre-August, 1965 level with effect from 1 November, 1967.
The two sides also agreed to discuss financial matters
relating to telecommunications in further meetings.
The Chief of the Army Staff of India and the C-in-C
of the Pakistan Army held their fourth meeting in Rawalpindi on 24-25 October, 1967. These meetings were held
in an atmosphere of understanding and cordiality.
Taking note of the sentiments expressed by President

Ayub Khan in a speech at the Pakistan Institute of International Affairs on 28 January, 1967, favouring reduction
in arms expenditure by both countries and utilization of
the resources so released for developmental purposes,
India's Foreign Minister addressed a letter on 25 February, 1967, to the Pakistan Foreign Minister, stating that
the Government of India considered that earnest efforts
should be made by the two countries to reach an agreement aimed at bringing about a reduction in arms expenditure in the two countries. He also suggested a meeting at the official level to discuss this important question.
<pg10>
The Pakistan Foreign Minister, in his reply of 7 April,
1967, turned down the offer on the plea that the question
of arms reduction could be realistically tackled only if
an effort was made simultaneously to negotiate a settlement of what he called the Jammu and Kashmir problem.
The Minister of External Affairs replied to the Pakistan
Foreign Minister on 6 May, 1967 regretting that the question of arms reduction had been relegated to a subsidiary
position and inseparably linked with the so-called Kashmir
question by the Government of Pakistan. He emphasized
that India's proposal for talks on arms reduction stood
on its own merits and had been made in response to the
views expressed in the Pakistan President's speech earlier in the year. In reply, the Foreign Minister of Pakistan, while suggesting simultaneous negotiations on the
so-called Kashmir dispute and the question of arms reduction, expressed the willingness of his Government to discuss what he called peripheral matters of mutual interest.
Anti-Indian propaganda by the official agencies and
news media of Pakistan continued steadily throughout
the year. The propaganda was particularly objectionable
during the Indian General Elections held in FebruaryMarch, 1967. An attempt was made to sow disaffection
among certain sections of our people. The Government
of India took various steps to deal with Pakistan's antiIndian propaganda and protested to the Government of
Pakistan on several occasions against propagation of distorted stories about India. The publication of President
Ayub Khan's political autobiography, "Friends not
Masters", in August, 1967 brings out rather eloquently
the unfriendly and, indeed, hostile sentiments harboured
towards India in the highest circles in Pakistan.
Following the publication of his book, President Ayub
Khan undertook a series of visits to European countries
particularly the Soviet Union, where he repeated his
<pg11>

familiar views. During these visits, the President repeatedly talked about Kashmir and the so-called `military imbalance' in the Indian sub-continent urging reAuction of arms supplies to India. At the same time, the
Government of Pakistan continued its eager search for
arms and ammunition from all available sources. In this
effort, Pakistan found in the People's Republic of China
a close, willing and lavish friend. The lifting of the
embargo on supplies of spares for armaments by the U.S.
Government stating that the new policy was bound to reactivate the entire war machine of Pakistan and hence was
likely to pose a severe threat to peace in this area. The
United States Government maintained that their policy
would not be allowed to result in an arms race between the
two countries. The Government of India also took strong
exception to the reported attempts by some countries to
supply obsolete U.S. weapons to Pakistan.
During the period under review, Pakistan continued her
policy of encouragement to certain hostile sections of the
population on the Eastern frontiers of India in their subversive activities against the Indian Union. In disregard of
Article 3 of the Tashkent Declaration under which the
two countries have undertaken not to interfere in each
other's internal affairs, Pakistan continued to incite Mizo
and Naga hostiles in their defiance of the Central authority. At a number of centres in East Pakistan', training is
being provided to Naga and Mizo hostiles in sabotage, subversion and guerilla warfare. Some of the arms and ammunition captured from the hostiles bore markings of the
Pakistan Ordnance Factory. The protests lodged by the
Government of India against such incitement and encouragement to the rebels by the authorities in Pakistan have
been rejected and the charges repeatedly denied by the
Government of Pakistan as being without any basis. Security measures have been tightened up all along the borders
<pg12>
to prevent crossing and re-crossing of the border with East
Pakistan by Naga and Mizo hostiles.
Infiltration by Pakistani nationals from East Pakistan to,
the eastern States of Assam, West Bengal and Tripura has
been somewhat on the decline during the year under review, largely due to the effective security measures taken
by the State Governments and the Border Security Force.
Some border incidents have, however, taken place along
the frontiers. These incidents have been in the form of intrusions by Pakistani lawless elements into Indian territory for committing dacoity, cattle lifting, kidnapping,
harvesting of crops, etc. While tightening the security

measures, the Government of India are making every
efforts to establish, through periodic meetings of the representatives of the two countries, a satisfactory working
relationship between the border security forces on either
side, in order to reduce border incidents and tension.
The work of demarcation of the borders has made some
progress. The Directors of Land Records and Surveys of
East Pakistan and the Government of Tripura are presently carrying on field work for demarcation of the border between East Pakistan and Tripura in the Sylhet Sector.
Work on the demarcation of the West Bengal-East Pakistan
border, which was to begin early this year, has, however,
come to a stand-still after the announcement of the decision of the Calcutta High Court in the Berubari case asking the Government of India not to proceed with the demarcation before a law is passed by the competent legislature
to pay compensation to the affected persons.
Travel between India and Pakistan continues to be restricted. With a view to facilitate such travel, the Government of India had requested the Government of Pakistan
to open all border checkposts on the land border between
the two countries. The Government of Pakistan have not
<pg13>
so far agreed to this, with the result that the poorer sections
of the population in both countries are put to great hardships. Indian nationals continued to face vexations and
difficulties in getting visas for travel to Pakistan. The Government of Pakistan, while abolishing visas for short term
journeys to Pakistan by foreigners, have singled out Indian
nationals as exceptions to this rule. The state of cultural
contacts between the two peoples continues to be far from
normal. There has, however, been a significant increase in
the number of pilgrims who visited Pakistan from India and
vice versa. During the year under review, 16 pilgrim parties comprising 958 persons visited India from Pakistan.
During the same period, 4 pilgrim parties comprising 3,902
individuals visited Pakistan from India.
There was some progress in the repatriation of Indian
nationals who have been imprisoned or interned in Pakistan. The number of persons who were repatriated during
this period was 133, leaving a balance of 70 persons. Every
effort is being made to expedite the repatriation of these
remaining persons. It may, however, be mentioned that
the Government of India have no definite information from
the Pakistan Government about the exact number of Indian nationals held in Pakistan.
In accordance with the provisions of the Indus Waters'

Treaty of 1960, the Indus Waters' Commissioners of India
and Pakistan held three meetings during the period under
review. At these meetings, the Commission discussed,
among other things, the question of reduction of supplies
of water to Pakistan as a result of completion of some of
the important projects under the Treaty.
The Kutch Award
The International Tribunal to determine and demarcate
the border between India and Pakistan in the GujaratWest Pakistan area rendered its Award on 19 February,
<pg14>
1968. This involved the determination of the boundary
between the erstwhile Indian State of Kutch and the,
province of Sind as it existed at the time of the creation
of Pakistan in 1947.
This Tribunal was constituted under the Indo-Pakistan
Agreement of 30 June, 1965. India nominated AmbassadorAles Bebler, Judge of the Constitutional Court of
Yugoslavia. Ambassador Nasrollah Entezam of Iran was
nominated by Pakistan. The Chairman of the Tribunal,
Judge Gunnar Lagergren, now President of the Court of'
Appeal for Western Sweden, was nominated by the U.N.
Secretary-General.
India was represented before the Tribunal by an
eminent team of Counsel led by the Attorney-General of
India, Shri C. K. Daphtary, the others being Shri
N. C. Chatterjee, M.P. and Shri N. A. Palkhiwala, Senior
Advocates of the Supreme Court of India, and Shri
J. M. Thakore, Advocate-General of Gujarat. The Counsel
were assisted by a team of officers headed by Shri
B. N. Lokur, Law Secretary to the Government of India
as Agent of India and Dr. K. Krishna Rao, Joint Secretary
and Legal Adviser, Ministry of External Affairs as Deputy
Agent.
The Tribunal commenced its deliberations in Geneva
on 15 February, 1966. It held 170 meetings in three
sessions. The final meeting was held on 14 July, 1967.
The position taken up by India before the Tribunal
was that the Indo-Pakistan boundary in this sector was
well established and that it ran roughly along the northern
edge of the Rann as shown in the pre-partition maps.
Pakistan's case was based on the following arguments.
Firstly, that Sind had extended to the South into the
Great Rann up to its middle and had exercised effective

and exclusive control over the northern half of the Great
Rann. Secondly, that the Rann is a "marine feature", i.e.
<pg15>
a separating entity between Kutch and Sind and that it
should accordingly be governed by the principles of the
median line and of equitable distribution. The bets in
the Rann were said to be governed by the principle of
"nearness of shores". Thirdly, Pakistan also alleged that
the whole width of the Rann formed a broad belt of boundary between territories on opposite sides and that the
Tribunal should reduce this wide boundary to a width-less
line which would run through the middle of the Rann.
According to Pakistan, the Tribunal should determine the
precise alignment of this width-less line. The three principal contentions of Pakistan were rejected by the Tribunal.
Reviewing and appraising the combined strength of the
evidence relied upon by India and Pakistan the Tribunal
has held that practically the entire Rann belonged to India
except the marginal area South of Rahim Ki Bazar, including Pirol Vala Kun, and Kanjarkot as well as Dhara Banni
and Chhad Bet, which have been held to be on the Pakistan
side of the alignment. This is on the ground that Pakistan
has made out a better and superior title based on effective
exercise of jurisdiction. Two inlets on either side of Nagar
Parkar have also been held to fall on the Pakistan side
of the alignment. It has also been held that the boundary
will take in on the Pakistan side, the small area of the
jutting out tongues of land in Nagar Parkar. The boundary line claimed by India has been modified only to
this extent and it involves an area of approximately 317
sq. miles. The Agreement of 30 June, 1965, stipulated
as follows:
The decision of the Tribunal..shall be binding
on both Governments, and shall not be questioned on any ground whatsoever. Both Governments undertake to implement the findings
of the Tribunal in full as quickly as possible
and shall refer to the Tribunal for decision
any difficulties which may arise between them
in the implementation of these findings. For
<pg16>
that purpose the Tribunal shall remain in
being until its findings have been implemented
in full.
Prime Minister Indira Gandhi has unequivocally made it
clear in Parliament on 28 February, 1968, that India would

implement the Award. The Representatives of the two
Governments will meet at New Delhi on 4 March, 1968, to
discuss the matters relating the demarcation of the boundary determined by the Tribunal.
THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA
The Chinese Government's hostility and intransigence
towards India continued undiminished and manifested itself in a variety of ways. The pressure on our Northern
borders was maintained and armed clashes were provoked
in Nathu La and Cho La areas. Properties belonging to the
Government of India in Shanghai, Lhasa, Yatung and Gartok were arbitrarily taken over by the Chinese authorities
by unilaterally tearing up contractual commitments.
Places of worship, viz., three Gurdwaras, a Parsi temple
and cemetery were arbitrarily confiscated by the Chinese
authorities. Anti-Indian sentiment was deliberately whipped up by levelling baseless charges against two Indian
diplomats and they were subjected to uncivilised and inhuman behaviour by Chinese mobs. The Chinese propaganda machinery intensified its hostile propaganda against
India. All these clearly point to the Chinese Government's
Unfriendly and antagonistic posture towards the Government and people of India.
The armed clashes at Cho La and Nathu La in the
months of September and October, 1967, respectively were
short and localised. However, the fact that they took place
without any provocation from the Indian side and over a
<pg17>
border which even by Chinese admission was never in dispute, clearly demonstrates China's attempts to create
trouble along the border at places of her choosing. It also
demonstrated that the Chinese Government showed no interest whatever in defusing the situation through discussions as the Chinese side totally ignored the proposal for a
ceasefire and a meeting between the Sector Commanders
at Nathu La made by India.
Chinese publicity media have intensified their offensive
against India. At first only the Central Government in
India was subjected to criticism. As time went on, however, the various State Governments and the "Parliamentary road" itself were subjected to fierce criticism. Chinese
propaganda has condemned Parliamentary institutions and
has spared no political party, not even the Communist
Party of India right and left. Their commendation at present is only available to the ultra-leftists and those who
are said to have been behind the Naxalbari incident. The
Naxalbari happenings and other violent and subversive

activities were enthusiastically lauded. The visits of Indian leaders abroad and of foreign dignitaries to India
appear to irk the Chinese and malicious stories were put
out in regard to the motivation of such visits. No effort is
spared to exacerbate the differences between India and
Pakistan and Chinese propaganda does everything to sow
misunderstanding between India and Pakistan.
China has even given up the pretence of peaceful coexistence and the summer of 1967 saw the mask taken off
from the Chinese face. Consequently, today China is perhaps more isolated than ever before. She has quarrelled
with almost all her neighbours and erstwhile friends. However, she persists in her overbearing and self-righteous attitude and there is not even a hint of desiring to repair her
relations with others. The Government of India have, on
32 E.A.-3
<pg18>
more than one occasion, declared that they are keeping the
door open for peaceful negotiations on all outstanding disputes and differences. We are, however, resolved to safeguard our territorial integrity and unity and will not brook
interference in our internal affairs. In spite of Chinese provocations we remained patient but firm in the hope and
belief that one day the Chinese people will compel their
rulers to revert to the paths of reason, good neighbourliness
and peace.
Tibetan Refugees
The number of Tibetan refugees, who have taken asylum
in India since 1959, rose to 56,000 on 31 October, 1967. Of
these, nearly 11,000 are children, 3,000 old and infirm persons and 2,600 Lamas. Between June and October, 1967,
about 945 refugees entered India from Tibet through NEFA,
Jammu and Kashmir and Uttar Pradesh. About 14,000 refugees have been settled in six land settlements at Bylakuppe in Mysore, Chandragiri and Mahendragarh in Orissa,
Mainpat in Madhya Pradesh, Clementown in Uttar Pradesh, and in the North East Frontier Agency.
Nearly 800 refugees from various camps have been resettled at the site of the proposed settlement at Mundagod
in Mysore, where work on reclamation has already begun.
It is hoped to move another 1,500 refugees to the site to
work on a dam which would irrigate some 2,500 acres. The
settlement is expected to be completed by 1970.
With financial assistance from the Government of India,
the Government of Bhutan have already rehabilitated 500
Tibetan refugees and have lately started work for the re-

settlement of another 1,000. Similarly, 500 Tibetan refugees
have been settled in Sikkim on small schemes and a proposal to settle another 2,000 on a Tea Estate to be established
by the Government of Sikkim with the assistance of the
<pg19>
Government of India is under consideration. Owing to
scarcity of lands it has been decided to shift about 1,200
Tibetans from Sikkim to the new agricultural settlement
being established at Mundagod in Mysore.
The Tibetan Industrial Rehabilitation Society, which
has a programme to rehabilitate 5,000 refugees, has so far
been able to provide work for 900 on projects such as woollen mill, tea estates, lime-stone quarry, hydrated lime plant
and a fibre glass factory in Himachal Pradesh and Uttar
Pradesh.
Nearly 600 refugees are working in handicraft centres,
mainly on carpet weaving, at Bylakuppe, Chandragiri,
Mainpat, Dalhousie, Simla, Darjeeling and Kalimpong.
Tibet House has been established in Delhi for the preservation of the Tibetan cultural heritage and for marketing
products of the Tibetan handicrafts through its emporium
and exhibitions. It has arranged two exhibitions in Delhi,
one in Bombay and one in Tokyo during the year.
Nearly 5,500 Tibetan children received education at
schools run by the Tibet School Society, an autonomous
body, under the Chairmanship of the Union Minister of
Education. The Society runs 7 residential schools at Darjeeling, Kalimpong, Mount Abu, Simla, Mussoorie, Dalhousie and Pachmarhi and day schools at Bylakuppe, Tezu,
Changthang, Mainpat and Chandragiri. In addition, the
Tibetan Homes Foundation, set up at Mussoorie as a charitable society, manages 24 Homes for Tibetan children.
Nearly 380 children of these Homes are given a grant of
Rs. 50 per months per child by the Tibet School Society. A
children's nursery has been established at Dharamsala,
which is run by His Holiness the Dalai Lama, with the
assistance of the Government of India and the Central Relief Committee (India). It takes care of about 700, children
<pg20>
most of whom are either orphans or semi-orphans. A nursery has also been established by the "Save the Children
Fund" voluntary agency at Simla. The Institute for
Higher Tibetan Studies was inaugurated by His Holiness
the Dalai Lama at Varanasi. The Institute would provide
higher education for 1,200 Lamas from Madhyama (Intermediate) to Shastri (Doctorate). About 100 students are
expected to join the institution, from Buxa Lama Ashram,
in the near future. 2,000 Lamas are being maintained at

Buxa Lama Ashram in West Bengal and in Dalhousie.
Medical services have been made available to all the
settlements and camps. Special attention is paid to those
suffering from TB and assitance is being provided to admit
them in sanatoria.
The Central Relief Committee (India) has been instrumental in obtaining assistance worth Rs. 37 lakhs from
foreign aid agencies. Of this, Rs. 24 lakhs were in cash
and Rs. 13 lakhs in the form of food, medicines, clothing,
etc. Rs. 40,000 were given during 1967-68 as grant-in-aid to
the Central Relief Committee (India). This Committee,
while coordinating, clearing and distributing foreign assistance, keeps the foreign agencies informed about the
requirements of the Tibetan refugees in India through its
monthly bulletins and meetings.
His Holiness the Dalai Lama visited Japan from 25
September to 10 October, 1967, as the guest of the Japan
Buddhist Missionary Association to attend the opening of
the exhibition of Tibetan arts and handicrafts in Tokyo.
This was his first visit to a foreign country since his arrival
in India In 1959. He also visited Bangkok from 11 to 17
November at the invitation of the Buddhist Association of
Thailand. Both these were cultural visits.
His Holiness the Dalai Lama has now decided to take
up his permanent residence in Dharamsala in Himachal
<pg21>
Pradesh during the period of his stay in India. He visited
the Tibetan settlement camps at Mundagod and Bylakuppe
in Mysore and Mainpat in Madhya Pradesh during the
month of December. He also visited the paper mill set
up by the Tibetan refugees at Sehore (Bhopal), besides
other places of interest in Mysore, Madras and Andhra
Pradesh.
In the past, agricultural settlements have been
organised for the Tibetan refugees on the lands donated
by the State Governments. These Governments are now
finding it difficult to provide additional lands. Efforts are,
however, being made to procure additional lands and to
purchase them, if necessary.
INDIA
AFGHANISTAN MALI PAKISTAN USA BURMA NEPAL TURKEY LATVIA CENTRAL AFRICAN
REPUBLIC UZBEKISTAN CHINA IRAN YUGOSLAVIA SWEDEN SWITZERLAND BHUTAN JAPAN
THAILAND

Feb 17, 1967

STATES IN SPECIAL TREATY RELATIONS WITH INDIA
CHAPTER II
STATES IN SPECIAL TREATY RELATIONS WITH
INDIA
BHUTAN
UNDER the Treaty of Friendship between India and
Bhutan, Bhutan is guided by India in regard to its external relations. It may be recalled that through India's
sponsorship, Bhutan became a member of the Colombo
Plan in 1962. In April, 1967, at the request of Bhutan,
the Government of India sponsored its application for
admission to the Universal Postal Union.
The Minister for External Affairs stated in the Lok
Sabha on Jun 05, 1967 that "the Government of India
would be happy to sponsor Bhutan for membership of the
United Nations and other international bodies when Bhutan
expresses its readiness to assume the responsibilities and.
obligations of such membership".
A Bhutanese delegation participated in the 18th Session of the Colombo Plan Consultative Committee held in
Rangoon from 21 November to 8 December, 1967. The
delegation was led by His Royal Highness Namgyal Wangchuk, Paro Penlop (Governor of Paro). Another Bhutanese delegation, led by Dasho Dawa Tsering, Secretary
General, Development Wing, Government of Bhutan,
participated in a Colloquium on Intra-Regional Technician
Training organised in Bangkok from 5 to 8 June, 1967 under
the Colombo Plan.
The following Arrangements were signed between India
and Bhutan in New Delhi on 21 April, 1967:
(i) An Arrangement relating to the letter post which,
inter alia, provides for the exchange of both registered and unregistered correspondence, and
<pg22>

<pg23>
replaces the previous Arrangement for the exchange of correspondence which was signed in
New Delhi on 11 September, 1962.
(ii) An Arrangement for the exchange of money
orders.
By agreement with the Government of Bhutan, the
Government of India have decided to post a "Special Officer of India in Bhutan" in Thimpu, the Capital of Bhutan.
His functions would be to coordinate Indian cooperation
schemes with Bhutan and generally act as a Liaison Officer of the Government of India with the Government of
Bhutan on matters of mutual interest. The Political Officer in Sikkim will, however, continue to be in overall
charge of India's relations with Bhutan. The first incumbent of the post of Special Officer in Bhutan, Shri Brijbir
Saran Das, assumed charge in Thimpu on 23 January, 1968.
The Government of India have agreed to underwrite
Bhutan's Second Five Year Plan (April, 1966 to March,
1971) up to a ceiling of Rs. 20 crores.
An Indian Parliamentary delegation under the leadership of Shri K. Hanumanthaiya, M.P., Chairman of the
Administrative Reforms Commission, visited Bhutan from
19 to 26 October, 1967. The other members of the delegation were Sarvashri S. C. Samantha, Rabi Ray, R. S. Khandekar and Amrit Nahata. They were greatly impressed
by the personality of His Majesty the King and the progress achieved in Bhutan under his enlightened leadership.
His Majesty the Druk Gyalpo (King of Bhutan) paid
a State visit to India from 1 to 15 February, 1968 for talks
on matters of mutual interest.
A seven-member delegation of the Royal Advisory
Council of Bhutan, led by Geshe Tshewang, paid a goodwill visit to India from 5 to 21 December, 1967. This was
<pg24>
the first time for a delegation of the Royal Advisory Council to visit India.
A twenty-member delegation of Bhutanese Lamas, led
by Geshe Tshewang, member of the Royal Advisory Council, visited places of Buddhist pilgrimage in India in January, 1967.

A delegation of Bhutan Government officials led by
Dasho Chogyal, Finance Secretary, visited Delhi from 17
to 22 December, 1967 for discussions with officials of the
Ministry of External Affairs regarding the progress of
Indian cooperation schemes in Bhutan.
A group of 40 Bhutanese schoolboys visited India on
Bharat Darshan from 14 January to 12 February, 1968.
Shri T. N. Kaul, Secretary in the Ministry of External
Affairs, visited Bhutan twice for discussions on matters
of mutual interest, first from 2 to 4 August, 1967 and then
from 31 October to 3 November, 1967.
A fifteen-member troupe of the Kathak Kala Kendra
from New Delhi visited Bhutan in March, 1967 and gave
performances which were greatly appreciated.
The Deputy Prime Minister, Shri Morarji Desai paid a
goodwill visit to Bhutan from 23 to 26 March, 1968.
SIKKIM
His Highness the Chogyal of Sikkim, accompanied by
the Gyalmo and his children, paid his first State visit to
India from 27 August to 11 September, 1967. They were
received with great warmth and affection wherever they
went and the visit served to further strengthen the close
and friendly relations between India and Sikkim.
An Indo-Sikkimese delegation led by the Dowager
Gyalmo of Sikkim (mother of the Chogyal) visited the
U.S.S.R. from 29 September to 30 October, 1967 to study
<pg25>
the possibility of obtaining material on Tibetological studies, such as Xylographs and manuscripts for the Namgyal
Institute of Tibetology, Gangtok.
Sikkim had its third elections to the State Council in
March, 1967 and a new Executive Council was sworn in
on 31 May, 1967.
The Chinese precipitated a serious incident at Nathu
La and there was heavy exchange of firing between Indian
and Chinese troops from 11 to 14 September, 1967. Indian
troops gave a magnificent account of themselves and effectively countered the Chinese belligerence. This was followed by another incident at Cho La on 1 October, 1967.
Indian troops made a measured response and the incident
remained localised.

As at the end of October, 1967 developmental assistance given by independent India to Sikkim amounted to
about Rs. 12.85 crores by way of grants and Rs. 56 lakhs
by way of loans. For Sikkim's Third Five Year Plan
(April, 1966 to March, 1971) the Government of India have
agreed to provide assistance of about Rs. 9 crores mainly
in the form of grants.
During 1967, 10 Sikkimese students were selected for
the award of Government of India scholarships for studies
in public schools in India and 20 for degree and diploma
courses.
A team of 11 members of the Indian Parliament visited Nathu La and Gangtok from 16 to 18 October. 1967.
A goodwill delegation of 3 Executive Councillors and
3 Deputy Executive Councillors of Sikkim visited India
from 24 January to 10 February, 1968.
A seventeen-member Sikkimese goodwill delegation
visited India for three weeks in March, 1967.
<pg26>
Shri Dharma Vira, Governor of West Bengal, visited
Gangtok from 30 October to 1 November, 1967.
Shri T. N. Kaul, Secretary in the Ministry of External
Affairs, visited Sikkim on 4 August, 1967 for talks on matters of mutual interest.
A Kathak Kala Kendra troupe visited Sikkim in January and gave several performances.
A six-member team of Rajasthani puppeteers from the
Bhartiya Natya Sangh gave performances to the school
children in Gangtok to coincide with the celebration of
the Children's Day in November, 1967.
Shri V. H. Coelho relinquished charges of the post of
Political Officer in Sikkim on 27 June, 1967. He was succeeded by Shri N. B. Menon on 3 July, 1967.
The Deputy Prime Minister, Shri Morarji Desai paid a
goodwill visit to Sikkim from 26 to 28 March, 1968.
INDIA
BHUTAN SRI LANKA UNITED KINGDOM USA
Jun 05, 1967

SOUTH-EAST ASIA
CHAPTER III
SOUTH-EAST ASIA
THERE was steady improvement in India's relationswith the countries in South-East Asia. The close and
cordial relations existing between India and her immediate neighbours, Ceylon and Burma, have been described in Chapter I. With the other countries in the region,
also, contacts continued to grow.
THAILAND
The Education Minister of Thailand visited India in
July, 1967 at the invitation of the Government of India.
Under the patronage of the Prime Minister of Thailand a large image of Buddha cast in bronze was installed
in the Thai temple at Bodh Gaya.
The Government of Thailand donated 50 tons of rice
for the people of Bihar.
Unfortunately, discussions between India and Thailand
concerning a new air agreement were not conclusive and,
as a result, the Rights of the two national airlines operating between the two countries have been suspended.
MALAYSIA
The then Foreign Minister, Shri M. C. Chagla, paid a
visit to Malaysia in May, 1967. This visit helped to bring
the two countries still closer. Shri Chagla had discussions
with the Prime Minister, Deputy Prime Minister and
other Ministers in Malaysia. The Foreign Minister's
offer of an Indian glider and technical and other assistance to Malaysia was well received.
<pg27>
<pg28>
A four-member delegation from the Ministry of
Defence visited Malaysia in 1967 and had useful discussions with their counterparts in Malaysia.
The Malaysian Minister of Transport, Tan Sri Haji

Sardon Bin Haji Jubir visited India in June, 1967, at the
invitation of the Government of India. During the visit,
the Air Agreement with Malaysia, which had been drawn
up earlier by an Indian Air delegation in Kuala Lumpur,
was signed.
To promote closer cooperation in the technical and
economic fields, 500 seats for training at various institutions in India were offered to the Malaysian Government.
In addition, a large number of Malaysian students are
already studying in India.
The Malaysian Government made a contribution of
$ (M) 30,000 for relief in Bihar.
SINGAPORE
The then Foreign Minister, Shri M. C. Chagla, visited
Singapore in May 1967 and had discussions with the Prime
Minister of Singapore and other Ministers.
The first High Commissioner of Singapore in India
presented credentials to the President of India in July
1967. India has had a Mission in Singapore for some
years.
There were anxieties regarding the future of people
of Indian origin in Singapore, particularly those employed
in the British base, consequent on the British decision
to withdraw from the base. The Prime Minister of Singapore and other authorities have, however, made it clear
that all citizens regardless of their origin, would have
equal rights to remain in Singapore without discrimination. Employment opportunities for non-citizens who
<pg29>
include many Indian nationals would, however, be affected.
The Delegation from the Defence Ministry which
visited Malaysia in June 1967, also visited Singapore.
CAMBODIA
Cambodia faced certain anxieties during the period
under review. In response to an appeal made by the
Cambodian Government to all countries with which Cambodia had diplomatic relations, the Government of India
reaffirmed her respect and recognition for the independence, neutrality and territorial integrity of Cambodia
within the limits of its present frontiers.

The International Control Commission in Cambodia
considered various questions in the context of the increased fighting in Vietnam and the consequent anxieties
of Cambodia regarding violation of its frontiers and was
successful in resolving some of the immediate problems
referred to it.
LAOS
His Majesty the King of Laos, accompanied by the
Deputy Prime Minister and other Ministers and officials,
paid a State visit to India in December, 1967. During his
talks with the President and Prime Minister, His Majesty
emphasised his earnest desire to maintain the neutrality
of Laos as envisaged in the Geneva Agreement of 1962
concerning Laos. The Prime Minister conveyed our
support for Laotian neutrality as well as our willingness
to be of assistance to Laos in various fields. His Majesty
also presented Laotian awards to eight members of the
Third Indian Medical Team for meritorious service in
Laos.
<pg30>
The International Control Commission in Laos faced
difficult conditions both as regards its function and
finances.
VIETNAM
The situation in Vietnam continued to cause serious
concern. The aerial bombing of North Vietnam increased
in intensity and there was also escalation of the ground
fighting. In pursuit of our objective of seeking a peaceful
solution to the Vietnam problem, the Government of
India continued to make every possible effort, through
diplomatic and other channels, to promote conditions
which would enable a peaceful solution of the problem.
The Defence Minister of India, who led the Indian
Delegation to the United Nations General Assembly
at its last session, expressed, on Oct 06, 1967 the
confidence of the Government of India that an unconditional stoppage of bombing would lead to discussions between the parties concerned for a peaceful settlement.
Subsequent events have confirmed this assessment. The
Prime Minister as well as other Government spokesmen
have also expressed on many occasions, our vital interest
in a peaceful solution of the Vietnam conflict and emphasised that the unconditional stoppage of bombing is
the first essential step which would lead to peaceful talks
between the parties concerned. India has also supported
all peace initiatives inspired by the same objective which
had been made by others, and specially that made by
U Thant.

In increasingly difficult conditions India continued to
shoulder its responsibilities of Chairmanship of the International Control Commission in the hope that this Commission would ultimately help in the restoration of peace in
the area. Though the Commission cannot be very active in
the conditions prevailing in Vietnam at present and is facing
<pg31>
serious financial difficulties as well, all parties concerned
seem desirous of its continuance in the hope that it could
play a more useful role in the future when active hostilities
cease.
INDONESIA
The improved relations between India and Indonesia
were further consolidated during the year. The Rs. 10 crore
credit offered by India to Indonesia has been almost entirely
utilised.
At the joint invitation of the Chairman of the Rajya
Sabha and the Speaker of the Lok Sabha, a five-member
Parliamentary delegation from Indonesia, led by the Speaker
of the Indonesian Parliament, visited India in October, 1967.
AUSTRALIA AND NEW ZEALAND
India's relations with these two Commonwealth countries continued to remain cordial.
The first round of Indo-Australian consultations between
the officials of the two Foreign Offices took place in April
1967.
An Indian Parliamentary delegation visited Australia in
September-October, 1967.
A visit contemplated by the Prime Minister of India had
to be postponed following the tragic death of the Australian
Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Holt. Shri B. R. Bhagat, Minister of State in the Ministry of External Affairs, attended
the memorial service at Melbourne. The Prime Minister
attended a memorial service held in New Delhi.
The Australian Government has shown great sympathy
and interest in helping India to tide over the situation created by drought in India. In July, 1967 Australia announced
<pg32>
a gift of 150,000 tonnes of wheat which was the third such

gift by Australia to India.
FIJI
The Chief Minister of Fiji, Ratu-K. K. T. Mara, visited
India in September, 1967 at the invitation of the Government of India. During the visit, there was a helpful exchange of views regarding the current situation in Fiji.
Mr. Vijay R. Singh, Minister for Social Services in the
Government of Fiji, also paid a visit to India in November,
1967.
The Secretary in the Ministry of External Affairs accompanied by a Joint Secretary visited Fiji in January, 1968.
GFNERAL
Indian Naval Ships paid goodwill visits to some of the
countries in the region, viz., Cambodia, Thailand, Indonesia,
Singapore and Malaysia.
INDIA
BURMA THAILAND USA MALAYSIA REPUBLIC OF SINGAPORE CAMBODIA VIETNAM LAOS
SWITZERLAND INDONESIA AUSTRALIA NEW ZEALAND FIJI
Oct 06, 1967

EAST ASIA
CHAPTER IV
EAST ASIA
JAPAN
THE growing friendly relations bentween India and Japan
were further strengthened by increased contacts at official
as well as unofficial levels.
At the invitation of the Japanese Foreign Minister, the
Deputy Prime Minister of India, Shri Morarji Desai, paid
a visit to Japan in August, 1967. He had two very useful
meetings with the Prime Minister of Japan, Mr. Sato. Ha
also discussed matters of mutual interest with the Foreign Minister and other members of the Government of

Japan and met leaders of business and industry in Japan.
An immediate result of the visit was the announcement
by the Government of Japan of a softening of the terms
of new loans and credits to India.
An agreement was signed in Tokyo in September, 1967,
under which Japan will give India a credit of $45 million,
her seventh in the series. The rate of interest for this
credit was reduced from 5-7 per cent to 5-5 per cent and
the repayment period was extended from 15 to 18 years.
An amount of 2.2 million tons of fertilisers was purchased
under the sixth Yen Credit.
The Third Consultative Meeting between high officials
of the Indian Ministry of External Affairs and the Gaimusho (the Japanese Foreign Office) was held in New Delhi
in the last week of January, 1968. The consultations were
held in a frank and cordial atmosphere and the exchange
of opinions which covered a wide range of topics has helped in strengthening the understanding and close friendship
which so happily exists between the two countries.
<pg33>
32 E.A.--4
<pg34>
The first meeting of the Japan-India Business Cooperation Committee was held in Tokyo in September, 1967. A
delegation of 10 leading Indian industrialists and businessmen took part in the meeting.
The first meeting of the Mixed Commissions was held
both in Tokyo and in New Delhi as provided for in the
Cultural Agreement between the two countries.
Mr. Kumao Nishimura came to India as a special envoy of the Japanese Foreign Minister, to explain his Government's point of view on the nuclear non-proliferation
treaty.
Shri B. R. Bhagat, Minister of State in the Ministry of
External Affairs, represented India at the funeral of the
former Prime Minister of Japan, Mr. Yoshida.
The Deputy Minister of Community Development and
Cooperation in the Government of India visited Japan at
the invitation of the Japanese Government. Among other
important Indian visitors to Japan were the Minister of
Commerce at the head of a Goodwill Mission of Developing Countries, the Deputy Minister of Commerce to attend
the twenty-third session of the ECAFE, the Minister of

Industry in the Government of Kerala and the Mayor of
Madras. Shri S. A. Dange attended the thirty-fourth annual convention of the General Council of Trade Unions.
Shri K. S. Ramachandran of the Press Trust of India
attended and presided over the inaugural session of the
Second General Assembly of the Organisation of Asian
News Agency. Shri Lalit Sen attended the Second World
Conference against Atomic and Hydrogen Bomb.
Messrs. Mitsukoshi organised a special promotion drive
for Indian handicrafts and handlooms in April, 1967, in
Japan. A baby elephant was presented to the Firm on
this occasion.
<pg35>
THE DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF KOREA
A special envoy of the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea visited India in June/July, 1967 and had talks
with the Prime Minister and other Ministers as well as
with the senior officials of the Ministry of External Affairs.
THE REPUBLIC OF KOREA
The Eighth Governing Body of the Asian Productivity
Organisation held at Seoul in April, 1967 was attended by
Shri N. N. Wanchoo, Secretary of the Ministry of Industrial Development and Company Affairs. In April, 1967,
three persons were sent for training to South Korea under
the U.S. Third Country Programme (included in U.S. Aid
Assistance) for training administrative and technical personnel in Family Planning and related fields.
A six-member Goodwill Mission visited India between
23 and 27 August and discussed matters of commercial
and economic interest.
In view of the $ 11 million rolling stock deal recently
concluded with the Republic of Korea, the visit of Shri
Parameshwaran, Secretary, Railway Board, to that country
was of special significance.
In September, 1967 two South Korean Government officials arrived in New Delhi to study policies and procedures
intended to induce foreign investments.
THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF MONGOLIA
At the invitation of the Mongolian Communist Party,
two members of the Communist Party of India, Shri M.
C. S. Rao and Shrimati M. Punyavati, paid a visit to Mongolia. Shri H. D. Malaviya, Editor of the Socialist Congressman, attended a research conference on 'The Great

October Socialist Revolution and Mongolia' held at Ulan
Bator.
<pg36>
The Indian Embassy organised a very successful commercial exhibition at Ulan Bator in the month of June,
1967.
A Cultural Exchange Programme was signed between
the Republic of India and the Mongolian People's Republic
on 16 January, 1968 at New Delhi.
JAPAN
INDIA USA UNITED KINGDOM KOREA MONGOLIA
Oct 06, 1967

WEST ASIA AND NORTH AFRICA
CHAPTER V
WEST ASIA AND NORTH AFRICA
WEST Asia was the scene of a major crisis during the
year. The story of the events leading to the armed conflict
between Israel and the Arab countries need not be
recounted.
On 18 May, 1967 the Government of India received
through their Ambassador in Cairo a verbal message from
President Nasser apprising them of the development
threatening the security of Arab States. The Prime Minister of India, in her reply, noted with deep concern the
developing situation and expressed the hope that peace
would be maintained. Subsequently, the U.A.R. demanded,
in the exercise of her sovereignty, the withdrawal of the
UNEF stationed in Gaza and the Sinai peninsula. The U.N.
Secretary-General, after consulting the U.N. Advisory
Committee on the UNEF and the countries contributing to
the force, decided to withdraw the UNEF.
In a statement in the Lok Sabha on May 25, 1967, the
Foreign Minister of India stated that since the UNEF could
function in the U.A.R. territory only with the latter's con-

sent, India could not be a party to any procedure which
would make the UNEF an occupation force.
When the Security Council met to discuss U Thant's
reports on the West Asian situation, India's representative
at the U.N. informally circulated an Indian draft resolution
aimed at supporting U Thant's recommendations and gaining a "breathing spell" to work out a modus vivendi consistent with the U.A.R. sovereignty. The Indian draft met
<pg37>
<pg38>
with favourable response and it was hoped that in the Security Council meeting scheduled for 5 June, 1967, significant
progress would be made.
On 5 June, 1967, however, Israel launched a massive airand land attack simultaneously upon the U.A.R., Jordan
and Syria. In the light of this sudden development, on the
same day the Indian representative in the Security Council
sponsored a draft resolution calling upon the combatants to.
cease fire and withdraw to the positions held by them before the commencement of hostilities, i.e., on 4 June, 1967
This draft, tabled before there was any indication of the
advantages either side might have acquired, was based on
the principle that no territorial advantage should be gained
by the use of force. The Indian draft had the support of
Mali, Nigeria, Ethiopia, Bulgaria and the U.S.S.R., but was
opposed by some others who would only agree to a simple
cease-fire resolution. India's representative argued, in
vain, that a call for cease-fire without simultaneous provision for withdrawal would make the acceptance of cease,
fire difficult, if not impracticable. On 6 June the Security
Council adopted a resolution asking for cease-fire as a first
step. An emergency meeting was convened at the request
of the U.S.S.R. on 7 June and a resolution was finally adopt.
ed unanimously demanding a cease-fire by 2000 hours
G.M.T. on 7 June, 1967, again, as a first step. While supporting this resolution, India's representative made it clear
that India along with some other members would have preferred a resolution which also asked for withdrawal of
forces to the 4 June positions. This, besides being sound in
principle, would have provided a basis on which peace could
be built in West Asia.
During the hostilities, the Indian contingent with the
UNEF suffered some serious casualties at the hands of the
<pg39>
Israeli forces. These acts were widely condemned in India

as well as abroad.
Following the cessation of hostilities, the Security Council met to consider two draft resolutions on the situation,
one tabled by the U.S.A. and the other by the U.S.S.R. The
Soviet resolution was voted upon and defeated. Thereupon,
at the request of the U.S.S.R., the Secretary-General convened a special emergency session of the General Assembly,
which began on 17 June. The Foreign Minister of India,
speaking on 22 June in the Assembly, stressed the need for
a lasting peace in the area for which the essential first
requisite was the return of the armed forces to the positions
held before the commencement of hostilities. He emphasised four cardinal principles in this connection. First, it was
not open to a country to start a war merely because it felt
that a threat to its security existed; the U.N. Charter prescribed various courses of action open to it under such circumstances. Secondly, no aggressor could be permitted to
retain the fruits of aggression. Thirdly, it was not permissible for a country to acquire territory of another state
in order to strengthen its bargaining power. Finally, rights
could not be established, territorial disputes could not be
settled and boundaries could not be adjusted through armed conflict. The Foreign Minister of India proposed, in
addition, that a special representative of the SecretaryGeneral be appointed to help reduce tension in the area and
to ensure the safety and security of the civilian Arab population in areas occupied by Israel and to facilitate the return
of refugees. He also proposed that the U.N. Truce Supervisory Organisation should be enlarged and strengthened
to ensure strict observance of the General Armistice
Agreements.
After protracted discussion, the Emergency Session came
to an end on 19 September without having been able to
<pg40>
adopt any substantive resolution regarding the West Asian
crisis and the matter was referred back to the Security
Council. After intensive consultations, the Security Council finally adopted unanimously on 22 November, 1967, a
British sponsored resolution on the issue. Three other resolutions-the three-power (Mali, Nigeria and India), the
U.S.A. and the U.S.S.R.-which were before the Security
Council were not pressed to a vote. As envisaged in the
British resolution, the U.N. Secretary-Genera after obtaining the views of all parties concerned appointed Dr. Gunnar
Jarring as U.N. Special Representative in the Middle East.
Dr. Jarring has since been consulting the leaders of the
countries concerned-the U.A.R., Jordan, the Lebanon and
Israel. Syria, however, refused to cooperate with
Dr. Jarring's mission.

There was widespread appreciation, among the Arab
nations in West Asia and North Africa, of India's principled
stand on the West Asian crisis. Soon after the conflict, the
Governments of Iraq and Syria requested the Government
of India to look after their interests in the United States
and the United Kingdom respectively.
The Government of India fully support the efforts of the
United Nations representative, Dr. Jarring, to reach a just
solution which would bring peace to the entire region,
This, in the Government's view, should ensure not only
vacation of territories which were occupied by force but
also security and legitimate rights for all the States and
rehabilitation of the Palestinian refugees.
THE SUDAN
India's relations, with individual countries in the region
remained cordial. The President of the Sudan paid a State
visit to India from 28 April to 5 May. During the visit,
President Azhari revived his personal contact with Indian
<pg41>
leaders after a lapse of 12 years. He was keen to see for
himself the progress in India since 1955, when he came to
India on his way back from the Bandung Conference.
While he expressed his admiration in no uncertain terms for
the achievements during the intervening decade, he also
witnessed the validity of India's secularism in action.
KUWAIT
The then Foreign Minister of India, Shri M. C. Chagla,
paid an official visit. from 15 to 17 April, 1967, to Kuwait.
He met the Amir, the Crown Prince and Prime Minister.
the Foreign Minister and the Minister for Commerce and
discussed problems of mutual interest with them. A joint
communique was issued at the end of the talks which noted
with satisfaction the friendly and cordial relations existing
between India and Kuwait and reaffirmed the mutual determination to develop these relations so that they could cover
all aspects of mutually beneficial cooperation. The Foreign
Minister of Kuwait, as also the Ministers of Commerce and
Education, accepted invitations to visit India.
The second Indo-Kuwait Joint Committee meeting was
held in Kuwait from 9 to 15 April, 1967. It discussed the
possibilities of collaboration between India and Kuwait.
India has offered to make available the services of Indian
technicians and experts to the Government of Kuwait as
well as training facilities for Kuwait personnel in various

fields.
In keeping with the growing relations between India and
Kuwait, a resident Indian Head of Mission, of the rank of
an Ambassador, in Kuwait was appointed during the year.
Previously, our Ambassador in the Lebanon was concurrently accredited to Kuwait.
<pg42>
SAUDI ARABIA
An Indian goodwill mission consisting of Prof. Abdul
Wahab Bokhari and Shri Hayatullah Ansari, M.P.s, and
Shri Moinuddin Harris visited Saudi Arabia during the Haj.
The delegation had an audience with the King. Considerable publicity was given in the local press to the activities
of the goodwill mission.
IRAQ
A seven-member Iraqi delegation led by Mr. Abdul
Gani Shandallah visited India from 15 to 19 July, 1967. The
delegation called on the President of India and also met the
Deputy Minister for External Affairs. The delegation was
on a goodwill visit to India.
THE PEOPLE's REPUBLIC OF SOUTH YEMEN
After more than a century and a quarter of colonial
rule, South Arabia achieved independence on 29 November,
1967 as the People's Republic of Southern Yemen. India
has consistently supported the cause of independence of
Aden and South Arabia. In a statement in the Indian Parliament on 30 November, the Prime Minister extended recognition and cordial welcome to the new Republic. A twoman technical delegation from India visited Aden between
13 and 17 December, 1967, to discuss technical and other
assistance needed by the new Republic. Southern Yemen
has become the fourteenth member of the Arab League,
During the disturbances in Aden in June, 1967 and later,
several Indians left the colony. The Government of India
have declared Aden as a "disturbed area" and granted liberalised Customs and Income Tax clearance concessions to
the repatriates. Out of an estimated number of 6,000
Indians living in Aden at the beginning of 1967, about 1,200
are estimated to remain there at present.
<pg43>
IRAN
The then Minister of External Affairs, Shri M. C.

Chagla, paid an official visit to' Iran from 17 to 20 April,.
1967. He was received by the Shah of Iran and called on
the Prime Minister and Foreign Minister. The talks were
held in a frank and friendly atmosphere.
The President and Prime Minister of India sent messages
of felicitations and gifts to the Shah of Iran on the occasion
of his coronation on 26 October, 1967. They also attended
a function held in this connection by the Indo-Iran Society
in New Delhi.
ISRAEL
INDIA EGYPT USA JORDAN SYRIA BULGARIA ETHIOPIA MALI NIGER NIGERIA CENTRAL
AFRICAN REPUBLIC LEBANON IRAQ SUDAN INDONESIA KUWAIT SAUDI ARABIA YEMEN
IRAN
May 25, 1967

AFRICA, SOUTH OF THE SAHARA
CHAPTER VI
AFRICA, SOUTH OF THE SAHARA
INDIA's relations with all the independent countries of
Africa, south of the Sahara, with the exception of South
Africa, remained friendly during the year under report.
There was increased mutual cooperation with most of these
countries, notably Nigeria, Ghana, Zambia, Tanzania,
Ethiopia and the colony of Mauritius scheduled to become
independent in March, 1968.
During the year, two new non-Resident Missions were
opened, one in the Congo (Brazzaville) and the other in
Mali. The Indian Ambassador in the Congo (Kinshasa) is
concurrently accredited to the Congo (Brazzaville) while
the Ambassador in Guinea is accredited concurrently to
Mali. The Democratic Republic of the Congo (Kinshasa)
opened its Embassy in New Delhi, during the year, with a
former Prime Minister, Brigadier General Mulamba, as its
first Ambassador.
In keeping with India's traditional support for the fight
against racial discrimination in South Africa, the Government of India agreed to the opening of an office in Delhi

by the African National Congress, which is the principal
resistance movement and is banned in South Africa. This
office, the first in Asia, is expected to mobilise support in
India and Asia for the anti-apartheid movement.
India played host to two distinguished visitors from
Africa, south of the Sahara, during the year. President
Kenneth Kaunda of Zambia paid a State visit to India from
14 to 18 June, 1967. India has consistently supported
<pg44>
<pg45>
Zambia in meeting the difficult situation created by the
unilateral declaration of independence by Ian Smith in
Rhodesia. India's views on the Rhodesian question, which
coincide with those of Zambia and the Organisation of
African Unity, were reiterated during President Kaunda's
visit. The joint communique issued at the end of the visit
reaffirmed the view that the only effective way of putting
an end to the illegal regime in Rhodesia was through the,
use of force by Britain.
The Prime Minister of Mauritius, Sir Seewasagar Ramgoolam, visited India from 13 to 19 December. Mauritius
became independent on Mar 12, 1968. The visit, coming on the eve of independence of Mauritius, was significant and symbolised the traditional bonds between India
and the island of Mauritius. Sir Seewasagar held talks
with the President, the Prime Minister and other Ministers.
During a visit to Bombay he met the representatives of
the Life Insurance Corporation of India, the All-India Manufacturers' Organisation and the Bank of Baroda.
The position of Indians in some of the East African
countries, especially Kenya and Tanzania, continues to be
uncertain as a result of the policy of Africanisation adopted
in these countries. The policy of Africanisation, as distinguished from nationalisation, has affected a large number
oil persons of Indian origin in these countries, many of whom
have had to leave their countries of domicile and adoption.
In Kenya, the recently introduced Immigration Act places
severe restrictions on the employment of non-citizens,
among whom are many Indian nationals.
India has continued, within and outside the United Nations, her support for the people in Southern Africa struggling under racist, minority regimes. When the Rhodesian
issue was discussed at the 22nd session of the U.N. General
Assembly, India's representative declared that the only way
<pg46>

to end the rebellion was for Britain to use force. Our general policy regarding racist regimes in Southern Africa is
that positive measures should be taken to employ "international machinery" for the implementation of the principles embodied in the United Nations Charter.
INDIA
GHANA NIGER NIGERIA TANZANIA ZAMBIA ETHIOPIA MAURITIUS USA CONGO MALI ZAIRE
GUINEA LATVIA SOUTH AFRICA KENYA
Mar 12, 1968

EASTERN AND WESTERN EUROPE
CHAPTER VII
EASTERN AND WESTERN EUROPE
Eastern Europe
THE U.S.S.R.
Apr 13, 1967, marked the twentieth anniversary of the
establishment of diplomatic relations between India and
the Soviet Union. These years have seen fruitful expansion in Indo-Soviet friendship and co-operation in all fields.
The occasion was suitably celebrated both in India and the
U.S.S.R. Public meetings were held by the Soviet-Indian
Cultural Society in Moscow and by the Indo-Soviet Cultural Society in New Delhi. To mark the occasion the institution of NEHRU AWARDS for Soviet writers, contributing towards the strengthening of Indo-Soviet Friendship,
was also announced.
The Twentieth Anniversary of India's Independence was
celebrated in the Soviet Union with great enthusiasm
Various receptions and cultural shows were held in Moscow
and Tashkent. The visiting Indian artistes and the Soviet
artistes gave variety performances in Moscow and Tashkent,
which were attended by thousands of Soviet citizens. Functions were also held by the Soviet Publishing House,
Soviet-Indian Friendship Society in Moscow and Uzbekistan
Union of the Societies of Friendship. Various cultural
shows, public meetings, film shows and receptions were
attended by high-ranking Soviet officials and large number

of Soviet citizens.
The tradition of high-level exchange of visits between
India and the U.S.S.R. continued. The President of India,
<pg47>
<pg48>
Dr. Zakir Husain, passed through Moscow in June, 1967,
on his way to Canada. He was received at the Moscow
airport by the Acting President of the Supreme Soviet of the
U.S.S.R. The Prime Minister, Shrimati Indira Gandhi,
visited the U.S.S.R. in November, 1967 to attend the celebration on the 50th Anniversary of the October Revolution.
The Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the U.S.S.R.,
Mr. Alexei Kosygin, came to India in January, 1968 to witness the Republic Day celebrations and stayed on for a
week for mutual consultations. Among other prominent
visitors from India to the U.S.S.R. were the Minister of
Defence, Shri Swaran Singh, the Education Minister
Dr. Triguna Sen, the Labour Minister, Mr. Jaisukhlal Hathi,
and the Ministers of State in the Ministries of Education,
Health and Family Planning and Social Welfare. The
Soviet Minister of Fisheries, Mr. A. A. Ishkov, visited India
in August, 1967 and held talks concerning the Fisheries Project being undertaken with Soviet assistance.
Mutual consultations between the two countries continued and the then Foreign Secretary, Shri C. S. Jha, visited
Moscow in July, 1967 and delivered a letter from the Prime
Minister of India to Chairman Kosygin. The Defence Minister, Shri Swaran Singh, accompanied by the Foreign Secretary, Shri Rajeshwar Dayal, was in the Soviet Union in
September, 1967, on his way to the U.N. General Assembly
session in New York. He held talks with the Soviet
Foreign Minister, Mr. A. Gromyko, in Moscow.
A number of important delegations from the Soviet
Union came to India during the year. Among these were
an eight-member military delegation led by the Soviet Chief
of General Staff, Marshal Zakharov, a six-member delegation of Agricultural Specialists led by the Soviet Deputy
Minister of Agriculture, Mr. G. I. Vorobiev, and a fourmember delegation to see the working of Panchayats in
<pg49>
Rajasthan. A cultural delegation from India, a thirteenmember delegation of Indian scientists and a delegation on
Social Security visited the U.S.S.R. during the year.
The Soviet Union gave a gift of 100 million doses of

freeze-dried Small-pox Vaccine to India.
YUGOSLAVIA
The customary regular contacts and exchanges of views
between Yugoslavia and India were maintained during the
year. In April, 1967, the then Foreign Secretary, Shri C. S.
Jha, visited Belgrade to hold talks with the Yugoslav
Foreign Office, especially on some aspects of the problem of
non-proliferation of nuclear weapons, which was due to be
considered by the Disarmament Committee of the United
Nations. The officials of the two foreign offices also discussed other problems in international relations as well as
matters pertaining to bilateral cooperation. The official
meetings were detailed and frank on both sides and there
was a general agreement on various issues, including the
draft treaty on non-proliferation.
The Foreign Minister of Yugoslavia, Mr. Marko
Nikezic, visited India in June, 1967. Earlier, in May, the
Deputy Foreign Minister of Yugoslavia was in India. The
then Indian Foreign Minister, Shri M. C. Chagla, visited
Yugoslavia in July, 1967 and had talks with President Tito.
While Mr. Nikezic came to India as a personal envoy of
President Tito, to exchange views and coordinate the initiative of the non-aligned countries, especially in relation to
the West Asian crisis, Shri Chagla's visit was considered
timely in the context of the impasse in the U.N. on steps to
resolve the crisis. There was fruitful exchange of views on
both occasions and much identity was evident. These visits
also served, as stated by Shri Chagla, to reinforce the importance of non-alignment and strengthen the ties of the nonaligned countries.
32 E.A.-5
<pg50>
The Prime Minister of India, Shrimati Indira Gandhi,
paid an official visit to Yugoslavia from 11 to 13 October,
1967 at the invitation of the President and the Prime Minister of Yugoslavia. She had useful exchange of views with
both of them on the current international problems with
particular emphasis on the situation in West Asia and Vietnam, the tripartite economic cooperation as well as further
promotion of bilateral cooperation. A concordance of views
was noted on all major international issues as well as readiness of the two parties to continue their cooperation in the
cause of peace and equitable relations in the world. The
Indian Minister of Defence, Shri Swaran Singh, who was
leading India's delegation to the U.N. General Assembly
meeting in New York, also joined the discussions in
Belgrade.

At the invitation of the Government of India, President
Josip Broz Tito, accompanied by Madame Broz, paid a State
visit to India from 22 to 27 January, 1968. The President
of Yugoslavia and the Prime Minister of India had talks in
which the international situation and the bilateral relations
were reviewed. The talks, which were frank and cordial,
confirmed the proximity of the views on important international problems and the present situation in the world.
On bilateral relations between India and Yugoslavia, the
two leaders noted with gratification the developing cooperation in all spheres and reaffirmed their resolve to expand
and intensify all-round bilateral cooperation. The tripartite
cooperation among India, Yugoslavia and the U.A.R. was
also reviewed and the two leaders affirmed their readiness
to explore and develop further avenues of collaboration.
They also agreed to maintain their common approach to the
various issues before the UNCTAD-II in New Delhi.
Other prominent visitors to Yugoslavia from India were
the Minister of Industrial Development and Company
<pg51>
Affairs, the Minister of Transport and Shipping and the
Minister of State for Finance, Planning and State Enterprise. During the visit of the Transport Minister, a contract was signed for the purchase of three bulk carriers
from Yugoslavia.
CZECHOSLOVAKIA
The Deputy Prime Minister of Czechoslovakia, Mr.
J. Krejci visited India in January, 1967. The delegation led
by him participated in the first meeting of the IndoCzechoslovak Joint Commission for Economic, Trade and
Technical Co-operation.
A delegation of members of Parliament headed by Shri
S. N. Mishra, M.P., visited Czechoslovakia, the Democratic
Republic of Germany, Poland, Hungary and Rumania
in September, 1967.
POLAND
At the invitation of Mr. Jozef Cyrankiewicz, Chairman
of the Council of Ministers of the Polish People's Republic,
Shrimati Indira Gandhi, the Prime Minister of India, paid
an official visit to Poland from 8 to 11 October, 1967,
where she was accorded a warm and cordial welcome.
During her visit Shrimati Gandhi was received in audience
by Mr. Edward Ochab, Chairman of. the Council of State
and called on Mr. Wladyslaw Gomulka, First Secretary of

the Central Committee of the Polish United Workers
Party. In her talks with the Polish Premier, important
international issues as well as problems of mutual interest
were discussed. The Indian Foreign Secretary, Shri
Rajeshwar Dayal, discussed separately with the Polish
Foreign Minister the situation in Vietnam, the role of
ICSC and the question of non-proliferation of nuclear
weapons.
<pg52>
RUMANIA
A three-member cultural delegation from Rumania led
by Mr. Wasile Gliga, Deputy Minister of External Affairs,
visited India in May, 1967. During their visit an agreement on cultural exchange programme for 1967-69 was
signed.
At the invitation of Mr. Gheorghe Maurer, Chairman
of the Council of Ministers of the Socialist Republic of
Rumania, the Prime Minister of India, Shrimati Indira
Gandhi paid an official visit to Rumania from 16 to 19
October, 1967. The Prime Minister and the members of
her entourage were welcomed with warm hospitality by
the Rumanian Government and people. The Prime Minister was received by the President of Rumania as well as
by Mr. Nicolae Ceausescu, General Secretary of the Central
Committee of Rumanian Communist Party. During the
talks between the two Prime Ministers much identity was
revealed in their views on several international issues.
Both expressed themselves in favour of maintaining the
sanctity of established borders inviolate and developing
inter-state relations on the basis of mutual respect of
sovereignty and non-interference in internal affairs. The
two Premiers agreed that conditions were favourable for
increasing technical, economic and industrial cooperation
between India and Rumania. The Prime Minister extended
an invitation to Mr. Nicolae Ceausescu and Madame
Ceausescu to visit India, which they accepted with pleasure.
BULGARIA
A Bulgarian delegation headed by Mr. Tano Tsolov,
Vice-Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the People's
Republic of Bulgaria, visited India during April, 1967.
During their visit an agreement on economic and technical
cooperation between the two Governments was signed in
<pg53>
which the Government of Bulgaria offered a credit of
Rs. 112.5 million at an interest of 2.5 per cent per annum
repayable through the sale of Indian goods.

At the invitation of the Chairman of the Council of
Ministers of the People's Republic of Bulgaria, Mr. Todor
Zhivkov, the Prime Minister of India, Shrimati Indira
Gandhi, paid an official visit to Bulgaria from 13 to 16
October, 1967. This was the first visit by an Indian Prime
Minister to Bulgaria. The people of Bulgaria accorded her
a heart-warming and spontaneous welcome which fully
reflected the friendly feelings they had for the people of
India.
Western Europe
THE UNITED KINGDOM
There was a steady improvement and further strengthening of the cordial and friendly relations between India
and the U.K. which bad been strained during the 1965
Indo-Pakistan conflict.
During the year, India received several prominent
visitors from the U.K., and some Ministers, Parliamentarians, officials and non-officials from India visited Britain.
Dr. Zakir Husain, President of India, stopped for a day
each in London on 25 June and 2 July, 1967 on his way to
and back from Canada on the occasion of his State visit
to that country. Shri Morarji Desai, Deputy Prime Minister and Finance Minister, briefly visited London in September, 1967 and exchanged views with the U.K.
Government on subjects of mutual interest. India continued to get economic and technical assistance from the
U.K. Shri S. S. Dhawan, ex-Judge of the Allahabad High
Court, has been appointed as the new Indian High Commissioner in the U.K.
<pg54>
FRANCE
India's relations with France during the year under
review continued to be cordial. Cultural and economic
contacts between the two countries increased during the
year.
A French Parliamentary delegation led by the President
of the Economic Affairs Committee visited India in January,
1967. Several Ministers of the Government of India and
Members of Parliament also visited France during 1967.
The Deputy Prime Minister, Shri Morarji Desai, visited
France in October, 1967 and had talks with Mr. Debre, the
French Finance Minister. Shri Fakhruddin Ali Ahmed,
Minister of Industrial Development and Company Affairs,
also visited France during 1967. Officials of the Government

of India went to Paris to participate in the meeting of the
Aid India Consortium.
France continued to offer technical and economic
assistance to this country under various programmes. As
a member of the Aid India Club, France is one of the
leading aid givers to India. The French Government has
also been offering scholarships, fellowships and training
facilities under the Indo-French Cultural Exchange Programme.
India's trade with France continued to be heavily tilted
in favour of the latter. During 1966-67, India's imports from
France were of the value of Rs. 20.49 lakhs as against
exports during the same period of Rs. 11.62 lakhs. This
represented a deficit of Rs. 8-87 lakhs for India. Talks are,
however, going on for furthering our exports to France.
Shri C. S. Jha, who was appointed Ambassador of India
to France vice Shri Rajeshwar Dayal, who took over as the
Foreign Secretary, presented his credentials to the President of France on 16 September, 1967.
<pg55>
Mr. Alphand, Secretary General of the French Foreign
Office, accompanied by Madame Alphand, paid an official
visit to India from 13 to 20 January, 1968. They visited
Agra, Bombay, Aurangabad and Ellora. During Mr.
Alphand's stay in the Capital he was received by the Prime
Minister, the Deputy Prime Minister, the Minister of State
in the Ministry of External Affairs and the Foreign Secretary. Mr. Alphand also had talks with the Foreign Secretary. Madame Alphand was received separately by the
Prime Minister.
A five-member delegation from the Commisison of
Foreign Affairs of the French National Assembly led by
Mr. Bernard Destremau is touring India currently to gain
a first hand impression of this country's problems. The
delegation, which visited Delhi from 24 to 27 January, 1968,
called on the Deputy Chairman, Rajya Sabha, the Minister
of State in the Ministry of External Affairs and the Foreign
Secretary. They also witnessed the Republic Day parade.
THE NETHERLANDS
The Government of the Netherlands offered assistance
to the Government of India in improving agricultural production in Bihar by increasing the amount of water available for irrigation. A maximum amount of DFL 1,000,000,
earmarked for this purpose, is to be utilised in carrying
out a survey of sub-soil water in a selected area in Bihar

by geological and geophysical methods, supplemented
by actual drilling of a few wells. A second project to be
undertaken by the Government of the Netherlands was
designed to improve the nutritional value of the common
diet of the people by the addition of lysine in order to upgrade the protein content of food. The Netherlands' contribution to this project would consist of the supply of
staple food supplemented with lysine and supported with
<pg56>
the necessary equipment and experts. The Netherlands
has also offered to establish a Child Aid Project in India.
A baby elephant was presented to the Zoo at Amsterdam
on 30 August, 1967, by the Ambassador of India in the
Netherlands, as a gift from the children of India to the
children of the Netherlands.
BELGIUM
An agreement was signed on 24 April, under which
Belgium would provide a loan of BF 60 million to India
for the purchase of commodities and services of Belgian
origin. This was the first government to government aid
provided by Belgium to India, the previous Belgian assistance having been in the form of suppliers' credit through
the Aid India Club. The present credit carried an interest
of 3 per cent. per annum and repayable over a period of
20 years with a grace period of 5 years.
THE FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY
Dr. Zakir Husain, the then Vice-President of India
passed through Frankfurt on his way back from the United
States of America in April 1967. He was met at the airport
by the Federal Minister for Refugees, Mr. Von Hassel and
officials of the Foreign Office.
The former Chancellor of the Federal Republic of
German, Dr. Konrad Adenauer, passed away on 19 April,
1967. Messages of condolence were sent on this occasion
by the President and the Prime Minister of India. Shrimati Vijaya Lakshmi Pandit, M.P., attended the funeral
of Dr. Adenauer held on 25 April, 1967, as India's special
envoy.
The FRG Minister for Federal Property, Mr. Kurt
Schmuechker, paid an unofficial visit to India on 8-9 July,
1967. On arrival at Palam airport, he was met by officials
<pg57>

of the Ministries of External Affairs and Finance. He was
seen off by the Deputy Foreign Minister, Shri Surendra Pal
Singh.
At the invitation of the Prime Minister of India, the
Chancellor of the Federal Republic of Germany, Dr. Kurt
Georg Kiesinger, paid an official visit to India from 20 to
22 November, 1967. This first official visit by a Chancellor
of the FRG enabled the leaders of the two countries to
personally review the mutually beneficial relations which
have long existed between the two countries. During the
talks, the two Heads of Government noted the broad similarity of views on current international problems, held by
both the countries. They agreed that, in order to enable
a continuing exchange of views, the Foreign Ministers of
India and the FRG or their representatives should meet
once a year, alternately in Bonn and in New Delhi. The
economic and commercial relations betwen the two countries were also reviewed and the Federal Chancellor affirmed his Government's desire to continue and strengthen the
economic, scientific and technological cooperation existing
between the two countries. They also declared their
attention to enter into a cultural agreement and welcomed
the proposed establishment of an Institute of German
Studies at the Nehru University.
AUSTRIA
The Government of Austria offered a number of
scholarships/training posts at the Hotel Training Centre
in Salzburg for 1967-68. Four candidates sponsored by
the Government of India were selected.
The Austrian Catholic Women's Association has offered,
through the Government of Austria, to help the Mar
Ivanios College, Trivandrum, Kerala, to set up a new
institute for advanced studies in Chemistry. The offer is
under the consideration of the authorities concerned.
<pg58>
PORTUGAL
The continued detention in Portugal of Shri Mohan
Laxman Ranade and Dr. Telo Mascarenhas greatly exercised Indian public opinion and repeated references to this
have been made in Parliament and else where. The Government of Mexico has played a very constructive role in
discharging their responsibilities for protection of Indian
interests in Portugal.
TURKEY
His Excellency Mr. Ihsan Sabri Caglayamgil, Foreign

Minister of Turkey, accompanied by the Hon'ble Muammer
Baykam and senior officials of the Government of Turkey,
paid an official visit to India from 4 to 9 January, 1968.
During their stay in New Delhi the Foreign Minister of
Turkey held discussions with the Prime Minister of India,
Deputy Prime Minister, Commerce Minister and the Minister
of State in the Ministry of External Affairs on national and
international issues. The Foreign Minister of Turkey was
also received by the President of India.
USA
INDIA RUSSIA UZBEKISTAN CANADA UNITED KINGDOM YUGOSLAVIA CENTRAL AFRICAN
REPUBLIC NORWAY SLOVAKIA GERMANY HUNGARY POLAND VIETNAM BULGARIA
PAKISTAN FRANCE THE NETHERLANDS LATVIA BELGIUM AUSTRIA PORTUGAL MEXICO
TURKEY
Apr 13, 1967

THE AMERICAS
CHAPTER VIII
THE AMERICAS
THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
THE traditional friendship between India and the U.S.A.
based on common democratic values was manifest
during the year, in spite of divergence of views over some
international issues. The understanding between the two
countries was promoted further by a succession of highlevel visits which served to keep both countries informed
of each other's views. The visit of the Deputy Prime
Minister of India to the U.S.A. in September, 1967 was important in this connection, His visit attracted considerable
attention as it coincided with the Chinese attempt to stir
up trouble on the Sikkim border. This provided Shri
Morarji Desai an opportunity to convince the American
leaders and public regarding India's determination to defend
itself. He also reiterated India's resolve to achieve its
social and economic goals despite the present economic
difficulties.
Other prominent visitors to the U.S.A. from India
included the Ministers of Commerce, Transport and Shipping, and Tourism and Civil Aviation. The former U.S.

Vice-President, Mr. Richard Nixon, visited India in April,
1967. He held discussions with the Prime Minister and
other leaders. Senator Hart was another important visitor
from the U.S.A. Some senior State Department officials,
including Mr. Eugene Rostow, Under Secretary for Political
Affairs, Mr. J. Yaeger, Head of the Policy Planning Division, Mr, L. Battle, Assistant Secretary, also visited India.
<pg59>
<pg60>
Ambassador Raymond Hare came to India as President
Johnson's special envoy, Senator Percy, who has been
mentioned as a possible Republican candidate for the 1968
U.S. Presidential elections, visited India in December, 1967.
Governor Romney, a declared candidate for the Republican
nomination, came on a visit in December, 1967-January,
1968. Senior officials of other U.S. Departments also visited,
India.
Faced with a second successive year of drought, India
has had to look abroad for a considerable portion of its
food-rain requirements. The response of the U.S.A. in
this regard has been most generous. Shipments of foodgrains under PL 480 programme, totalling about 4.7 million
tonnes from January, 1967 to October, 1967, have helped
India to tide over the serious shortages. The latest agreement, signed in December, 1967, makes provision for the
supply of 3.5 million tonnes of U.S. foodgrains to India in
the first half of 1968. This agreement follows the one
signed in September, 1967, for 1 million tonnes of foodgrains. Earlier in 1967, an agreement for 1.6 million tonnes
of foodgrains was signed in June, and another for 1.95
million tonnes in April. With a brighter outlook for the
current season, it is expected that our need for U.S. food
assistance will be reduced appreciably in the coming year.
Together with the food aid the U.S.A. has continued to
make substantial contributions in the form of economic and
technical assistance to India's development plans. It is
reported that the U.S. Congress has voted large cuts in the
total foreign aid appropriations for that country. India is
likely to feel the effect of this by way of diminished economic assistance.
CANADA
1967, being Canada's Centennial Year, was the occasion
in that country for widespread celebrations, of which the
<pg61>
most spectacular was the great Montreal Fair known as

EXPO'67. India's active participation in the celebrations
was an expression of the close and warm relations that
exist between the two countries. President Zakir Husain
visited Canada on this occasion (from 26 to 30 June) and
was received with great warmth and cordiality.
The Indian pavillion in EXPO'67, which attracted large
crowds, was presented as a gift to the City of Montreal by
the Commerce Minister Shri Dinesh Singh at the conclusion of the Fair.
The Deputy Prime Minister, Shri Moraji Desai, visited
Canada from 16 to 19 September, 1967.
Canada responded generously and promptly to the grave
situation created in India by drought by gifting wheat
worth $ 50 million, in addition to the supply of foodgrains
on loan terms. The programme of Canadian economic
assistance to India steadily increased both in volume and
in its effectiveness. Among new programmes initiated
with Canadian assistance is the scheme to build a nuclear
power station in Rajasthan. for which Canada has given
a loan of $ 38.5 million. Canada has also given loans of
$ 11.85 million and $ 10 million for the purchase of industrial plant and raw materials and a loan of $ 19.5 million
for the Iddiki project in Kerala.
THE CARIBBEAN AND LATIN AMERICA
The Deputy Prime Minister of India, Shri Morarji Desai,
visited some of the countries in these regions during his tour
abroad from 6 September to 5 October, 1967. He visited
Trinidad and Tobago to attend the Commonwealth Finance
Ministers' Conference. Then he went to Brazil to attend
the annual meetings of the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund. The Deputy Prime Minister also
<pg62>
paid a two-day visit to Venezuela at the invitation of the
Venezuelan Government where he received a warm welcome.
The Minister of External Affairs of Brazil, Mr. Jose de
Magalhaes Pinto, accompanied by Mrs. Magalhaes Pinto
and officials, paid a visit to India from 1 to 6 February, 1968,
as guests of the Government of India. Apart from visiting
places of interest, Mr. Pinto called on the President, Prime
Minister, Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Commerce,
Minister of Industrial Development, Minister of State in
the Ministry of External Affairs and the Deputy Chairman,
Planning Commission. The highlight of the visit was the
signing of the Trade Agreement between India and Brazil.

In Brazil, a low cost housing colony in Niteroi, Capital.
of the State of Rio-de-Janeiro, was named after Mahatma
Gandhi. A school, also named after Mahatma Gandhi,
was founded in Porto Alegre. The Legislative Assembly
of the State of Guanabara in Brazil held a special session
of the Assembly to pay homage to the memory of Mahatma
Gandhi on Oct 02, 1967.
In appreciation of these gestures, the Embassy of India
in Rio-de-Janeiro presented to the Archbishop of Rio-deJaneiro a sum of Rs. 7,277, being the profits on the sale of
Indian handicrafts and objects of art at a charity fair
arranged by the Embassy.
Senator Arnon de Mello of Brazil visited India from 1
to 10 November, 1967, to study the development of peaceful
uses of atomic energy in India. He stayed in Bombay
from 7 to 10 November, 1967 as a guest of the Department
of Atomic Energy. He visited the Bhabha Atomic Research
Centre and the Tata Institute of Fundamental Research.
An Indian delegation led by Shri Govind Narain, Secretary, Ministry of Health and Family Planning, attended the
18th Session of the International Planned Parenthood
<pg63>
Federation held in Santiago, Chile, from 8 to 15 April, 1967.
The contribution made by the Indian delegation to the
proceedings of the Conference was appreciated widely.
The small Indian community of Chile made a contribution of about Rs. 7,500 to the Prime Minister's Drought
Relief Fund.
A cultural delegation led by Rev. Father Ismael Quile,
Vice-Rector of the EI Salvador University, Buenos Aires,
visited India from 12 to 23 January, 1967. During their
stay in India, they visited several places of tourist interest
in Bombay, Delhi, Agra, Jaipur, Varanasi, Calcutta and
Madras. In New Delhi, they called on the Vice-President
and Minister of Education.
Out of the sum of Rs. 11,178 collected at a charity fete
arranged by the Embassy of India, Buenos Aires, a sum
of Rs. 5,589 was donated to the National Emergency Fund
of Argentina set up for helping the victims of the floods in
Buenos Aires. The balance of Rs. 5,589 has been remitted
to India as a donation to the Prime Minister's National
Relief Fund.
The Government of India have endowed a Chair of

Indian Studies at the West Indies University, Trinidad. An
Indian. professor has been selected for this Chair.
Senator Hamilton Maurice, President of the Senate,
Trinidad and Tobago, visited India from 6 to 15 November,
1967 as a guest of the Government of India, He called on
the Vice-President, the Deputy Prime Minister, the Speaker
of the Lok Sabha, Minister of Education, Minister of Parliamentary Affairs and the Deputy Minister in the Ministry
of External Affairs.
Blankets, antibiotics and vaccines worth Rs. 5,500 were
sent to Bolivia as emergency relief for flood-stricken people
there.
USA
INDIA CANADA CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO BRAZIL VENEZUELA
CHILE ARGENTINA BERMUDA BOLIVIA
Oct 02, 1967

UNITED NATIONS AND INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCES
CHAPTER IX
UNITED NATIONS AND INTERNATIONAL
CONFERENCES
THE United Nations General Assembly's XXII regular
session commenced on Sep 19, 1967 and ended on
19 December, 1967. Mr. Corneliu Manescu of Rumania
was elected as the President of the Assembly. The People's
Republic of Southern Yemen, comprising of the former
British territories of Aden and the Federation of South
Arabia was admitted as the 123rd Member of the United
Nations on 14 December, 1967.
Besides the regular session, the General Assembly was
convened in two special sessions during the year-the
Fifth Special session from 21 April to 13 June, 1967 to
consider the question of South-West Africa and U.N. peace
keeping operations; the Fifth Emergency Special Session
to consider the West Asian Crisis from 17 June to 21
July and again on 18 September, 1967.

At the elections held during the XXII session of the
General Assembly, India was re-elected to the Economic
and Social Council for a further term of three years,
beginning from 1 January, 1968. At the 23rd session of the
Commission on Human Rights, held in Geneva, from 20
February to 23 March, 1967, Shri K. C. Pant, M.P., the
leader of the Indian delegation, was elected Vice-Chairman
of the Commission. India was also elected to the U.N.
Council for South-West Africa, established by a resolution
of the Fifth Special Session of the General Assembly.
<pg64>
<pg65>
At the XXII regular session of the General Assembly,
the Chairman of the Indian delegation, Shri Swaran Singh,
speaking on 6 October, 1967, drew special attention to
the Vietnam problem. He said that the first step towards
peace was for the United States to halt its bombing of
North Vietnam, to be followed by cessation of all hostilities
and commencement of negotiation for a peaceful settlement
of the Vietnam problem. On the West Asian situation, he
reiterated India's stand that a settlement should be based
on (a) the complete withdrawal of all Israeli forces from
areas occupied by them during the recent hostilities,
(b) respect for the territorial integrity and political independence of each state in the region, and (c) the safeguarding of the rights of the Arab refugees.
At the special session of the General Assembly, convened
to consider the question of South-West Africa, India cosponsored a resolution with 78 other countries, which was
adopted on 19 May, 1967. The resolution established an
eleven-member U.N. Council for South-West Africa to
administer the territory until its independence on a date
to be fixed in accordance with the wishes of the people.
The Council was required to be based in the territory and to
establish contact with the South African authorities with
a view to laying down procedures for the transfer of the
territory. Mr. Constantin A. Stavropoulos, Legal Counsel
of the U.N., was appointed the acting United Nations
Commissioner for South-West Africa. The South African
Government, however, refused to have any discussions
with the Council.
At the XXII regular session, India co-sponsored a resolution, which was adopted on 16 December, condemning
South African refusal and calling upon her to withdraw
from the territory unconditionally and without delay. The
resolution also requested the Security Council to take
32 E.A.-6

<pg66>
all appropriate measures to enable the U.N. Council for
South-West Africa to discharge its functions.
The Special Committee of 33 on peace keeping operations continued its work and on the basis of its recommendations a resolution was adopted by the Fifth Special Session
of the General Assembly on 23 May, 1967. This resolution renewed its appeal to all Member States, principally
to the developed countries, to make voluntary contributions
to overcome the continuing financial difficulties of the
United Nations. At the XXII regular session, India cosponsored a resolution which renewed the mandate of the
special committee and suggested that steps be undertaken
on matters relating to facilities, services and personnel to
be provided by Member States for peace-keeping.
During the year, the Indian contingent in the U.N.
Emergency Forces stationed in the U.A.R. territory and
Gaza was withdrawn, consequent on the withdrawal of the
UNEF by the Secretary-General of the United Nations, as
requested by the U.A.R.
As a member of the U.N. Security Council, India participated in the Council's deliberations on the West Asian
crisis (details given in Chapter V on West Asia and
North Africa).
India continued to participate in the work of the special
committee of twenty-four nations on the Implementation of
the Declaration of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples and in the Fourth committee of the General
Assembly. Indian representatives took part in the special
committee's meetings held in the Congo, Zambia and
Tanzania in May-June, 1967. In the Fourth Committee of
the General Assembly, India co-sponsored a resolution
on Southern Rhodesia which was later adopted by the
General Assembly on 3 November, 1967. The resolution
declared that the only effective and speedy way for the
<pg67>
U.K. to end the rebellion in Southern Rhodesia was
through force and that sanctions, in order to achieve their
objectives, would have to be comprehensive and mandatory
and backed by force. On the territories under Portuguese
administration, the General Assembly adopted a resolution
on 17 November, which condemned the colonial war
waged by Portugal and urged that country to apply the
principle of self-determination to its colonies without any
delay. The General Assembly also considered the report

of the special committee of twenty-four nations and recommended de-colonization measures to be taken in regard
to Fiji, Gibraltar, Ifni, Spanish Sahara, Equatorial Guinea,
French Somaliland, Oman, Falkand Islands and 26 other
small territories.
The special committee of twenty-four adopted a resolution co-sponsored by India, on 19th June, 1967, deploring
the dismemberment of Mauritius and Seychelles by the
administering power. The Indian representative pointed
out during the debate that the reported establishment of
military bases in the Indian Ocean territory would be in
violation of General Assembly resolutions and the United
Nations Charter.
In the Fourth Committee, India co-sponsored with 61
other countries a resolution, which was later adopted by
the General Assembly on 7 December, 1967, strongly
condemning the exploitation of the colonial territories and
people and the methods practised in the territories by
foreign financial, economic and other interests.
At the 43rd session of the Economic and Social Council,
held in Geneva, the Indian delegation introduced a resolution on the Second U.N. Conference on Trade and Development. This resolution received considerable support
from the delegations of the developing countries and was
adopted by the Council. The resolution recognised the
<pg68>
importance of the UNCTAD-II as a forum for the
adoption of additional measures for the acceleration of
economic development of the developing countries and
expressed the hope that substantial progress would be
achieved in the implementation of the recommendations of
the UNCTAD-I before the commencement of the second
session.
The Commission on Human Rights, to which India was
re-elected, considered, inter alia, the question of a draft
International Convention on the Elimination of all forms
of Religious Intolerance and forwarded it to the Economic
and Social Council for consideration by the General
Assembly.
The General Assembly has designated the year 1968,
in which falls the 20th anniversary of the adoption, of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights, as the International Year for Human Rights. The Government of
India has constituted a National Committee to co-ordinate
its observance in India. On the eve of the International
Year, the President of India issued a message urging

greater understanding of human rights and their extension
to areas where they are now denied.
DISARMAMENT
The 18-Nation Disarmament Committee, of which India
is a member, re-convened in February, 1967, and continued in session until 14 December, 1967, except for a brief
recess of 6 weeks. The session centred principally on the
question of a treaty on non-proliferation of nuclear
weapons. The U.S.A. and the U.S.S.R. had tabled separate, but identical, drafts of a treaty. Amendments to the
draft were proposed by Sweden, Mexico, Rumania, Brazil,
the U.A.R., Italy and the U.K. but were not voted upon.
Sweden proposed a complete formulation of Article III
concerning International Control which had been left
<pg69>
blank in the U.S.A.-U.S.S.R. draft treaties. The Indian
representative, who took part in the debate, made detailed
comments on the draft. He urged that the treaty, to, be
acceptable, should conform fully with the resolution of the
General Assembly 2028(XX). At the XXII regular session of the U.N. General Assembly, the Chairman of the
Indian delegation emphasised that any draft non-proliferation treaty should not adversely affect the development
of nuclear technology for peaceful purposes in non-nuclearweapon-states.
The XXII session of the U.N. General Assembly adopted a number of resolutions on the subjects of disarmament
and peaceful uses of atomic energy. India co-sponsored a
resolution, which was adopted, recommending the total
suspension of all nuclear weapons tests. India also voted
for a resolution urging all states to undertake negotiation
concerning the conclusion of a Convention on the prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons. The Assembly also
adopted a resolution requesting the ENDC to submit, on
or before 15 March, 1968, a full report on the negotiation
regarding the draft treaty on non-proliferation of
nuclear weapons. On Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy, the
Assembly requested the Secretary-General to prepare
plans for a Fourth International Conference on Peaceful
Uses of Atomic Energy to be held in 1970 or 1971. On Outer
Space, the Assembly called on all states, which had not
yet done so, to sign the Outer Space Treaty. At the Fifth
Special Session of the General Assembly, India co-sponsored a resolution on holding a U.N. Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses of Outer Space at Vienna
from 14 to 27 August, 1968.
INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCES

During the year under review, India participated in
several international conferences, seminars etc., a list of
<pg70>
which is given at Appendix I. Notable among the International Conferences held in India were the Ninth Session of the Asian-African Legal Consultative Committee
and the Second Session of the U.N. Conference on Trade
and Development.
A list of international organisations of which India is
a member is given at Appendix II.
The United Nations seminar on Apartheid was held on
25 July in Kitwe, Zambia. The seminar was attended by
34 Governments and some observers and experts. India
was represented by Shri S. Krishnamurthi, High Commissioner for India in Zambia.
YEMEN
INDIA SWITZERLAND VIETNAM ISRAEL SOUTH AFRICA USA CONGO ZAMBIA TANZANIA
UNITED KINGDOM PORTUGAL EQUATORIAL GUINEA FIJI GIBRALTAR GUINEA MALI OMAN
MAURITIUS SEYCHELLES BRAZIL MEXICO SWEDEN ITALY AUSTRIA
Sep 19, 1967

EXTERNAL PUBLICITY
CHAPTER X
EXTERNAL PUBLICITY
THE External Publicity Division, during the year under
review, continued its efforts to promote India's publicity
abroad. Through its publicity posts in Indian Missions
abroad, the Division sought to:
(i) foster an increasing understanding of our country and its policies;
(ii) explain and interpret our objectives and actions;
and
(iii) counteract adverse influences and false and hos-

tile propaganda against our country.
With this in view, the Division supplied its net-work of
49 publicity posts, and also the Indian Missions without
them-over 100 in number-material and information on
India, i.e. literature, newspapers, journals, books, pamphlets, feature articles, background notes and directives
on important developments.
The Division keeps contact with Indian Missions abroad
which receive Radio Telegraph transmissions on teleprinter machines. Transmissions containing news, statements, background material, etc., on India are broadcast
twice a day (2 pm and 8 pm IST) and received on the
teleprinters by 50 Missions. On the basis of these transmissions our publicity posts abroad issue periodical news
bulletins and news digests in English and other local languages. During the year arrangements were made by 20
new posts to receive these transmissions.
<pg71>
<pg72>
Production: The Production Unit of the Division is
concerned with the procurement, production and distribution of feature articles, and printed literature such as
books, pamphlets and periodicals.
To improve the quality of publicity material the Production Unit has introduced some new features. One is a
monthly Photo Feature depicting interesting aspects of
modern India. The other is the production of printed single
sheet feature articles with illustrations. Both these features
have been well received. Steps have also been taken to expand and modernise the XP Division Press to meet the
needs not only of the XP Division but of the entire Ministry.
The Production Unit has also undertaken certain types
of translation and printing jobs in foreign languages
within India.
Apart from regular publications such as the Foreign
Affairs Record (monthly), the Indian and Foreign Review (fortnightly), and the French version of the Indian
and Foreign Review (Courrier de l' Inde), nineteen
pamphlets were produced at Headquarters. Local language versions of several pamphlets were produced by our
Missions abroad, in addition to periodical bulletins in various languages.
Scripts have been completed for two pamphlets contain-

ing basic information on India to meet the requirements
of foreign school children. It is proposed to publish these
pamphlets. in all the major languages of the world, as soon
as finances permit.
The Production Unit has been making efforts to get
Indian books published in foreign languages through leading publishing houses abroad. As a result, at least three
<pg73>
foreign editions of three Indian books are expected to be
brought out during the current year.
About 2,118 copies of 67 books were added to our
libraries abroad, in addition to providing them with a regular supply of Indian newspapers and periodicals. 6,700
copies of 47 Indian books were presented to important individuals, libraries and institutions in foreign countries.
Audio-Visual Publicity: The audio-visual medium is
also extensively used to project India abroad and to
counter anti-Indian propaganda. Nearly 39,185 photographs on various subjects were distributed to Indian
Missions abroad for publicity and display purposes. Photographic Exhibitions showing different aspects of modern
India and India's ancient culture were held in Cairo, Paris
and Djibouti. Arrangements have been made to hold similar exhibitions shortly in Bonn and Buenos Aires, and
later in all the other capital cities of the world where our
Missions are located.
During the year we participated in 28 general exhibitions on India held in different countries. The material
for these exhibitions, i.e. photographs, paintings, posters.
books, newspapers, stamps, emblems, art objects, etc., were
procured from various sources and supplied to our
Missions.
Gramophone records and tape-recordings of Indian
Music are regularly supplied to our Missions for use under
their auspices and through local radio and other organisations. During the year about 233 records were supplied to 17
of our Missions abroad for their regular use, in addition to
75 records supplied for presentation purposes to our Missions in Moscow, Islamabad and Baghdad.
Collections of tape-recordings and Photographs were
supplied to several Missions for arranging Children's Day
celebrations abroad.
<pg74>

Audio-Visual equipment was made available to several
Missions during the year; 3 new film projectors to our Missions in Colombo, Rangoon and Kinshasa; 3 new cinema
vans to our Missions in Colombo, Sikkim and Port of
Spain, and 4 new tape-recorders to our posts in Colombo,
Kabul, Mogadiscio and New York.
As regards the projection of India through films, 4,067
prints of different documentaries previewed and considered suitable, were supplied to our Missions abroad. Prints
of seven short films were supplied to our Missions for presentation to foreign Governments/Organisations. 16 mm
prints of five feature films were purchased for circulation
and non-commercial exhibition abroad; negotiations for
the purchase of a few children's films are also in progress.
During the year, permission was obtained for tele-casting the Film Division's documentaries, free of royalties, on
behalf of 4 more Missions, viz., Kuala Lumpur, Accra,
Berne and Moscow. This brings the total of such Missions
to 42.
India participated in 39 International Film Festivals;
the feature film Yadein won the Grand Prix Award in
the Asian Film Festival, Frankfurt; and the documentary
film Through the Eyes of a Painter was awarded
"Golden Bear" in the XVII International Film Festival,
Berlin.
The film Rule by Consent (On General Elections) has
been completed and supplied to our Missions abroad. The
film Report on Drought and eight short TV films on food
situation in India were also produced and supplied to,
selected Missions abroad. The production of one film,
namely, India Then and Now has been entrusted to the
private sector.
Fifteen compilation films mainly on the visits of VIPs
and dignitaries were planned for this year, out of which 9
<pg75>
have already been produced and supplied to the Missions,
concerned, the remaining 6 are under production.
Press Relations: The Ministry of External Affairs has
a Joint Secretary in charge of briefing the Indian and
Foregin press correspondents in Delhi. He is available to
the press every day and also holds briefing sessions twice
a week when the Parliament is not in session, and once a
week when it is. The correspondents are supplied with
background information and publicity material on subjects of interest to them.

Over 625 press releases were issued on various topics.
Material from these releases was used by the local press,
All India Radio and XP Division transmission room.
Logistic facilities to 136 visiting foreign correspondents
and TV teams were provided. Arrangements were also
made for some of them to meet the President, Prime Minister and other important dignitaries.
Press delegations from Argentina, Ceylon, Soviet
Union, Burma and Laos were invited to visit India. Local
hospitality was extended to visiting journalists from
Canada, Kenya, Indonesia, Federal Republic of Germany,
Iran and Belgium. Foreign travel facilities were provided
to 60 Indian journalists going abroad during the year.
Organisation and staff: A post of Assistant Press
Attache is being created at Jeddah and a post of Press
Attache has been created at Addis Ababa.
Budget: The total budget for the External Publicity
Division including the ISI units abroad, amounts to
Rs. 1,6,0,58,200 for the year 1967-68. (This does not include
information units which have no separate budget grants.)
Of this, amount of Rs. 40,00,0,00 is for expenditure at Headquarters.
INDIA
USA EGYPT FRANCE DJIBOUTI ARGENTINA GERMANY RUSSIA IRAQ PAKISTAN SRI LANKA
ZAIRE SPAIN AFGHANISTAN GHANA MALAYSIA SWITZERLAND BURMA LAOS CANADA
INDONESIA KENYA BELGIUM IRAN SAUDI ARABIA ETHIOPIA
Sep 19, 1967

TECHNICAL AND ECONOMIC COOPERATION
CHAPTER XI
TECHNICAL AND ECONOMIC COOPERATION
THERE was a marked increase in the tempo of the ITEC
Programme during the year under review-the third since
the inception of this programme late in 1964. This only reflected the ever increasing importance which the Govern-

ment of India has been attaching to the promotion of
mutual economic and technical cooperation and closer
economic relations between India and other developing
countries, particularly those in Asia and Africa. The possibility and desirability of such cooperation figured prominently during the discussions which our Foreign Minister
had in Indonesia, Singapore, Malaysia, Kuwait, Iran, etc.,
when he visited these countries during the course of the
year. Similar discussions also took place, both in India
and abroad, at the official level between India and other
Governments. The Director of the Economic Division was
associated with all such talks and senior officers of the
Division visited Indonesia, Singapore, Malaysia, Iraq,
Kuwait and South Yemen to hold discussions on this subject. The various administrative arrangements were further streamlined in the light of the experience gained and
thus added to the increasing tempo of activities in the
Division. Various proposals regarding technical assistance
initiated in the previous years, were successfully implemented during the current year and many more were
taken in hand.
During the year, further bilateral economic assistance
was arranged with several countries. A Rs. 50 million loan
to Ceylon, offered earlier, was finalised during this period.
<pg76>
<pg77>
The second meeting of the Joint Indo-Kuwait Committee
was held in Kuwait during April, 1967. The Division was
associated with the discussions of the various Working
Groups set up by economic joint committees such as the
Tripartite Committee of India, the U.A.R. and Yugoslavia,
Indo-Czech Committee, the UNCTAD, etc. A delegation
was sent to South Yemen immediately after its attaining
independence to assess the assistance which India could
offer to the newly emerged state and to explore the
avenues of mutual economic cooperation in future. An
Agreement on Friendship, Scientific and Technical Cooperation with Iraq was finalised and is scheduled to be
signed very shortly.
Various delegations from abroad, notably from Algeria
and the Sudan showed keen interest in the possibilities of
expansion of the field of co-operation between themselves
and India. Two Brazilian economists also spent two months
in India to study our planning techniques as well as to
observe the potential of such co-operation. Another distinguished visitor, from Malaysia, Mr. Mansor-bin-Otman,
Director of Training, MARA, also visited India to find the
possibility of Malaysians obtaining technical training in

this country, As a result of this visit, 500 Malaysians would
be trained in India. During the year, another significant
development was the increasing contacts between, Indian
businessmen, consultancy experts etc., with their counterparts in other countries with a view to setting up joint
ventures or providing consultancy services etc. Thus,
Godrej have already set up a factory in Malaysia and
many other proposals are under active consideration between the businessmen of the two countries. The National
Industrial Corporation have been retained by the Iranian
Ministry of Economy for consultancy advice. There has,
been a spurt in the commercial and economic relations
<pg78>
between India and Kuwait, where, as a result of joint consultations between the two Governments, Indian businessmen and industrialists have established contacts with
their counterparts. Leading Indian manufacturing firms
have been able to successfully bid tenders and the Heavy
Engineering Corporation of India is to prepare technical
feasibility and survey reports of some of the proposed industries in Kuwait.
Under the ITEC Programme, training facilities were
provided to 47 trainees from Iran, Iraq, the Sudan, Yemen,
Ethiopia, Trinidad and Tobago and Brazil. Fifty-four
Indian experts were deputed under the Programme as
engineers, technicians, doctors and nurses, teachers, economists, etc. The countries to which they were sent were
Afghanistan, Muscat, Kuwait, the Sudan, Ghana, Somalia,
Ethiopia, Saudi Arabia and South Yemen. Defence training
facilities under the Programme were provided to 23 officers
and cadets from Somalia, the Sudan, Uganda and Ghana.
One Pushpak aircraft and two gliders were presented to
Malaysia and one Pushpak aircraft to Singapore during
the year under review. Gifts were made of sophisticated
surgical items to Burma, of essential medicines worth
Rs. 20,000 to Afghanistan, of one hundred water pumps
worth Rs. 11 lakhs to Yemen, and of machinery and equipment for cottage industries worth Rs. 1.5 lakhs to Tanzania.
Fifty thousand doses of cholera and small-pox vaccines
have been gift Led to Guinea. The total value of these vaccines
was Rs. 9,600. The first consignment of medical instruments
valued at Rs, 57,000 gifted to Cambodia has been despatched.
Two Iraqi bankers are now undergoing training in India
at the Reserve Bank and the State Bank of India.
<pg79>

A delegation led by Director (TEC) in the Ministry of
External Affairs visited Malaysia to discuss with the concerned authorities in that country, programmes for technical and industrial collaboration between the two countries.
The total expenditure on the ITEC programmes during
1967-68 is expected to amount to Rs. 40 lakhs. The assistance during the next financial year is expected to be more
than two times the aid offered in 1967-68.
Two Tamil teachers, who have been selected for deputation to the Government of Singapore as Tamil teachers
under ITEC, have reached Singapore in February, 1968.
It has been decided to give financial assistance under
ITEC to Mr. Philips of the Government of Fiji for attending the Housing Management Course in Bombay.
Apart from the assistance rendered under the ITEC programmes enumerated above, India also provided facilities
to the other developing countries to recruit experts from
India and to train their civil and military personnel in
various technical and defence fields in India. Thus, Zambia
recruited a number of accountants and railway officials
from India during this period.
A tripartite conference of Economic Ministers of the
U.A.R., Yugoslavia and India had taken place in December,
1966 and had appointed three ad hoc working groups to
study in depth various aspects of economic co-operation
between the three countries. The Group on "Trade Preferences" held three meetings in Cairo in February, 1967, in
Belgrade in October, 1967, and in New Delhi in December,
1967. The Group has finalised arrangements for exchange of
tariff preferences between the three countries which was
signed in December, 1967. The Working Group on
"Shipping" met in Belgrade in April, 1967 and the third
Working Group on "Industrial Co-operation" met in New
<pg80>
Delhi in September, 1967. As stated earlier, the Division has
been associated with the deliberations of these groups as
also with those set up in connection with the UNCTAD-II
held in New Delhi in February-March, 1968.
INDIA
USA INDONESIA IRAN KUWAIT MALAYSIA REPUBLIC OF SINGAPORE IRAQ YEMEN
YUGOSLAVIA ALGERIA SUDAN BRAZIL RUSSIA ETHIOPIA TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
AFGHANISTAN GHANA MALI OMAN SOMALIA SAUDI ARABIA UGANDA BURMA TANZANIA
GUINEA CAMBODIA FIJI ZAMBIA EGYPT

Sep 19, 1967

PASSPORT AND CONSULAR SERVICES
CHAPTER XII
PASSPORT AND CONSULAR SERVICES
Passport Services
THE Passport and Visa Division are responsible for the
implementation of the passport and emigration policy of
the Government of India and control of the Central Passport and Emigration Organisation and the Regional Passport and Emigration Offices in Bombay, Calcutta, Delhi,
Lucknow and Madras.
During the year 1967, the percentage of rejected applications was about 0.05 of the total number of applications
received. The number of applications received in the five
Regional Passport Offices, including those brought forward
from previous year, was 1,06,397. Out of this 96,993 passports were issued by them.
At the Headquarters, 2,482 official passports, 437 diplomatic passports and 2,905 visas to foreigners were issued.
The Passports Act, 1967
The Passports Act, 1967 was passed on Jun 24, 1967.
The Act relates to the issue of passports and travel documents. It regulates the departure from India of citizens of
India and other persons and makes provisions for matters
incidental or ancillary thereto. The grounds on which passports or travel documents may be refused, impounded or
revoked have been clearly defined in the Act, which also
provides for furnishing, on demand, to the affected persons
the reasons for refusal or withdrawal of passport facilities,
unless it is not in the public interest to do so. The Act
<pg81>

<pg82>

also provides for appeals against such refusals or withdrawals and for the establishment of an appellate autho-rity.
Emigration to Britain
According to the statistics published by the British Government, Indian visitors to Britain during 1966 were 53,469
as against 50,829 during the year 1965. The net inflow of
Indian nationals into Britain calculated after deducting
the number of those who left Britain during 1966 comes
to 18,402. The corresponding figures in earlier years were
18,815 in 1965, 15,513 in 1964 and 17,493 in 1963. For the
calendar year 1967, 4,126 employment vouchers were issued
by the British Government to Indian nationals for employment in Britain as against 4,282 during 1966.
During the year 1967, 612 Indian nationals had to return
after reaching Britain as they were refused admission into
that country by the British Immigration authorities, mostly on the ground that they were seeking employment in,
Britain without any employment voucher.
The Government of India have expressed their concern
to the British Government about the difficulties experienced at British ports by Indian immigrants and visitors and
have impressed on them the need for completing all formalities in India.
The British Government appointed a Committee in February, 1966 to examine, inter alia, the question of Commonwealth Citizens and aliens who are refused entry into the
U.K. The Committee has recommended a system of appeals by persons who are refused entry at British ports
or are served with deportation orders or refused visa or
entry certificates. The Committee has also recommended
the establishment of a new Advisory Welfare Organization to help intending immigrants.
<pg83>
Emigration to countries other than Britain
Applications for passport facilities for countries other
than Britain, especially for African and Persian Gulf countries, continued to be received from aplicants who had
secured employment as teachers, technicians, doctors, nurses, etc., in these countries. Passports were also issued to
various parties of artists/musicians touring abroad for cultural purposes.
Some of the African countries, e.g. Zambia and Nigeria
recruited technicians, locomotive drivers, loco-fitters, etc.,
from India for their railways and passports were issued

to these personnel after observing the minimum emigration
formalities. Similarly, on receipt of a request from a Textile Mill in Mbale, Uganda, necessary instructions were
issued to extend passport facilities to about 120 technicians
recruited by the Mill.
The Protector of Emigrants at air or sea ports registered under the Emigration Act, 1922, the departure of
3,127 skilled workers, most of whom went to Saudi Arabia,
Persian Gulf and East African countries.
Deportation
718 Indian nationals were deported from Ceylon on
charges of illicit emigration.
Repatriation
322 repatriates arrived in India from Malaysia in the
year 1967.
Revenue receipts
The Regional Passport Offices earned a revenue of
Rs. 16,37,400 during the year 1967.
<pg84>
Consular Services
The Consular Division of the Ministry of External
Affairs are responsible for guiding the Indian Missions/
Posts abroad on consular work. They render assistance and
tender advice to foreign Missions in India on consular matters. They also perform consular and quasi-consular functions on behalf of foreign governments, who do not have
Missions in this country. Broadly speaking, the Consular
Division deal with cases of repatriation, deportation and
extradition of Indian nationals from abroad and also arrange
to afford financial and other relief to stranded Indian
nationals abroad. They also deal with the properties of
Indian nationals who die abroad and help Indian nationals
in India in tracing the whereabouts of their relatives abroad.
They also render assistance to foreign Missions in India for
the disposal of properties and estates of foreigners in India.
The Consular Division also make reciprocal arrangements
with other countries regarding service of summonses in the
civil cases, execution of decrees, examination of witnesses
in criminal cases and enforcement of maintenance orders,
etc.
38 Letters of Request and commissions for examination
of witnesses abroad and vice versa were forwarded to the

authorities concerned after due scrutiny. Similarly, 40
summonses and 6 Maintenance Orders and other Processes
were sent for execution or service abroad.
The proposal to make reciprocal arrangements under
Section 29(c) of the Civil Procedure Code, 1908 for service
of summons and other processes with Japan, West Germany,
Belgium, Hong Kong, the U.A.R., the U.S.S.R., and Switzerland could not be put through unless Order 5, Rule 26(b) was
amended. The Ministry of Law have taken up the matter
with the Law Commission and the latter's report is still
<pg85>
awaited. The matter relating to entering into such arrangements with New Zealand, Thailand, Spain and France and
revision of existing arrangements with Nepal is also being
pursued.
Cases relating to reciprocal arrangements for execution
of decrees under Section 44A ibid with Japan and Trinidad
and Tobago are still pending for want of final replies from
the Governments concerned. The conclusion of such
arrangements with Nepal has also been taken up during
this year.
Negotiations for reciprocal arrangements under Section
504(3) of the Code of Criminal Procedure for examination
of witnesses on Comission in criminal cases with Nepal,
Cameroun, Czechoslovakia, Sierra Leone, Liberia, Aden and
Malaysia are still in progress. The proposals in respect of
Libya, West Germany and Nigeria have been dropped.
2,335 commercial and judicial documents, including powers of attorney and births, deaths, marriages and educational
certificates, etc., were attested for use in foreign countries.
Proposals to make reciprocal arrangements under Section 14 of the Notaries Act, 1952, with Czechoslovakia, Ireland, Canada and Greece are being pursued. Proposal in
respect of the U.S.A. has been initiated this year.
On a reference received from the Commission of India,
Hong Kong, that the Certificates of Origin issued by the
Indian Chamber of Commerce, Hong Kong, were not accepted by certain countries who are signatories to the International Convention Relating to the Simplification of Customs
Formalities, 1923, even though the Government of Hong
Kong had designated that Chamber as competent to issue
such Certificates of Origin in accordance with the provisions
of that Convention, the matter was taken up with the countries concerned through our Missions. As a result of these

<pg86>
efforts, the Governments of Sweden, Denmark, West Germany, the Philippines and Sierra Leone have agreed to
accept such Certificates issued by the above-mentioned
Chamber. The matter is still under correspondence with
the Governments of Nigeria, Rwanda and Burundi.
69 cases of estates and properties of Indians abroad and
16 cases relating to foreigners in respect of their properties
in India were dealt with during the period under review.
Negotiations for concluding Reciprocal Arrangements
under Section 57 of Administrator General's Act, 1963 with
Kuwait are in progress.
During the period under review, 178 persons were repatriated from foreign countries by our various Missions at
public expense at a total expenditure of Rs. 84,802.17.
A total sum of Rs. 36,264.69 was advanced to fourteen
Indian citizens to enable them to tide over temporary
difficulties which arose due to unforeseen circumstances
such as theft, illness, delay in the departure of ships or
their travellers cheques not being endorsed for the
country where they were stranded.
Proposals to conclude extradition arrangements with
Uganda, Malaysia and Ceylon, are being considered. Also
26 cases relating to extradition of offenders from or to India,
trial of citizens of India for offences committed abroad and
trial of foreigners in the country of their nationality for
offences committed in India were dealt with by the Section.
In addition, 25 cases of deportation of Indian citizens
from other countries and 11 cases of arrests of Indian
nationals in foreign countries were also dealt with.
A large number of cases for the grant of Indian citizenship referred to by the Ministry of Home Affairs for our
views was returned to them with our comments. Besides,
<pg87>
172 references on this subject received from our Missions
abroad, Foreign Missions in India, Goa Administration, etc.,
were handled. This included requests received from persons of Goan origin who failed to surrender their foreign
passports within the prescribed time limit for being recognised as Indian citizens. In addition, a large number of
references received from the Passport and Visa Division
in respect of persons who had applied for Indian passports
was also examined and comments offered.

40 cases relating to marriage, desertion bigamy, etc.,
and 16 cases of adoption of Indian children by foreigners
were dealt with. 66 cases of whereabouts and welfare
of Indian nationals abroad were also dealt with.
58 cases of death of foreigners in India were reported
to the foreign Missions concerned. 43 cases of death of
Indian nationals abroad were also dealt with.
15 cases relating to remittance and customs facilities
were dealt with. 61 cases relating to complaints against
Indians abroad and foreigners in India and against Indian
firms and vice versa, recovery of private outstanding dues
from Indians abroad, were handled during the period under
review. Also 14 cases regarding issue of birth, death and
marriage certificates were dealt with. 24 cases relating
to verification of date of birth and other particulars were
dealt with. 56 cases relating to issue of 'No obligation to
return to India' certificates to Indian students who wanted
to settle down in Canada and the U.S.A. were dealt with
during this period. 30 cases relating to settlement of
claims of Indian citizens for pay pension, gratuity, etc.,
against foreign Governments were received and pursued
with the Governments concerned.
During the period under review several officers and staff
who were either fresh appointees or who had not handled
<pg88>
consular work in Missions/Posts abroad previously were
imparted training in consular matters.
During the period 1942-47, a sum of Rs. 7,18,03,561 was
advanced to the evacuees from War Zones during World
War II on repayable basis. Out of this amount, a sum of
Rs. 25,53,381.85 is debitable to the Government of Burma.
So far a sum of Rs. 40,27,550.54 has been recovered, a sum
of Rs. 2,75,51,433.07 has been written off, and a sum of
Rs. 4,02,24,577.39 is still outstanding. This outstanding
amount will be further reduced by Rs. 25,53,381.85 when
debits are accepted by the Government of Burma. Efforts
are also being made to recover the outstanding balance
from the evacuees through the State Governments and
Missions concerned and to write off the irrecoverable
amount.
Besides looking after the consular and quasi-consular
functions on behalf of the Governments of Jamaica and
Malta, the Government of India have agreed to perform
similar functions on behalf of the Government of Malawi
The above work is being handled in the Consular Section.

Diplomatic Missions in India
During the period under review. the Governments of
the Republic of Singapore and of the Democratic Republic
of Congo established their Diplomatic Missions in New
Delhi and accredited His Excellency Mr. Maurice Baker
and His Excellency General Leonard Mulamba as their first
High Commissioner and first Ambassador Extraordinary
and Plenipotentiary respectively to India. His Excellency
Mr. Maurice Baker presented his Letter of Commission to
the President on 17 July, 1967, while His Excellency
General Leonard Mulamba presented his Letter of Credence
on 31 October, 1967.
During the period under review the level of representation of the Holy See in India hag been raised from the
<pg89>
Apostolic Internuncio (Legation) to that of ApostolicNunciature (Embassy) and the Most Reverend Monsignor
Giuseppe Caprio presented his credentials as the first ProNuncio (Ambassador) to India on 11 December, 1967.
The Polish Embassy established their Information
Centre in New Delhi for furthering economic relations
between India and Poland.
The total number of diplomatic missions in India is 69.
A list of the Diplomatic Missions in India and a list of
sub offices of the High Commissions of the Commonwealth,
Countries are given at Appendix III.
Consular Posts in India
The total number of foreign Consular Posts at the end
of October, 1967 rose to 109. A list of Consular Posts in
India is given at Appendix IV.
Distinguished visitors from abroad
A list of distinguished visitors to India from abroad
during the year is given at Appendix V.
INDIA
USA MALI UNITED KINGDOM NIGER NIGERIA ZAMBIA UGANDA SAUDI ARABIA MALAYSIA
GERMANY JAPAN BELGIUM HONG KONG FRANCE NEW ZEALAND SPAIN THAILAND NEPAL
LIBERIA NORWAY SIERRA LEONE SLOVAKIA LIBYA CANADA GREECE DENMARK SWEDEN
PHILIPPINES BURUNDI RWANDA KUWAIT BURMA JAMAICA MALTA MALAWI REPUBLIC OF
SINGAPORE CONGO POLAND

Jun 24, 1967

ORGANIZATION AND ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER XII
ORGANIZATION AND ADMINISTRATION
THERE was no change in the sphere of responsibilities of
the Ministry of External Affairs, as allotted to this Ministry
under the Government of India Allocation of Business
Rules, 1961 (as amended from time to time).
Organisation: There were a few changes in the organisation of the Ministry at Headquarters. With the resignation of Shri M. C. Chagla, the Minister for External
Affairs, the Prime Minister herself took over the portfolio
on Sep 06, 1967. Shri B. R. Bhagat, formerly Minister
for Defence Production, was appointed Minister of State
in this Ministry on 15 November. 1967, while Shri
Surendra Pal Singh continued as Deputy Minister. Consequent on transfer of Shri C. S. Jha, Shri Rajeshwar Dayal
took over as Foreign Secretary on 19 August, 1967.
A post of Additional Secretary has been created to
deal "exclusively with Administration", as recommended
by the I.F.S. Committee. The Additional Secretary, in addition to dealing with the growing volume of administrative problems, is also expected to give a directing and
purposive lead in implementing reforms with a view to
increasing the functional efficiency of the Ministry and its
far-flung net-work of Missions and Posts. Shri V. H. Coelho
assumed charge of the new post from 4 January. 1968.
<pg90>
<pg91>
The Secretariat of the Foreign Office, headed by the
Foreign Secretary, consists of nineteen Divisions, of which
nine are Territorial Divisions dealing with India's relations
with foreign countries, six specialised Divisions dealing
with Protocol, Consular matters, Passport and Visa, External Publicity, Historical Research and Records, Legal
matters and Treaties, and the Policy Planning and the remaining four Divisions with United Nations and Confer-

ences, Administration, Economic and Security matters.
The I.F.S. Committee: Several of the recommendations of the I.F.S. Committee which are within the
competence of this Ministry, and deal with matters like
streamlining the organisational structure of the Ministry,
improving the functional relationship with Missions/Posts
abroad, etc., have been taken up for action. A number of
recommendations involve appreciable extra expenditure
and require consultation with the Ministries of Finance,
Home Affairs, etc. These consultations are in progress.
Deputations/Delegations Abroad: As a measure of
economy, especially in terms of foreign exchange, fewer
deputations/delegations were sponsored by this Ministry
during the year under report than in the previous year.
A statement giving the names of persons sent abroad, the
countries visited and the purpose of the visits is given at
Appendix VI.
Rationalisation of Methods of Work etc.: During the
period under review, inspections of various Sections and
Registries in this Ministry and the Regional Passport
Office, Delhi, were undertaken. Suggestions were made
to rationalism work by applying modern work-study techniclues and to simplify work to expedite disposal and promote
efficiency. The recommendations of the Inspection Units
were implemented as far as practicable.
<pg92>
A review of the work of the Registries functioning under
the reorganised pattern was also undertaken to assess its
effectiveness.
Instructions on the restricted use of telegram and telex
messages on administrative matters have resulted in
economy in expenditure on these items.
Old Records: Systematic weeding of old records
continued during the period under review. As a result.
13,131 files were destroyed and 11.217 new files were received for storage in Record Rooms. 8,747 index slips for the
year 1953 were prepared for printing.
It is expected that an O & M Manual will be printed
shortly and circulated at Headquarters and to all the
Missions abroad.
Incentive Awards: The Scheme of Incentive Awards
was revived last year. The Senior Departmental Promotion Committee of this Ministry considered recommendations for awards to non-gazetted staff for their superior

performance, during the years 1964-65 and 1965-66. One
Assistant got the award for 1964-65 and three Assistants
for 1965-1966.
Missions Abroad: Two new resident Heads of
Missions were appointed during the year, one in Georgetown as High Commissioner and the other in Kuwait as
Ambassador.
Two new non-resident Missions at Embassy level were
also opened, one in the Congo (Brazzaville) and another
in Mali. Our Ambassador in Kinshasa has been accredited
to the Congo (Brazzaville) and our Ambassador in Guinea
is concurrently accredited to Mali.
<pg93>
Consequent on the change of status of Aden, now known
as People's Republic of South Yemen, the Resident Mission
in Aden has been redesignated as an Embassy under the
charge of an Ambassador.
A post has been opened at Thimpu, Bhutan, under the
charge of a Special Officer. It would be under the overall
supervision of the Political Officer in Sikkim and Bhutan
at Gangtok.
A list of Indian Missions/Posts abroad is given at
Appendix VII.
The Indian Foreign Service: The need for economy was
kept in view in dealing with requests for additional staff
both at Headquarters and in Missions abroad.
To review the staffing pattern at Headquarters, the Staff
Inspection Unit of the Ministry of Finance undertook in
1965 an on-the-spot work-study of all Divisions. The
recommendations were finalised in the middle of 1967 and
have been implemented.
Foreign Service Inspectorate: The Foreign Service
Inspectorate, consisting of two officers of the rank (A Joint
Secretary, one each from the Ministries of External Affairs
and Finance, visited Indian Missions in London, Budapest
Stockholm, Paris, Tokyo, Hong Kong and Rangoon. The
Inspectors made an on-the-spot examination of staffing and
functioning of Missions and the structure of allowances and
rental ceilings, and other administrative matters. Their
recommendations are under examination.
Office Accommodation at Headquarters: The Ministry
of External Affairs continues to be housed in four different
buildings as additional office accommodation in the South
Block is not yet available. It is hoped that during the year

<pg94>
1968 most of the important Divisions of this Ministry will
be provided accommodation in the South Block. A proposal to shift some section and officers to the newly
constructed "Shastri Bhawan" is also under consideration.
Acquisition of Property Abroad: Progress in the acquisition of immovable property for use of Indian Missions
abroad has continued to be slow in view of the need for
economy and the conservation of foreign exchange.
A suitable house for the residence of the Commissioner
for India in Mauritius was purchased in September, 1967
at a cost of Rs. 4,80,705-00. This house will continue to
serve as the residence of the Head of Mission in Mauritius,
when that country attains its independence.
Proposals for the construction of the High Commissioner's residence in Trinidad (Port of Spain) and the Embassy
residence and Chancery building in Brasilia, the new capital
of Brazil, are being finalised and the building work will be
started as soon as practicable.
Historical Division: As part of its normal tasks involving
historical research, the Division prepared several papers
on different topics, on its own initiative as well as at the
request of the Ministry, to provide background to themaking Of policy. In addition, the Division provided assistance to scholars working on official research projects.
Assistance is also given to private scholars, to the degree
permitted by current restrictions on access to official records. The printing of selected old records for official use
is progressing satisfactorily. The Research and Intelligence Section, working under the direction of the Historical Division, continued to bring out Monthly Summaries
<pg95>
for official use. The Historical Division prepares and issues
monthly summaries of the activities of the Government of
India for the information of Missions abroad. The Division
is also the coordinating agency of the Ministry in the matter
of examining and clearing maps and publications importedfrom abroad. The Historical Division is currently responsible for the compilation and editing of the annual report of
the Ministry.
The Ministry's Library, functioning under the overall
supervision of the Director, Historical Division, houses
about 65,000 books besides a large collection of maps. The
Library also makes available to the members of the Minis-

try a large number of Indian and Foreign periodicals and.
newspapers, government documents and reference material
essential to the conduct of the Ministry's responsibilities in.
international affairs.
Policy Planning and Review Division: The setting up of
the Policy Planning and Review Division and the Policy
Planning and Review Committee was mentioned in last
year's report. The Division is charged with the task of
evaluating our current policies in the light of changing
circumstances and formulating recommendations for future
policies in respect of different regions and problems. These
analyses and recommendations are considered by the Policy
Planning and Review Committee and final recommendations made to Government for decisions. In fulfilment of
this task assigned to them, the Division and Committee have
studied a number of problems of India's external relations.
A modest beginning was made of liaising with non-govern
mental academic and research institutions so as to diversify
the sources of study material, and encourage exchange of
ideas with informed opinion in the country.
EXPENDITURE
Under the Revised Estimates the expenditure of this
Ministry in 1967-68 is expected to be Rs. 33.48 crores and
falls under two main heads as shown below:
(In crores
of
rupees)
(1) External Affairs
17.65
(2) Other Revenue Expenditure of the Ministry of External
Affairs
15.83
-------33.48
-------The annual expenditure of 97 resident Missions/Posts
abroad amounts to Rs. 1016.09 lakhs. This works out to an
average of Rs. 10.48 lakhs per Mission/Post per annum. Of
this, a sum of Rs. 68.84 lakhs is spent on Pay of Officers,
Rs. 210.73 lakhs on Pay of Staff, Rs. 365.31 lakhs on foreign
allowances of Officers and Staff and about Rs. 371.21 lakhs
on office and residential accommodation and other contingent expenditure. A broad break-up of the expenditure is
as follows:
--------------------------------------------------------------------------RE 1967-68
HEAD
(In lakhs

of
Rupees)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------Headquarters including XP Division but excluding discretionary
expenditure
243.58
Missions abroad including High Commission of India, London

1,016.09

Contributions to :
U.N.O.

187.83

Commonwealth Secretariat

8.00

Commonwealth Foundation
4.26
--------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg96>
<pg97>
--------------------------------------------------------------------------RE 1967-68
HEAD

(In lakhs
of Rupees)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------U.N. Relief and Work Agency
1.00
Entertainment Charges/Hospitality Gran

16.96

Passport and Emigration Organisation

31.97

Indian Medical Team to Laos
Indo-China Commission

3.90
15.89

Indian Delegation to U.N.O. and other International Conferences
Other items including demarcation of Indo-Pakistan Boundary
and discretionary expenditure
225.76
-------1,764.16
-------Other Revenue Expenditure of the Ministry of External Affairs
Aid to Nepal
Kutch Tribunal
Directorate of Aid to Nepal
Other items including loss of exchange

869.00
25.00
11.49
678.03

8.92

-------1,583.52
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------32 E.A.-8
INDIA
USA KUWAIT CONGO MALI ZAIRE GUINEA YEMEN BHUTAN HUNGARY UNITED KINGDOM
FRANCE HONG KONG JAPAN SWEDEN MAURITIUS SPAIN BRAZIL LAOS CHINA PAKISTAN
NEPAL
Sep 06, 1967

APPENDIX I INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCES,
CONGRESSES AND SYMPOSIA ETC
APPENDIX I
INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCES, CONGRESSES AND SYMPOSIA ETC., IN WHICH
INDIA PARTICIPATED IN 1967
--------------------------------------------------------------------------S. No.
Name of the Conference
--------------------------------------------------------------------------IN INDIA
1.

Third Asian Agricultural Cooperative Conference
organised by the National Cooperative Union of
India (NCUI) in collaboration with the International Cooperative Alliance (ICA) and the AfroAsian Rural Reconstruction Organisation, New
Delhi, in January, 1967.

2.

Expert Conference on Cooperative Marketing organised
by the International Cooperative Alliance and theNational Cooperative Union of India, New Delhi, in
January, 1967.

3.

Indo-Australian Consultative Conference, New Delhi,
Apr 12, 1967.

4.

Eighth Conference of the Indian National Commission
for Cooperation with UNESCO, Madras, 29 to 30
August, 1967.

5.

International Seminar on Narcotics Control, New Delhi,
9 to 21 October, 1967.

6.

International Homeopathic Congress organised by
International Homeopathic League, New Delhi,
2 to 28 October, 1967.

7.

International Federation of Cotton and Allied Textile
Industries (IFCATI) World Congress, New Delhi,
12 to 18 November, 1967.

8.

XIX World Vegetarian Congress organised by the Indian
Vegetarian Congress, held in New Delhi, Calcutta,
Madras and Bombay, 1 November to 16 December,
1967.

9.

Fifth Indian Cooperative Congress organised by the,
National Cooperative Union of India, New Delhi,.
2 to 4 December, 1967.

10.

FAO Horticulture Conference on Tropical Fruit Propagation in the Far East, New Delhi, 9 to 13 December, 1967.

11.

Ninth Session of the Asian-African Legal Consultative
Committee, New Delhi, 18 to 29 December, 1967.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg98>
<pg99>
--------------------------------------------------------------------------S. No.
Name of the Conference
--------------------------------------------------------------------------ABROAD
12.

UNDP-Governing Council, Geneva, in January,
1967.

13.

Meeting of Public Administration Experts, New York,
16 to 24 January, 1967.

14.

Inter-Regional Follow-up meeting on Cooperation
(Asia) organised by ILO and FAO, Bangkok, in
January, 1967.

15.

Meeting of the Panel of Experts on Water resources
appointed by, the United Nations to advise on the
implementation of a Five Year Survey Programme
in Natural Resources Development, New York,
26 January to 4 February, 1967.

16.

168th Session of the Governing Body of ILO, Geneva,
3 February to 6 March, 1967.

17.

FAO/WHO Seminar on Planning and Evaluation of
the Applied Nutrition Programme-Asia and Far
East, Rome, 6 to 8 February, 1967.

18.

Tenth Session of ECAFE Committee on Trade, Bangkok,

15 to 24 February, 1967.
19.

FAO Second Ad Hoc Consultation on Tea, London,
20 to 28 February, 1967.

20.

Meetings of the General Working Party of Committee
of the Executive Council of the Universal Postal
Union and the joint IATU-UPU Working Party,
Berne, 22 to 24 February, 1967.

21.

Fifth Congress of the Central Cooperative Council of
Czechoslovakia, in February, 1967.

22.

Second Session of the Asian Industrial Development
Council, Bangkok, 28 February to 6 March, 1967.

23.

Nineteenth Session of the Committee on Industry and
Natural Resources, Bangkok, 7 to 14 March, 1967.

24.

41st Session of the Committee on Commodity Problems,
Rome, 1 to 15 March, 1967.

25.

Sixth Arab Petroleum Congress, Baghdad, in March,
1967.

26.

International Seminar on the "Role of Democratic
Socialism in the Development of Asian and European
Countries" organised by Friedrich Ebert Stiftung
E.V. (Asian Labour Institute), Tokyo, in March,
1967.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg100>
--------------------------------------------------------------------------S. No.
Name of the Conference
--------------------------------------------------------------------------27.

Sixth Session of the Plant Protection Committee for the
South East Asia and Pacific Region, Kuala Lumpur,
27 March to 3 April, 1967.

28.

Spring Meeting of the Inter-Parliamentary Union,
Palma de Mallorce (Spain), in March-April, 1967.

29.

Regional Seminar on Cooperation organised by the
International Cooperative Alliance, Tokyo, in MarchApril, 1967.

30.

Seventh World Petroleum Congress, Mexico City, 2 to 8
April, 1967.

31.

Inter-Regional Seminar on Rural Housing and Commodity Facilities, Maracay (Venezuela), 3 to 20 April,
1967.

32.

23rd. Annual Session of ECAFE, Tokyo, 3 to 17 April,
1967.

33.

Eleventh Session of the Inter-Governmental Committee

of the World Food Programme, Rome, 12 to 21 April,
1967.
34.

International Conference on Asian Security held in Japan
in April, 1967.

35.

Second Session of the Committee on Fisheries, Rome,
24 to 29 April, 1967.

36.

76th Session of the Executive Board of UNESCO, Paris,
24 April to 12 May, 1967.

37.

Symposium on Virus Diseases of Rice, Los Banos
(Philippines), 25 to 28 April, 1967.

38.

Inter-Regional Seminar on Containerization and Other
Unitized Methods for Inter-Model Movement of
Freight, London, 1 to 12 May, 1967.

39.

International Seminar in Chemical Engineering and
Physical Chemistry organised in cooperation with
UNESCO at the Technical Institute, Karlsruhe
(W. Germany), 2 May to 15 July, 1967.

40.

42nd Session of ECOSOC, New York, 8 May to 2 June,
1967.

41.

22nd Session of the Administrative Council of the
International Telecommunication Union, Geneva, 6 to
20 May, 1967.

42.

40th Session of the Executive Board of WHO, Geneva, in
May, 1967.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg101>
--------------------------------------------------------------------------S. No.
Name of the Conference
--------------------------------------------------------------------------43.

20th World Health Assembly, Geneva, in May, 1967.

44.

Second UN Inter-Regional Seminar on the Application of
Cartograpy for economic development, Humleback
(Denmark), 15 May to 10 June, 1967.

45.

Diplomatic Conference on Maritime Law, Brussels,
16 to 27 May, 1967.

46.

35th General Conference of the International Office of
Epizootics, Paris, 22 to 27 May, 1967.

47.

World Newspaper Conference, Kyoto (Japan), in May
1967.

48.

International Conference on Water for Peace, Washington,
23 to 31 May, 1967.

49.

International Tin Council Session, Tokyo, 29 May to
2 June, 1967.

50.

169th Session of the Governing Body of ILO and Committee meetings, Geneva, in May-June, 1967.

51.

Meeting of the ILA Committee on International Water
Resources Law, The Hague, 5 to 8 June, 1967.

52.

UNDP-Fourth Session of the Governing Council,
Geneva, 6 to 23 June, 1967.

53.

51st Session of International Labour Conference, Geneva,
7 to 29 June, 1967.

54.

Eighteenth Executive Meeting of the International
Commission on Irrigation and Drainage, The Hague,
9 to 19 June, 1967.

55.

Meeting of the Executive Board of UNICEF, New
York, 12 to 21 June, 1967.

56.

48th Session of the Council of FAO, Rome, 12 to 23
June, 1967.

57.

ECAFE Seminar on industrial Statistics, Bangkok,
12 to 21 June, 1967.

58.

Sixth Session of the Legal Sub-Committee of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, Geneva,
16 June to 14 July, 1967.

59.

Inter-Regional Workshop on Training in the Field of
Population, Elsinore (Denmark), 19 to 30 June, 1967.

60.

UNESCO's Advisory Committee on Natural Resources,
Paris, 20 to 27 June, 1967.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg102>
--------------------------------------------------------------------------S. No.
Name of the Conference
--------------------------------------------------------------------------61.
Inter-Regional Symposium on Technical Services and
facilities for Small Scale Industries, Vedback (Denmark), 25 June to 8 July, 1967.
62.

ECAFE Working Group meeting on Children and
Youth, Bangkok, 26 to 30 June, 1967.

63.

Twelfth International Cooperative Seminar organised by
the Cooperatives of Czechoslovakia, in June, 1967.

64.

Inter-Regional Seminar on New Methods of Mineral
Exploration with emphasis on Geophysical Techniques
held in the U.S.S.R., 3 to 22 July, 1967.

65.

Workshop for the Managers of Industrial Research
Institutes in Developing Countries, Athens, 4 to 18
July, 1967.

66.

Wheat Conference convened by the International
Wheat Council, Rome, in July-August, 1967.

67.

43rd Session of ECOSOC, Geneva, 11 July to 4 August,
1967.

68.

International Seminar on Apartheid, Kitwe (Zambia),
in July-August, 1967.

69.

ECAFE Seminar on methods of inducing social changes
for overall development, Bangkok, 25 July to 3 August,
1967

70.

Inter-Regional Seminar on Cooperative Marketing of
Agricultural Produce organised by ILO and FAO
held in Denmark, in July, 1967.

71.

Second Seminar on Agricultural Marketing under
Colombo Plan, U.K., in July-September, 1967.

72.

Seminar on Financial Aspects of Trade Expansion,
Bangkok, in August, 1967.

73.

Fifth Session of the Scientific and Technical Sub-Committee of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space, New York, in August, 1967.

74.

20th Session of the WHO Regional Committee for
South East Asia, Ulan Bator, in Augut, 1967.

75.

International Seminar on Civic and Political Education
of Women, Helsinki, 1 to 14 August, 1967.
76.
Third Session of the Asian Highway Coordinating
Committee and Third meeting of experts on the
Asian Highway, Kabul, 9 to 16 August, 1967.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg103>
--------------------------------------------------------------------------S. No.
Name of the Conference
--------------------------------------------------------------------------77.

Fifth Session of Trade and Development Board, Geneva,
15 August to 9 September, 1967.

78.

Symposium on "Floods and their Computation",
Leningrad, 15 to 22 August, 1967.

79.

Conference of the International Union for Scientific
Study of Population, Sydney, 21 to 26 August, 1967.

80.

Eleventh Triennial Conference of the Inaternational
Association of Agricultural Economy, Sydney, 21 to
31 August, 1967.

81.

Tenth Session of the International Coffee Council,
London, 21 August to 8 September, 1967.

82.

Regional Seminar on Co-operative organised by the

International Cooperative
Alliance, Singapore, 28
August to 11 September, 1967.
83.

International Seminar on Wood Preservation in Tropical
Countries, Feldfing (near Munich), 28 August to 1
September, 1967.

84.

36th Session of the International Statistical Institute,
Sydney, 28 August to 8 September, 1967.

85.

Seventeenth Session of the United Nations Scientific
Committee on the Effects of Atomic
Radiation, Geneva,
in August, 1967.

86.

ECAFE Seminar and Study Tour on Electric Power,
MOSCOW, 1 to 25 September, 1967.

87.

Second Inter-Regional Workshop on Problems of
Budget Policy and Management in Developing Countries, Vedback (Denmark), 4 to 16 September, 1967.

88.

Executive Meeting of the International Commission on
Large Dams, Istanbul, 31 August to 2 September, 1967
and the Ninth Congress of the Commission, 4 to 8
September, 1967.

89.

Eleventh Session of Sub-Committee on Metals and
Engineering, Sydney, 4 to 15 September, 1967.

90.

International Hydrology Symposium, Fort Collins
(Colorado, U.S.A.), 6 to 8 September, 1967.

91.

Second Session of the FAO Study Group on oil seeds,
oils and fats, Rome, 11 to 18 September, 1967.

92.

XIIth International Congress of the International Association for Hydraulic' Research, Colorado (U.S.A.),
11 to 14 September, 1967.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg104>
--------------------------------------------------------------------------S. No.
Name of the Conference
--------------------------------------------------------------------------93.

Xth International Conference on Coordination Chemistry, Tokyo, 12 to 16 September, 1967.

94.

Tenth Session of the Committee on Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space, New York, in September, 1967.

95.

Fourth Session of the FAO Consultative Committee
of the Study Group on jute, Kenef and Allied Fabrics,
Rome, 13 to 15 September, 1967.

96.

First Meeting of the Advisory Group of the Asian
Industrial Development Council, Bangkok, 15 to 23
September, 1967.

97.

Inter-Regional Technical Meeting on Cooperation and
Trade Unions, Elsinore (Denmark), 17 September to
1 October, 1967.

98.

Meeting of the International Federation for Documentation, Tokyo, in September, 1967.

99.

UN General Assembly, New York, 19 September to 19
December, 1967.

100.

Third Far East Regional Science Conference, Tokyo,
in September, 1967.

101.

Meeting of ECAFE developing countries, Bangkok, 18 to
22 September, 1967, and Ministerial level meeting
from 25 to 27 September, 1967.

102.

Symposium on Rice Diseases and their control, Tokyo,
25 to 28 September, 1967.

103.

Ninth Session of the Railway Sub-Committee of ECAFE,
Bangkok, 26 September to 2 October, 1967.

104.

International Conference-"The World in 2000",
Tokyo, in September, 1967.

105.

IXth Session of the General Conference of IAEA, Vienna,
26 September to 3 October, 1967.

106.

Meeting of the Central Cooperative Council of Czechoslovakia, in September, 1967.

107.

Asian and Far Eastern Regional Conference on
Epizootics, Tokyo, 2 to 9 October, 1967.

108.

Third Session of the FAO Inter-Governmental Ad Hoc
Committee on the Food Production Resources Programme, Rome, 2 to 4 October, 1967.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg105>
--------------------------------------------------------------------------S. No.
Name of the Conference
--------------------------------------------------------------------------109.

Twelfth Session of the Inter-Governmental Committee
of the World Fool Programme, Rome, 5 to 14 October
1967.

110.

ECAFE Working Party on Typhoons, Bangkok, 5 to 10
October, 1967.

111.

Second Session of the FAO Study Group on Bananas,
Canary Islands (Spain), 9 to 17 October, 1967.

112.

UNCTAD-Meeting of the Ministers Of 77 Developing
Countries, Algiers, 10 to 25 October, 1967.

113.

66th Meeting of the United Nations Scientific Advisory

Committee, New York on 13 October, 1967.
114.

International Research Seminar on Great October Socialist
Revolution and Mongolia, Ulan Bator, in October,
1967.

115.

Fifth Session of the General Assembly of IMCO, London,
17 to 31 October, 1967.

116.

FAO-Fourth Session of the Teak Sub-Commission
Rome, on 17 October, 1967.

117.

Fifth Session of the Committee on Housing, Building
and Planning, Geneva, 16 to 27 October, 1967.

118.

Fourteenth Session of the UN Population Commission,
Geneva, 30 October to 10 November, 1967.

119.

49th Session of the FAO Council, Rome, 30 October to
2 November, 1967.

120.

First Pledging Conference on the United Nations
Capital Development Fund, New York, on 31 October,
1967.

121.

Meeting of the International Cooperative Alliance and
IDACA of Japan held in Japan in October-November,
1967.

122.

170th Session of the Governing Body of ILO, Geneva,
31 October to 17 November, 1967.

123.

Fourteenth Session of the FAO Conference, Rome,
4 to 23 November, 1967.

124.

Third Working Group of Experts on National Accounts,
Bangkok, 6 to 13 November, 1967.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg106>
--------------------------------------------------------------------------S. No.
Name of the Conference
--------------------------------------------------------------------------125.

Third Seminar of Asian Planners Conference, Bangkok,
8 to 15 November, 1967.

126.

Meeting of the Working Group of Experts on Water
Codes, Bangkok, 15 to 29 November, 1967.

127.

Conference on Inter-Governmental Consultations on
Regional Plan Harmonization and Economic Cooperation, Bangkok, 16 to 25 November, 1967.

128.

Seminar on the System of National Accounts, Paris
2o November to 1 December, 1967.

129.

Seminar on the Organisation and Conduct of Population
and Housing Censuses, Bangkok, 24 November to

1 December, 1967.
130.

50th Session of the Council of United Nations Organisation for Food and Agriculture, Rome, on 24 November, 1967.

131.

Symposium on Hydrological Forecasting organised
jointly by WMO, UNESCO and the Government
of Australia, Surfers' Paradise (Australia), 29
November to 6 December, 1967.

132.

UNIDO International Symposium on Industrial Development, Athens, 29 November to 2o December,
1967.

133.

Regional Seminar on Retail Management in Consumer
Cooperatives organised by the International Cooperatives Alliance Regional Office and Education Centre
for South East Asia, Lahore, 4 to 16 December,
1967.

134.

Sixth Session of Advisory Committee on Salaried
Employees and Professional Workers of ILO, Geneva,
4 to 15 December, 1967.

135.

BIRPI-Second Ordinary Session of the Conference of
Representatives of the International Union for the
Protection of Industrial Property (Paris Union) and
the Fifth Ordinary Session of the Inter-Union Coordination Committee, Geneva, 18 to 21 December,
1967.

136.

Information Seminar organised by the German Cooperatives held in West Germany, in December,
1967-February, 1968.

137.

Meetings of the Eighteen-Nation Disarmament Committee, Geneva, in 1967.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------INDIA
AUSTRALIA USA SWITZERLAND ITALY UNITED KINGDOM NORWAY SLOVAKIA IRAQ
JAPAN MALAYSIA SPAIN MEXICO VENEZUELA FRANCE PHILIPPINES GERMANY
CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC DENMARK BELGIUM LATVIA GREECE ZAMBIA SRI LANKA
MONGOLIA FINLAND AFGHANISTAN REPUBLIC OF SINGAPORE RUSSIA TURKEY AUSTRIA
ALGERIA
Apr 12, 1967

APPENDIX II INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATIONS OF WHICH INDIA IS A MEMBER

APPENDIX II

INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATIONS OF WHICH INDIA IS A MEMBER
United Nations and its Specialised Agencies
1.

General Assembly.

2.

Committees and Commissions of the General Assembly.
(a)

Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space

(b)

Committee on Agreements for a Conference for the purpose
of Reviewing the Charter.

(c)

Special Committee Of 24 on the situation with regard to the
implementation of the Declaration on the granting of independence to Colonial Countries and peoples.
(i) Its Working Group.
(ii) Sub-Committee on Petitions.
(iii) Sub-Committee (Pacific Territories).

(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)
(k)
(l)
(m)
(n)
(o)
(p)
(q)
(r)
(s)
(t)
(u)

Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation.
Peace Observation Commission.
Disarmament Commission.
International Law Commission.
Committee on Contributions.
Administrative Tribunal.
18-Nation Disarmament Committee.
Investment Committee.
Working group of 21 to examine Administrative and Budgetary Procedures of the United Nations.
Staff Pension Committee.
UN Committee for International Cooperation Year.
UN Advisory Committee on Congo.
Scientific Advisory Committee.
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions (ACAQB).
Special Committee on Peace-keeping Operations.
Panel of Experts for preparation of the United Nations
Conference on exploration and Peaceful uses of Outer Space.
Special Committee on Principles of International Law Concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation among States.
Committee on Conferences.
<pg107>
<pg108>

3.

Security Council.

4.

Economic and Social Council.

5.

Functional Commissions and Committees
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)

Human Rights Commission.
Narcotic Drugs Commission.
Statistical Commission.
Population Commission.

of ECOSOC.

(e) Sub Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and
Protection of Minorities.
(f) Regional Commission of the Economic and Social Council;
Economic Commission for Asia and the Far East (ECAFE).
(g) Permanent Central Narcotic Board (PCNB).
(h) Advisory Committee of Experts on the prevention of crime
and treatment of offenders.
(i) Preparatory Committee for International Conference on
Human Rights.
6.

Other Subsidiary Bodies of the Economic and Social Council.
(a) Executive Board of UN Children Fund (UNICEF).
(b) UN/FAO Inter Governmental Committee on the World
Food Programme.
(c) Permanent Central Opium Board.
(d) Advisory Committee on the Application of Science and
Technology and Development.
(e) Committee on the International Year for Human Rights.
(f) Drug Supervisory Body.
(g) Committee for Programme and Co ordination.
(h) Committee on non-governmental organisation.
(i) Committee for Development Planning.
(j) Ad Hoc Working Group on the question of a Declaration
on International Economic Cooperation.
(k) Committee on Housing, Building and Planning.
(l) Programme Committee of UNICEF.
(m) FAO/UNICEF joint Policy Committee.

7.

UN Conference on Trade and Development (The Trade and
Development Board).
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)

Committee on Commodities.
Permanent Sub-Committee on Commodities.
Committee on Manufactures.
Group on Preferences.
Committee on Invisibles and Financing related to Trade.
Inter-governmental Group on Supplementary Financing.
Committee on Shipping.
<pg109>

8.

United Nations Industrial Development Organisation (UNIDO).

9.

United Nations Development Programme (UNDP).

10.

UN Specialised Agencies
(a) Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO).
(b) International Bank of Re construction and Development
(IBRD).
(c) International Finance Corporation (IFC).
(d) International Monetary Fund (IMF).
(e) International Development Association (IDA).
(f) International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO).
(g) International Telecommunication Union (ITU).
(h) World Meteorological Organization (WMO).
(i) Universal Postal Union (UPU).
(j) International Labour Organization (ILO).
(k) UN Educational Scientific and Cultural Organisation
(UNESCO).

11.

(l) World Health Organisation (WHO).
(m) Inter-Governmental Maritime Consultative Organisation
(IMCO).
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA).
Other Inter-Governmental Organizations

1.

Afro-Asian Rural Reconstruction Organisation, New Delhi.

2.

Asian African Legal Consultative Committee, New Delhi.

3.

Asian Development Bank.

4.

Asian Productivity Organisation, Tokyo.

5.

Commonwealth Advisory Aeronautical Research Council,
London.

6.

Commonwealth Agriculture Bureau, London.

7.

Commonwealth Telecommunication Board, London.

8.

General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.

9.

Indo-Pacific Fisheries Council, Bangkok.

10.

International Bureau of Education, Geneva.

11.

International Center for the Study of Preservation and Restoration of Cultural Property, Rome.
<pg110>

12.

International Committee of Military Medicine and Pharmacy,
(Belgium).

13.

International Institute of Refrigeration, Paris.

14.

International Institute for the Unification of Private Law, Rome.

15.

International Lead and Zinc Study Group, New York.

16.

International Office of Epizootics, Paris.

17.

International Sugar Council, London.

18.

International Tin Council, London.

19.

International Wheat Council, London.
Non-Governmental Organizations

1.

Advisory Committee of Marine Resources Research.

2.

Asian Broadcasting Conference, Tokyo.

3.

American Society of Travel Agents, New York.

4.

Asian Statisticians Conference.

5.

Association of Secretaries General of Parliaments.

6.

British Electrical and Allied Institutes Research Association.

7.

British Institute of International and Comparative Law.

8.

Committee on Space Research (COSPAR) of the International.
Council of Scientific Union.

9.

Commonwealth Forestry Institute.

10.

Commonwealth

Broadcasting Conference.

11.

Commonwealth

Statisticians Conference.

12.

Commonwealth

Defence Science Organisation.

13.

Commonwealth Parliamentary Association, London.

14.

Commonwealth joint Services Committee on Clothing and General,
Stores.

15.

Commonwealth Sugar Agreement.

16.

Commonwealth War Graves Commission.

17.

Conference International des Grandes Reseaux Electriques,
Paris.
<pg111>

18.

Universal Federation of Travel Agents Association (UFTAA).

19.

International Air Transport Association, Montreal.

20.

International Association for Bridges and Structural Engineering,
Zurich.

21.

International Association of Hydraulic Research, Delft.

22.

International Association for the Exchange of Students for
Technical Experience, Stockholm.

23.

International Association of Cereal Chemistry, Vienna.

24.

International Association of Light House Authorities, Paris.

25.

International Association of Ports and Harbours, Tokyo.

26.

International Coffee Council.

27.

International Commission on Irrigation and Drainage, New
Delhi.

28.

International Commission on Large Dams, Paris.

29.

International Council of Archives, Paris.

30.

International Council of Building Research Studies and Documentation, Rotterdam.

31.

International Council for Bird Preservation, London.

32.

International

Council for Monuments and Sites.

33.

International

Criminal Police Commission, Paris.

34.

International

Customs Tariff Bureau, Brussels.

35.

International

Dairy Federation, Brussels.

36.

International

Federation of Film Archives, Paris.

37.

International
Parts.

Liaison Centre of Cinema and Television Schools,

38.

International

Mathematical Union, Zurich.

39.

International

Union for Pure and Applied Biophysics.

40.

International

Railway Congress Association, Brussels.

41.

International

Seed Testing Association, Wageningan.

42.

International

Social Security Association.

43.

International Society of Soil Mechanics and Foundation Engineering, London.
<pg112>

44.

International Society for Horticultural Science, The Hague.

45.

International Secretariat for Voluntary Service, Washington.

46.

International Statistical Institute, The Hague.

47.

International

Union of Geodesy and Geophysics, Paris.

48.

International

Union of Official Travel Organisations, Geneva.

49.

International Union

50.

International Union Against Venereal Diseases and Treponemetoses, Paris.

51.

International Union of Geological Sciences, Copenhagen.

52.

International Union of Railways, Paris.

53.

Inter-Parliamentary Union, Geneva.

54.

Pacific Area Travel Association, San

55.

Permanent International Association of Navigation Congress,
Brussels.

56.

Permanent International Association of Road Congress, Paris.

57.

World Power Conference, Paris.

of Astronomy, Greenwich.

Francisco.

58.

World Poultry Science Association, London.

59.

World Petroleum Congress.

INDIA
USA CONGO RUSSIA JAPAN UNITED KINGDOM
FRANCE SWEDEN AUSTRIA LATVIA DENMARK

SWITZERLAND

ITALY

Apr 12, 1967

APPENDIX III FOREIGN DIPLOMATIC MISSIONS IN INDIA

APPENDIX III
FOREIGN DIPLOMATIC MISSIONS IN INDIA
(I) Embassies
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.

Afghanistan
Algeria
Argentina
Austria
Belgium
Brazil
Bulgaria
Burma
Cambodia
Chile
China
Colombia
Congo (Democratic Republic)
Cuba
Czechoslovakia
Denmark
Ethiopia
Finland
France
Germany (Federal Republic)
Greece
Holy See (Apostolic Nunciature)
Hungary
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Ireland
Italy
<pg113>

32 E.A.-10

29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.
41.
42.
43.
44.
45.
46.
47.
48.
49.
50.
51.
52.
53.
54.
55.
56.
57.

Japan
Jordan
Kuwait
Laos
Lebanon
Mexico
Mongolia
Morocco
Nepal
Netherlands
Norway
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Rumania
Saudi Arabia
Spain
Sudan
Sweden
Switzerland
Syria
Thailand
Turkey
U.S.S.R.
U.A.R.
U.S.A.
Uruguay
Venezuela
Yugoslavia

BELGIUM

<pg114>
(II) High Commissions
1. Australia
2. Britain
3. Canada
4. Ceylon
5. Ghana
6. Malaysia
7. New Zealand
8. Nigeria
9. Pakistan
10. Singapore
11. Tanzania
12. Uganda
(III) Legation
I. Albania (stationed at Baghdad)
(IV) Sub-Offices of High Commissions
1.

Office of the Assistant High Commissioner for Ceylon at Madras.

2.

Office of the Assistant High Commissioner for Malaysia at Madras.

3.

Office of the Deputy High Commissioner for Pakistan at Calcutta.

4.

Office of the Deputy High Commissioner for Australia at Bombay.

5.

Office of the Deputy High Commissioner for Britain at Bombay.

6.

Office of the Deputy High Commissioner for Britain at Calcutta.

7.

Office of the Deputy High Commissioner for Britain at Madras.

INDIA
AFGHANISTAN JAPAN ALGERIA JORDAN ARGENTINA KUWAIT AUSTRIA LAOS USA
BELGIUM LEBANON BRAZIL MEXICO BULGARIA MONGOLIA BURMA MOROCCO CAMBODIA
NEPAL CHILE CHINA NORWAY COLOMBIA PERU CONGO PHILIPPINES CUBA POLAND
SLOVAKIA DENMARK SAUDI ARABIA ETHIOPIA SPAIN FINLAND SUDAN FRANCE
SWEDEN GERMANY SWITZERLAND GREECE SYRIA THAILAND HUNGARY TURKEY
INDONESIA IRAN IRAQ IRELAND URUGUAY ITALY VENEZUELA YUGOSLAVIA
AUSTRALIA CANADA GHANA MALAYSIA NEW ZEALAND NIGER NIGERIA PAKISTAN
REPUBLIC OF SINGAPORE TANZANIA UGANDA ALBANIA

Apr 12, 1967

APPENDIX IV FOREIGN CONSULAR OFFICES IN INDIA

APPENDIX IV
FOREIGN CONSULAR OFFICES IN INDIA
--------------------------------------------------------------------------S. No. Country
Location
Status
--------------------------------------------------------------------------1. Afghanistan
Bombay
Consulate General
2.

Argentina

Calcutta

Vice Consulate*

3.

Austria

Bombay

Hon. Consulate General

4.

Austria

Madras

Hon. Consulate

5.

Austria

Calcutta

Hon. Consulate

6.

Belgium

Bombay

Consulate General

7.

Belgium

Calcutta

Consulate General

8.

Belgium

Madras

Hon. Consulate

9.

Bolivia

Bombay

Hon. Consulate

10.

Bolivia

Calcutta

Hon. Consulate General

11.

Brazil

Bombay

Consulate

12.

Brazil

Calcutta

Hon. Consulate

13.

Burma

Calcutta

Consulate General

14.

Burma

Madras

Vice Consulate

15.

Costa Rica

Bombay

Hon. Consulate General

16.

Costa Rica

Madras

Hon. Consulate General

17.

Czechoslovakia

Bombay

Consulate General

18.

Czechoslovakia

Calcutta

Consulate General

19.

Denmark

Bombay

Hon. Consulate General

20. Denmark
Calcutta
Hon. Consulate
--------------------------------------------------------------------------*Closed with effect from Jan 01, 1968.
<pg115>

<pg116>
--------------------------------------------------------------------------S. No.
Country
Location
Status
--------------------------------------------------------------------------21.

Denmark

Cochin

Hon. Consulate

22.

Denmark

Madras

Hon. Consulate

23.

Dominican Republic

Bombay

Hon. Consulate General

24.

Dominican Republic

Calcutta

Hon. Consulate

25.

Equador

Calcutta

Hon. Consulate

26.

El Salvador

Calcutta

Hon. Consulate

27.

Ethiopia

Bombay

Hon. Consulate General

28.

Ethiopia

Calcutta

Hon. Consulate General

29.

Finland

Bombay

Hon. Consulate

30.

Finland

Calcutta

Hon. Consulate

31.

Finland

Madras

Hon. Consulate

32.

France

Bombay

Consulate General

33.

France

Calcutta

Consulate General

34.

France

Cochin

Hon. Consular Agent

35.

France

Madras

Consulate General

36.

France

Pondicherry

Consulate General

37.

Germany

Calcutta

Consulate General

38.

Germany

Madras

Consulate General

39.

Germany

Bombay

Consulate General

40.

Greece

Bombay

Hon. Consulate General

41.

Greece

Calcutta

Hon. Consulate General

42.

Haiti

Calcutta

Hon. Consulate

43.

Haiti

Bombay

Hon. Consulate

44.

Indonesia

Bombay

Consulate

45. Indonesia
Calcutta
Mon. Consulate
46. Iran
Bombay
Consulate General
--------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg117>

--------------------------------------------------------------------------S. No.
Country
Location
Status
--------------------------------------------------------------------------47.

Iraq

Bombay

Consulate General

48.

Israel

Bombay

Consulate

49.

Italy

Bombay

Consulate General

50.

Italy

Calcutta

Consulate General

51.

Italy

Cochin

Hon. Consular Agent

52.

Japan

Calcutta

Consulate General

53.

Japan

Bombay

Consulate General

54.

Japan

Madras

Consulate General

55.

Jordan

Bombay

Hon. Consulate

56.

Kuwait

Bombay

Consulate General

57.

Lebanon

Calcutta

Hon. Consulate

58.

Liberia

Calcutta

Hon. Consulate General

59.

Nepal

Calcutta

Consulate General

60.

Netherlands

Bombay

Consulate General

61.

Netherlands

Calcutta

Hon. Consulate General

62.

Netherlands

Madras

Hon. Consulate

63.

Nicaragua

Bombay

Hon. Consulate

64.

Nicaragua

Calcutta

Hon. Consulate

65.

Norway

Bombay

Consulate General

66.

Norway

Calcutta

Hon. Consulate General

67.

Norway

Cochin

Consulate

68.

Norway

Madras

Hon. Consulate

69.

Panama

Bombay

Consulate General

70.

Panama

Calcutta

Consulate General

71.
Panama
Madras
Hon. Consulate
72.
Peru
Bombay
Hon. Consulate
--------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg118>
--------------------------------------------------------------------------S. No.
Country
Location
Status
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

73.

Peru

Calcutta

Consulate General

74.

Philippines

Bombay

Hon. Consulate General

75.

Philippines

Calcutta

Hon. Consulate General

76.

Poland

Bombay

Consulate

77.

Poland

Calcutta

Consulate

78.

Spain

Bombay

Hon. Vice

Consulate

79.

Spain

Calcutta

Hon. Vice

Consulate

80.

Spain

Madras

Hon. Vice

Consulate

81.

Sudan

Bombay

Consulate

General

82.

Sweden

Bombay

Hon. Consulate General

83.

Sweden

Calcutta

Hon. Consulate

84.

Sweden

Madras

Hon. Consulate

85.

Switzerland

Bombay

Consulate General

86.

Switzerland

Calcutta

Vice Consulate

87.

Switzerland

Cochin

Hon. Consular Agent

88.

Syrian Arab

Bombay

Consulate General

89.

Thailand

Bombay

Hon. Consulate General

go.

Thailand

Calcutta

Consulate General

91.

Turkey

Bombay

Eon. Consulate General

92.

Turkey

Calcutta

Hon. Consulate General

93.

Turkey

Madras

Hon. Consulate General

94.

U.S.S.R.

Bombay

Consulate General

95.

U.S.S.R.

Calcutta

Consulate General

96.

U.S.S.R.

Madras

Consulate General

Republic

97. United Arab Republic
Bombay
Consulate General
--------------------------------------------------------------------------*Opening of a Hony. Consulate General of Philippines at Madras has.
been approved.
<pg119>
--------------------------------------------------------------------------S. No.
Country
Location
Status
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

98.

United Arab Republic

Calcutta

Consulate General

99.

U.S.A.

Bombay

Consulate General

100.

U.S.A.

Calcutta

Consulate General

101.

U.S.A.

Madras

Consulate General

102.

Yugoslavia

Bombay

Consulate General

103.

Yugoslavia

Calcutta

Consulate General

104.

Korea (D.P.R.)

New

Delhi

Consulate General

105.

Korea (Republic

New

Delhi

Consulate General

106.

Monaco

New Delhi

Hon. Consulate General

107.

San Marino

New Delhi

Hon. Consulate General

108.

Viet Nam (D.P.R.)

New Delhi

Consulate General

of)

109. Viet Nam (Republic of)
New Delhi
Consulate General
--------------------------------------------------------------------------NOTE : Opening of a Columbian Consulate at Bombay has been
approved.
INDIA
USA AFGHANISTAN ARGENTINA AUSTRIA BELGIUM BOLIVIA BRAZIL BURMA
COSTA!!NORWAY SLOVAKIA DENMARK DOMINICA EL SALVADOR ETHIOPIA FINLAND
FRANCE GERMANY GREECE HAITI INDONESIA IRAN IRAQ ISRAEL ITALY JAPAN
JORDAN KUWAIT LEBANON LIBERIA NEPAL CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC NICARAGUA
PANAMA PERU PHILIPPINES POLAND SPAIN SUDAN SWEDEN SWITZERLAND SYRIA
THAILAND TURKEY YUGOSLAVIA KOREA MONACO SAN MARINO
Jan 01, 1968

APPENDIX V DISTINGUISHED VISITORS FROM ABROAD

APPENDIX V
DISTINGUISHED VISITORS FROM ABROAD
--------------------------------------------------------------------------S. No.
Name and Designation
Period of visit
--------------------------------------------------------------------------Heads
1.

H.E. Sayed Ismail El Azhari,

of State
Apr 28, 1967

5 May, 1967.

President of the Supreme Council
of State of the Republic of the
Sudan.
2.

H.E. Dr. Kenneth Kaunda,
President of the Republic of
Zambia.

14 to 18 June, 1967.

3.

His Highness Major General
Palden Thondup Namgyal, Chogyal of Sikkim, and Her Highness
Hope Namgyal, Gyalmo of
Sikkim.

27 August to 11 September, 1967.

4.

H.E. Mr. W. Gopallawa, Governor General of Ceylon.

21 October to 2 November, 1967.

5.

His Majesty Sri Savang Vatthana,
King of Laos.

3 to 15 December, 1967.

6.

H.E. Mr. Josip Broz Tito,
President of the Socialist Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia.

22 to 27 January, 1968.

Heads of Government
1.

H.E. Dr. Kurt Georg Kiesinger,
Chancellor of the Federal Republic of Germany.

20 to 22 November, 1967.

2.

H.E. Sir S. Ramgoolam, Prime
Minister of Mauritius.

13 to 19 December, 1967.

3.

H.E. Mr. A. N. Kosygin, Chair25 to 31 January, 1968.
man of the Council of Ministers
of the U.S.S.R.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg120>
<pg121>
--------------------------------------------------------------------------S.No.
Name and Designation
Period of visit
--------------------------------------------------------------------------Other Dignitaries
1.
H.E.U Thant, Secretary-General
1967.

10 to 13 April and 15 to 16 April,

of the United Nations.
2.

Rev. Yonosuke Nakano, President of O.I.S.C.A., Japan.

15 to 23 April, 1967.

3.

Mr. Richard M. Nixon, former
Vice-President of the U.S.A.

19 to 22 April, 1967.

4.

H.E. Lord Richard Casey, Ex-

25 to 27 April, 1967.

Governor General of Australia,
and Lady Casey.
5.

H.E. Mr. Tano, Tsolov, ViceChairman of the Council of
Ministers of the People's Republic of Bulgaria.

23 April to 3 May, 1967.

6.

H.E. Mr. Miso Pavicevic, Deputy
Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Socialist Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia.

11 to 14 May, 1967.

7.

H.E. Tan Sri Haji Sardon bin
Haji Jubir, Minister of Transport
of Malaysia.

9 to 11 June, 1967.

8.

H.E. Mr. Malakul, Education
Minister of Thailand, and Mrs.
Malakul.

17 to 21 July, 1967.

9.

H.E. Mr. Philip Gunawardane,
Minister of Industries of Ceylon.

26 to 29 August, 1967.

10.

H.E. Ratu K.K.T. Mara, Chief
Minister of Fiji.

22 to 24 September, 1967.

11.

H.E. Dr. Mahmoud Fawzi,
Assistant to the President of the
U.A.R.

22 to 26 September, 1967.

12.

H.E. Mr. Marii Ivanov, Minister
of Machine Building Industry of
the People's Republic of Bulgaria.

31 October to 7 November, 1967

13. His Highness the Aga Khan
5 to 28 November, 1967.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg122>
--------------------------------------------------------------------------S.No.
Name and Designation
Period of visit
--------------------------------------------------------------------------14.

Sir Bernard Fergusson, ExGovernor General of New
Zealand.

7 to 14 November, 1967.

15.

H.E. Mr. George Thomas,
Minister of State for Commonwealth Affairs in the United
Kingdom.

25 November to 1 December, 1967.

16.

H.E. Mr. S. Samodlaka, Under
24 to 25 December, 1967.
Secretary of State for the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (advance party of the
President of the Socialist Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia).

17.

H.E. Mr. Ihsan Sabri Caglayangil, Foreign Minister of Turkey.

4 to 9 January, 1968.

18.

H.E. Mr. Maurice Sauve, Minister of Forestry of Canada.

5 to 16 January, 1968.

19.

H.E. Mr. Alphand, SecretaryGeneral in the French Foreign
Office.

13 to 20 January, 1968.

20.

Rt. Hon. Mr. Arthur Bottomley,
OBE, M.P. from the United
Kingdom.

20 to 28 January, 1968.

21.

H.E. Mr. K. Febris, Deputy
Minister of Mines and Power of
Poland.

22 to 28 January, 1968.

22.

Mr. Tewfik Owedia, Secretary23 to 31 January, 1968.
General of the Supreme Council
of Islamic Affairs of the U.A.R.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------SUDAN
ZAMBIA USA LAOS YUGOSLAVIA GERMANY
AUSTRALIA BULGARIA MALAYSIA THAILAND

MAURITIUS UNITED KINGDOM JAPAN
FIJI TURKEY CANADA POLAND

Apr 28, 1967

APPENDIX VI VISIT OF INDIAN DIGNITARIES TO FOREIGN COUNTRIES

APPENDIX VI
VISIT OF INDIAN DIGNITARIES TO FOREIGN COUNTRIES AND OTHER DEPUTATIONS/
DELEGATIONS SPONSORED BY THE MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------S.No.
Name/Designation
Places visited
Purpose
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------1.

Shri G.A. Shah, Joint
Secretary, Ministry of Law,
Shri Sangat Singh, Senior
Research Officer, Ministry
of External Affairs.

London
Geneva.

and

2.

Shri M.C. Chagla, Foreign
Minister, Shri T.N. Kaul,

Burma, Thailand
and Indonesia.

Kutch case.

Goodwill.

Secretary, Shri K.M.
Kannampilly, joint
Secretary, Ministry of
External Affairs.
3.
Out
er

Dr. Vikram Sarabhai,

U.S.A., U.K.

As an expert on

Chairman, Atomic Energy
Commission.

and U.S.S.R.

Space Committee.

4.

Shri T.T.P. Abdullah,
Director, Ministry of
External Affairs.

Kathmandu

Official.

Burma

Talks with the

5.
Shri K.M. Kannampilly,
Gove
rnjoint Secretary and Shri
B. K. Basu, Director,
Ministry of External
Affairs, Shri D.R. Kohli,
joint Secretary, Ministry
of Defence, Shri G.P.
Pandey, joint Secretary,
Ministry of Education,
Brig. J.S. Paintal,
Surveyor General.

ment of Burma.

6.

Shri Moinuddin Harris,
Mecca
Haj Delegation.
Editor, Daily "AJMAL",
Bombay, Shri Hayatullah
Ansari, Chief Editor,
"QUAMI AWAZ",
Lucknow, Shri Syed, A.
W. Bokhari, Principal,
New College, Madras.
------------------------------------------------------------------------------

<pg123>
<pg124>
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------S.No. Name/Designation
Places visited
Purpose
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------7.
Shri C.S. Jha, Foreign
consul
Secretary, Shrimati K.
Rulanini Menon, Director,
Ministry of

Yugoslavia

Indo-Yugoslav
tation.

External Affairs.
8.
Co
Plan
-

Shri C.S. Jha, Foreign

U.A.R., Yugos-

Committee on U.N,

Secretary.

lavia and U.S.A.

ordination and
ning,

9.

Dr. Zakir Husain, VicePresident, Shri V. Phadke,
Secretary.

U.S.A.

Lecture Tour.

10.
ele
c-

Shri Purshottam Tri-

Malaysia

Observers to the

11.

Shri M.C. Chagla, Foreign
Minister, Shri C. S. Jha,
Foreign Secretary, Shri
Azim Hussain, Secretary,
Ministry of External
Affairs.

Kuwait, Iran
and Geneva.

Official.

12.

Shri M. C. Chagla, Foreign
Minister, Shri T.N.Kaul,
Secretary, Ministry of
External Affairs.

Singapore and
Malaysia.

Goodwill.

13.

Dr. Zakir Husain, President of India and party.

Canada

State visit.

14.
of

Shri M. C. Chagla, Foreign

U.S.A.

Emergency Session

kamdas, Advocate, Shri
A. N. Kashyap, Secretary
to the Government of
Punjab.

tions in Sabah.

Minister.

U.N. General Assembly.

15.

Shri M.C. Chagla, Foreign
Minister, Shri
Azim
Hussain, Secretary,
Ministry
of External
Affairs.

U.A.R. and
Yugoslavia.

Goodwill.

16.

Shri R.D. Sinha (Dinker),
Adviser to the Government of India, Shri Shiv
Mangal Singh (Suman).
Shrimati Vijaya Lakshmi

Kenya and
Mauritius.

Goodwill.

West Germany.

India's special

17.
envo
y

Pandit, Member of Parliato Dr. Adenauer's
ment.
funeral.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

-<pg125>
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------S. No.
Name/Designation
Places visite
Purpose
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------18.

Tokyo, Singapore
and

Meeting of ECAFE in
Tokyo and discussion

External Affairs.
Singapore
.

Malaysia.

Malaysia and

10.

U.S.S.R.

Talks with the Soviet

i
n

Shri A.N. Mehta, joint
Secretary, Ministry of

Shri

Swaran

Singh,

Defence Minister, Shri
Rajeshwar Dayal, Foreign
Secretary, Shri R. jaipal,
joint Secretary, Ministry
of External Affairs.

leaders.

20. Shri A.G. Meneses, joint
inspec
Secretary, Ministry of
External Affairs, Shri M.
S. Sundara, joint Secretary, Ministry of Finance.

U.K., Hungary,

Foreign Service

Sweden, France,
Japan, Hong
Kong and
Burma.

tions.

21.

Shri L.C. Jain, Secretary,
Ministry of Communications, Shri S. N. Ranganathan, Deputy Director
General, Posts and Telegraphs, and others.

Pakistan

Telecommunications
Conference.

22.

Shri C.K. Daphtary, Attorney General, Shri N.
A. Palkhiwala, Advocate,
Shri B. N. Lokur, Law
Secretary, Col. S. K. S.
Mudaliar, Dr. K. Krishna
Rao, joint Secretary,
Ministry of External
Affairs, Lt. Col. P.
Rout, Deputy Director
of the Survey of India.

U.K.

Kutch Tribunal.

23.
of

Shri B.R. Bhagat, Minister

Japan

To attend the funeral

of State, Ministry of
Yoshid

the late Mr. S.

a,

External Affairs

former Prime Minister
of Japan.

24. Shri V.K. Ahuja, joint
Govern-

Aden

Talks with the

Secretary, Ministry of

ment

Commerce, Shri R.
Bhandari, Director, Ministry of External Affairs.

Yemen.

25. Shri Surendra Pal Singh,
celebrat
ion
Deputy Minister, Ministry
of

Liberia

of

Southern

To attend the
of the inauguration

of External Affairs.

President Tubman of
Liberia.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg126>
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------S. No.
Names/Designation
Places visited
Purpose
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------26. Shri T.N. Kaul, Secretary,
Indian

Fiji and Australia

Shri R. Jaipal, joint
discuss
ions
Secretary, Ministry of
Governments

Missions and
with the

External Affairs.
27. Shri B.R.Bhagat, Minister
memori
al
of State, Ministry of
Mr.
H.
External Affairs.
Prime
Australi
a.

Inspection of

concerned.
Australia

To attend the
services of late
Holt,

former

Minister of

28.

Shri N. Subrarnanyan,

Czechoslovakia

Meeting of

Working

Special Secretary, Minis-

and Bulgaria.

Group on Industrial

try of Industrial DevelopCooperation.
ment and Company Affairs,
Shri K. B. Rao, Adviser
(Industries), Planning
Commission, Shri B. D.
Kalelkar, Director General,
Technical Development,
Ministry of Industrial
Development and Company Affairs, Shri V.
Krishnamurthi, Deputy
Senior General Manager,
Bharat Heavy Electricals
Ltd., Tiruchirapally.
------------------------------------------------------------------------------

INDIA
UNITED KINGDOM SWITZERLAND BURMA THAILAND INDONESIA USA NEPAL
YUGOSLAVIA MALAYSIA IRAN KUWAIT REPUBLIC OF SINGAPORE CANADA KENYA
MAURITIUS GERMANY JAPAN HUNGARY FRANCE SWEDEN PAKISTAN YEMEN LIBERIA
AUSTRALIA FIJI NORWAY SLOVAKIA BULGARIA
Apr 28, 1967

APPENDIX VII INDIAN MISSIONS/POSTS ABROAD

APPENDIX VII
INDIAN MISSIONS/POSTS ABROAD
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------S. No.
Country
Location
Remarks
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------EMBASSIES-(a) Resident
1. Afghanistan

Kabul

2.

Algeria

Algiers

3.

Argentina

Buenos Aires

Ambassador concurrently

accredited to
Paraguay
as Ambassador and Uruguay as Minister.
4. Austria

Vienna

5. Belgium

Brussels

Ambassador concurrently
accredited to Luxembourg
as Ambassador. Additionally, the Ambassador
is India's Special Representative for Economic,
Financial and Commercial
Affairs and he is also
accredited to the European
Economic Community and
the European Coal and
Steel Community.

6. Brazil

Rio-de-Janeiro

7. Burma

Rangoon

Ambassador concurrently
accredited to Venezuela
and Bolivia as Ambassador.

8. Cambodia

Phnom Penh

9. Chile

Santiago

Ambassador concurrently
accredited to Columbia
and Peru as Ambassador.

10. China
Peking
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg127>
<pg128>
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------S. No.
Country
Location
Remarks
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------11.

Congo

12. Cuba

Kinshasa

Ambassador concurrently
accredited to Gabon and
Congo (Brazzaville).

Havana

Incharge of a First Secretary/
Charge d'Affaires, Ambassador resident in Mexico.

13. Czechoslovakia

Prague

14. Denmark

Copenhagen

15. Ethiopia

Addis Ababa

16. Finland

Helsinki

17. France

Paris

18. Federal Republic of Germany.

Bonn

19.

Guinea

Conakary

20.

Hungary

Budapest.

21.

Italy

Rome

22.

Indonesia

Djakarta

23.

Iran

Tehran

24.

Iraq

Baghdad

25.

Ireland

Dublin

26.

Japan

Tokyo

Incharge of a Counsellor/
Charge d' Affaires. Ambassador resident in Sweden.

Ambassador concurrently
accredited to Mali as
Ambassador.

Ambassador concurrently
accredited to Albania as
Minister and as High
Commissioner to Malta
and First Secretary concurrently
accredited to
the Republic of San
Marino as Consul General.

<pg129>
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------S. No.
Country
Location
Remarks
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------27. Jordan
Secret
ary/

Amman

Incharge of First
Charge d'Affaires.
bassador resident in

the

Lebanon.
28. Kuwait
jurisdictio

Kuwait

Ambassador's

Am-

n

extends to Gulf Sheikhdoms, viz.

Dub
ai

Bahrain,

and Muscat.

29. Laos

Vientiane.

30. Lebanon

Beirut

accredited as

Ambassador

to Jordan and as High
Commissioner to

Cyprus.
31. Malagasy

Ambassador concurrently

Tananarive

Ambassador concurrently
accredited as

Ambassador

General to Reunion island and Comores.
32. Mexico

Mexico City

Ambassador concurrently
accredited to

and

Cuba

Panama as Ambassador.
33. Morocco

Rabat

Ambassador concurrently
accredited to

a
s

Ambassador.

34. Nepal

Kathmandu

35.

Netherlands

The Hague.

36.

Norway

Oslo.

37.

Philippines

Manila.

38.

Poland

Warsaw.

39.

Rumania

Bucharest

Ambassador concurrently
accredited to
as Ambassador.

40.

Tunisia

Saudi Arabia

Jeddha.

Bulgaria

41.

Senegal

Dakar

Ambassador concurrently
accredited as

Ambassador

to Ivory Coast, Upper
Volta and Mauritania

and

High Commissioner to
Gambia.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------32 E.A-11
<pg130>
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------S. No.
Country
Location
Remarks
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------42.

Somalia

Mogadiscio.

43.

South Yemen, People's
Repuhlic of

Aden.

44.

Spain

Madrid.

45.

Sudan

Khartoum

46.

Sweden

Stockholm

Ambassador concurrently
accredited to Finland as
Ambassador.

47.

Switzerland

Berne

Ambassador

concurrently

accredited to the Vatican
as Ambassador.
48.

Syrian Arab

Republic

Damascus.

49.

Thailand

Bangkok.

50.

Tunisia

Tunis

Incharge of First Secretary/Charge
Ambassador
Morocco.

d'Affaires.
resident in

51.

Turkey

Ankara.

52.

United Arab Republic

Cairo

Ambassador

concurrently

accredited as

Ambassador

to Libya and Minister to
Yemen.
53.

Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics.

Moscow

54.

United States of America

Washington.

55.

Yugoslavia

Belgrade

Ambassador concurrently
accredited to Mongolia
as Ambassador.

Ambassador concurrently
accredited to Greece as
Ambassador.

EMBASSIES-(b) Non-resident
1. Bolivia

Ambassador resident in Rio-de-Janeiro.

2. Bulgaria
3. Burundi

Ambassador resident in Bucharest.
Ambassador resident in Kampala.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg131>
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------S. No. Country
Location
Remarks
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------4.

Cameroun

Ambassador resident in Lagos.

5.

Columbia

Ambassador resident in Santiago.

6.

Congo
(Brazzaville)

Ambassador resident

7.

Dahomey

Ambasador resident

8.

Gabon

Ambassador resident

in

Kinshasa.

9.

Greece

Ambassador resident

in

Belgrade.

in Kinshasa.
in Lagos.

10.

Ivory Coast

Ambassador resident in Dakar.

11.

Liberia

Ambassador resident

in

Accra.

12.

Libya

Ambassador resident

in

Cairo.

13.

Luxembourg

Ambassador resident

in

Brussels.

14.

Mali

Ambassador resident

in

Conakry.

15.

Mauritania

Ambassador resident

in

Dakar.

16.

Mongolia

Ambassador resident in

Moscow.

17.

Panama

Ambassador resident in

Mexico City.

18.

Paraguay

Ambassador

19.

Togo

Ambassador resident

20.

Peru

Ambassador

resident

21.

Rwanda

Ambassador

resident in

22.

Upper Volta

Ambassador

resident

in

Dakar.

23.

Venezuela

Ambassador

resident

in

Rio-de-Janeiro.

resident

in
in
in

Buenos Aires.
Lagos.
Santiago.
Kampala.

HIGH COMMISSIONS-(a) Resident
1.

Australia

Canberra

2.

Guyana

George Town

3.

Canada

Ottawa

4.

Ceylon

Colombo

High Commissioner accredited to Maldives.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg132>
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------S. No.
Country
Location
Remarks
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------5. Ghana

Accra

High commissioner accredited to Liberia as
Ambassador and as High
Commissioner to Sierra
Leone.

6.

Kenya

Nairobi

7.

Malawi

Blantyre

8.

Malaysia

Kuala Lumpur

Incharge of an Acting
High Commissioner.

9.
10.

New Zealand

Wellington

Nigeria

Lagos

High commissioner concurrently accredited to
Togo, Dahomey and
Comeroun as Ambassador.

11. Pakistan

Islamabad/
Karachi.

12. Singapore

Singapore

13. Trinidad and Tobago

Port of Spain.

High Commissioner concurrently
accredited as
High Commissioner to
Jamaica, Barbados, Antigua, Grenada, Dominica,
St.
Kitts,
St.

Lucia,

St. Vincent and Montserrat, and as Consul
General to Surinam.
14. Uganda

Kampala

High Commissioner concurrently accredited as
Ambassador to Rwanda
and Burundi.

15. United Kingdom

London

16. United Republic of
Tanzania.

Dar-es-Salaam

17. Zambia

Lusaka

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg133>
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------S. No.
country
Location
Remarks
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------HIGH COMMISSIONS-(b) Non-resident
1.

Cyprus

High Commissioner resident at Beirut.

2.

Sierra Leone

High Commissioner resident in Accra.

3.

Jamaica

High Commissioner resident in Port of
Spain.

4.

Malta

High Commissioner resident in Rome.

5.

Gambia

High Commissioner resident in Dakar.
DEPUTY HIGH COMMISSION

1.

Pakistan

Dacca

Deputy High Commissioner
resident in Dacca.

ASSISTANT HIGH COMMISSION
1. Ceylon

Kandy

Assistant High Commissioner.

COMMISSIONS-(a) Resident
1.

Fiji

Suva.

2.

Hong Kong

Hong Kong.

3.

Mauritius

Port Louis.

4.

Kenya

Mombasa.
COMMISSIONS-(b) Non-resident

1.

Antigua

Commissioner resident in Port of Spain.

2.

Barbados

Do.

3.

Dominica

Do.

4.

Grenada

Do.

5. Montserrat
Do.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg134>
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------S. No.
Country
Location
Remarks
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------6. St. Kitts

Commissioner resident in
port of Spain.

7.

St. Lucia

Do.

8.

St. Vincent

Do.

LEGATIONS-Non-resident
1. Albania

Minister resident in Rome.

2. Uruguay

Minister resident in Buenos Aires.

3. Vatican

Minister resident in

4.

Minister resident in Cairo.

Yemen

Berne.

CONSULATES GENERAL--(a) Resident
1. Denmark

Copenhagen

Hon. Consul General (Functioning under the Ambassador).

2.

Berlin

Ambassador resident in
Bonn.

Germany
(Federal Republic).

3.

Do.

Frankfurt

Do.

4.

Do.

Hamburg

Do.

5.

Muscat

Muscat

6.

Switzerland

Geneva

Resident Consul General.

7.

United States of America

New York

Ambassador resident
Washington.

San Francisco

Resident Consul General.
Ambassador resident in
Washington.

8.

Do.

9. Vietnam (North)

Hanoi

10. Vietnam (South)

Saigon

in

11. Paraguay
Asuncion
Hon. Consul General.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg135>
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------S. No.
Country
Location
Remarks
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------CONSULATES GENERAL-(b) Non-resident
1.

Comores

Consul General resident in Tananarive.

2.

Republic of San Marino

Consul General resident in Rome.

3.

Re-Union Island

Consul General resident in Tananarive.

4.

Surinam

Consul General resident in Port of Spain.
CONSULATES-Resident

1. Afghanistan

Jalalabad

Consul. Ambassador resident in Kabul.

2.

Do.

Kandhar

3.

Belgium

Ghent

Hon. Consul. Ambassador
resident in Brussels.

4.

Burma

Mandalay

Consul. Ambassador resident
in Rangoon.

5.

Canary Island

Las Palmas

Hon. Consul.

6.

French Somaliland

Djibouti

Hon. Consul.

7.

Germany
(Federal Republic)

Munich

Hon. Consul. Ambassador
resident in Bonn.

8.

Do.

Stuttgart

9.

Greece

Athens

Hon. Consul. Ambassador
resident in Belgrade.

10.

Iran

Khorramshahr

Consul. Ambassador resident in Tehran.

11.

Italy

Genoa

Hon. Consul. Ambassador
resident in Rome.

12.

Indonesia

Medan

Consul. Ambassador resident in Djakarta.

13.

Iraq

Basra

Consul. Ambassador resident in Baghdad.

14.

Japan

Kobe

Do.

Do.

Consul. Ambassador resident in Tokyo.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg136>
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------S. No.
Country
Location
Remarks
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------15. U.S.S.R.

Odessa

Consul. Ambassador resident in Moscow.

16. U.S.A.

Cleveland

Hon. Consul. Ambassador

resident in Washington.
17.

Do.

Honolulu

18. Panama

Do.

Bandar Abbas

Hon. Consul. Ambassador
resident in Mexico City.

VICE CONSULATE-Resident
1. Iran

Zahidan
TRADE

Ambassador resident in Tehran.

COMMISSIONS-Resident

1. Australia

Sydney

High Commissioner resident
in Canberra.

2. Canada

Vancouver

High Commissioner resident
in Ottawa.

3. Bahrein

Bahrein

In charge of a Trade Agent.

4.

Dubai

In charge of a Trade Agent.

Dubai

SPECIAL MISSIONS-(a)
1.

Political Office, Sikkim

Gangtok

2.

Permanent Mission of New York
India to the United
Nations.

3.

Special Office, Bhutan

Resident
Political Officer.
Permanent Representative.

Thimpu

Special Officer under the
supervision of Political
Officer, Sikkim.

SPECIAL MISSION-(b) Non-resident
1. Political Office, Bhutan

Political Officer resident in

Gangtok.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg137>
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------S. No.
Country
Location
Remarks
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------NEW MISSIONS-(a) Resident
1. Guyana

George Town

Resident High commissioner
appointed in 1967.

2. Kuwait

Kuwait

Resident Ambassador appointed in 1967.

NEW MISSIONS-(b) Non-resident
1.

Congo
(Brazzaville)

2.

Gabon

3.

Mali

Ambassador resident in
Kinshasa.
Do.

Ambassador resident at
Conakry.
------------------------------------------------------------------------------

INDIA
AFGHANISTAN ALGERIA ARGENTINA PARAGUAY AUSTRIA USA BELGIUM BRAZIL
VENEZUELA BOLIVIA BURMA CAMBODIA CHILE PERU CHINA CONGO ZAIRE GABON
CUBA MEXICO CZECH REPUBLIC NORWAY SLOVAKIA DENMARK ETHIOPIA FINLAND
SWEDEN FRANCE GERMANY GUINEA MALI HUNGARY ITALY ALBANIA MALTA
INDONESIA IRAN IRAQ IRELAND JAPAN JORDAN LEBANON KUWAIT BAHRAIN OMAN
LAOS CYPRUS PANAMA MOROCCO TUNISIA NEPAL PHILIPPINES POLAND ROMANIA
BULGARIA SAUDI ARABIA SENEGAL MAURITANIA SOMALIA YEMEN SPAIN SUDAN
SWITZERLAND SYRIA THAILAND TURKEY EGYPT LIBYA RUSSIA MONGOLIA
YUGOSLAVIA GREECE BURUNDI UGANDA GHANA LIBERIA RWANDA AUSTRALIA CAYMAN
ISLANDS GUYANA CANADA SRI LANKA MALDIVES KENYA MALAWI MALAYSIA NEW
ZEALAND NIGER NIGERIA PAKISTAN REPUBLIC OF SINGAPORE TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
JAMAICA DOMINICA GRENADA UNITED KINGDOM TANZANIA ZAMBIA SIERRA LEONE
FIJI HONG KONG MAURITIUS MONTSERRAT URUGUAY VIETNAM SAN MARINO DJIBOUTI
BHUTAN
Apr 28, 1967


