1970-71

Contents
REPORT
1970-71
(CORRECTED UP TO Feb 15, 1971)

43 M of EA-1.

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS
NEW DELHI
CONTENTS

CHAPTER
I

General

Page
1-4

II

India's Neighbours

5-19

III

South East Asia

20-27

IV

East Asia

28-29

V

West Asia and North Africa

30-38

VI

Africa, South of the Sahara

39-42

VII

Europe

43-47

VIII

The Americas

48-51

IX

United Nations and International Conferences

52-66

X

Technical and Economic Co-operation

67-71

XI

External Publicity

72-76

XII

Cultural Centres

77

XIII

Protocol Matters

78

XIV

Passport Visa and Consular Services

79-80

XV

Administration and Organisation

81-84

(i)

APPENDICES
Number

Page

I

International Conferences, Congresses, Seminars, etc.,
in which India participated in 1970

85-105

II

International Organisations of which India is a member

106-111

III

Governing Bodies of the Specialised Agencies and
other Agencies of the United Nations of which India
is a member

112-113

IV

Foreign Diplomatic Missions in India

114-115

V

Foreign Consular Offices in India

116-120

VI

Indian Missions/Posts Abroad

121-131

VII

Traaties/Convantions/Agreements concluded or renewed
by India with other countries in 1970

132-144

VIII

Expenditure on Headquarters and Missions/Posts
Abroad during 1970-71
(ii)

INDIA

Feb 15, 1971

General
CHAPTER I
GENERAL
Amidst the welter of conflicts, of contradictory Pulls and
of perplexing situations, a historian of the future might discern
two hopeful strands in the year under report. The first consists
in the concrete steps in Europe towards a detente; the second,
a growing realisation in Asia and Africa that it is through
cooperation that prosperity can be achieved. In both these
strands he might see a common thread: countries of different
political and economic persuasions have not allowed those
differences to come in the way of their getting together. This
is co-existence; but it is more than co-existence for it is not
merely a hostile toleration of the other. It is a Positive stop
forward in the shape of collaboration for mutual benefit. This
is also one of the objectives of non-alignment.

145-146

Europe has seen during the year the historic treaties of the
Federal Republic of Germany with the Soviet Union and Poland.
These treaties mark a new realism. They mark the recognition
that the plague of the past cannot be allowed permanently to
infect the present, that the present has to be taken as it is and
that it is on the basis of this present that a better future has
to be built. This building can only take place in cooperation,
not only with those of one's own way of thinking but also with
those who think differently. Clearly, there can be no sudden
break with the past, but that they represent a new spirit cannot
be denied.
If these treaties mark a new realism in the. conduct of
international affairs, they find their counterpart in the field of
national security, as seen in the strategic arms limitation talks
taking place between the two super Powers. Here too there is
an attempt to change the seemingly fatalistic spiral of arms
and yet more arms by deliberate human wisdom.
43 M. of E.A.
<pg1>
<pg2>
In Asia and Africa too the outstanding characteristic of the
year, it may be, is the fresh emphasis on cooperation for mutual
benefit. Such cooperation takes various forms; bilateral, as
with many of India's relations with the countries of Asia and
Africa, sub-regional and regional, such as the ECAFE Council
of Ministers and the Kabul Meeting of December, 1970, which
sought to further such important concepts as monetary co-operation and an Asian Clearing Union. It is now realised that from
the social and economic development of individual countries,
and of the region as a whole, will come true strength: reliance
upon military pacts and hostile blocs becomes increasingly
outdated.
Our relations with the countries of South and South East
and East Asia, with the exception of China and Pakistan, saw
an increasing measure of understanding during the year. Our
traditional ties of friendship with these countries have been
further strengthened with visits and frequent exchanges in
various fields. We do not follow identical policies and there
are differences. as is natural between friends, but we feel that
we increasingly speak the same language, in, the sense of
understanding one another even though our views on particular
issues might differ.
Unfortunately, we cannot yet say the same of our relations
with China and Pakistan. While China showed some, signs of
return to the accepted norms of international conduct, we do
not yet see any positive concrete move towards a resolution of
our differences. We are willing to resolve these differences on
the basis of mutual respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity

and non-interference in internal affairs.
In Pakistan, the year has seen the momentous event of
Pakistan's General Elections. While we had looked forward to
an atmosphere free of tension in which our differences could
be taken up quietly and realistically, the Pakistan Government
<pg3>
saw fit to give asylum to those who criminally hijacked one
of our aircraft and allowed the wanton destruction of the
aircraft. We have informed Pakistan in no uncertain terms
that we hold her responsible for these outrages, we expect the
return of the criminals to face their trial in India and
compensation for the aircraft; till she makes, amends, the ban
on overflights by Pakistani aircraft over India will remain in
force. We hope that Pakistan will show a sense of balance and
maturity, for she must realise that there is no alternative to
peace and co-operation on the sub-continent.
Elsewhere in the world, too, situations of great danger
continue to exist. In the context of those, it is obvious that an
has not been co-operation or the recognition of realism during
the year. In fact, they show that the concept of co-operation
faces great odds in its further growth.
In South East Asia a local war, local and yet with
far-reaching implications, still continues. In West Asia a
parlous truce hangs in the balance. Within the developed and
developing countries the strains that accompany great changes
in social Organisation are apparent, the strains of alienation,
disaffection, the impatience of an expanding proletariat, and
these bring in their wake stresses that must affect national and
international policy. It has become as common to talk of the
haves and have-nots within the international community as it is
to use these terms when talling of the national community. And,
as with a national community, so with the international community
the gap between these two groups must be reduced if the
community is not to be put to unbearable strains. Unfortunately.
it cannot be said that the year under report has succeeded in
reducing this gap. In fact, the First Development Decade has
not attained the farget set for it and we are faced with the fearful
prospect of an increasing gulf between the developed and the
developing nations. However, the near unanimous agreement on
the strategy of the Second Development Decale at the Silver
<pg4>
Jubilee Session of the United Nations raises some hope, however slender, that the seventies may bring comparatively less
disappointment than the sixties.
If Europe and America are bringing to their immediate
problems a new sense of realism, then it must be hoped that a
similar realism will inform their policies towards Asia and Africa.

The virulence of Great Tower rivalry must give way to
accommodation. and the understanding that these nations too
have the legitimate, expectation that they may be allowed to
mould their future in an atmosphere undistorted by Great Power
conflict. For India, this certainly does not mean mutually
exclusive societies, for it looks forward, to co-operation with all
nations on terms of equality and mutual respect.
It is in this spirit that India, participated in international
conferences during the year, whether of the United Nations, the
nonaligned at Lusaka or the Commonwealth at Singapore. So
Jong as these represent the contemporary urges of mankind and
are. able to change with a changing world, they will be of
relevance. A vast mass of people, largely inarticulate, hungers
for pence, for the banning of nuclear and yet newer horrific
instruments of war. for a world free of the evils of racial and
colour superiority, and for an economic and social order which
recognises as legitimate the aspirations of four-fifths of the human
race. The Silver Jubilee Session of the United Nations, and other
international forums, sought to give an increased emphasis and
some shape to these concepts. They have India's support, for
they are also the ideals which suffuse Indian thinking and Indian
foreign policy. They cannot be attained overnight, but a step
towards them is a step towards Peace based on human dignity
and the equality of nations.
GERMANY
POLAND USA INDIA AFGHANISTAN CHINA PAKISTAN REPUBLIC OF SINGAPORE ZAMBIA
Feb 15, 1971

India's Neighbours
CHAPTER II
INDIA'S NEIGHBOURS
Relations with Afghanistan continued to be warm and
friendly. Indian experts have been helping Afghanistan in the
economic, scientific and technical fields. Two groups of
consultants, from M/s. Kirloskar and Dastur & Co., visited
Afghanistan in September and October, 1970, respectively.
India has offered the services of Indian experts to assist the
Afghan Government in the construction of a road from Kandahar
to the Iranian border near Zahidan, connecting it to the

Zahidan-Bandar Abbas road in Iran. The Atomic Energy
Department has decided to gift to the Faculty of Science of the
Kabul University a Radio Isotope Dispensing Unit and to help
in its installation. India has been providing assistance for a
WNW Children's Hospital in Kabul which is to be completed
in 1971. Indo-Afghan trade has almost doubled during the
last three years.
During the year, the Crown Prince Ahmad Shah and
Princess Khatool came on an official visit to India in March,
and the Chief of General Staff, General Ghulam Farouk visited
India in September for medical treatment.
In the cultural field, Prof. Nurul Hassan, M.P. and Head of
the History Department, Aligarh Muslim University, paid a
week's visit to Kabul in October, 1970, at the invitation of the
Kabul University. An Indian team of archaeological experts has
been working on the preservation of Buddhist monuments
at Bamiyan.
<pg5>
<pg6>
Relations with Burma have continued to be cordial. General
Ne Win, Chairman of the Revolutionary Council of the Union
of Burma, paid an informal visit to India from the Jul 08, 1970 to the
10th July, 1970. Various international and bilateral subject,,
were discussed.
Trade between the two countries continues to increase, and a
new trade agreement has been signed. We have so far brought
1,25,000 tons of rice. Both countries have also agreed in principle to economic and technical collaboration and they are
further examining the possibility of the diversification of trade. A
trade delegation led by Colonel Maung Lwin, Deputy Minister
for National Planning of the Government of Burma, visited India
from the 10th to the 16th February, 1970.
There is an encouraging increase in cultural exchanges
between the two countries, A 44-member dance troupe from
Burma visited India from the 2nd to the 31st December, 1970.
We are sending a considerable amount of educational material
to Burma. A 3-member Ayurvedic team from Rangoon visited
India from the 24th September to the 14th October, 1970, to
study Ayurvedic institutions in this country to enable Burma
to set up an Ayurvedic College.
We have been able to demarcate about 643 Kms. of the
Indo-Burmese border in the last two field seasons and a further
362 Kms. of the border in the Nagaland and NEFA sectors will
be demarcated in the present field season.
The problems faced by people of Indian origin in Burma are
being discussed between the two Governments.

Close relations with Cevlon continued through exchanges,
of delegations, and other visitors between the two countries,
the provision of Indian experts, under the U.N. and Colombo
Plan and private contracts, and the provision of scholarships
and places in Indian universities and other institutions to
<pg7>
Ceylonese nationals. Close discussions with the new government, headed by Mrs. Bandaranaike, which was elected to
power in May, 1970, further strengthened the existing cordial
relations. The Government's declared Policy, of expediting the
Ceylonisation of certain sectors of its economy, has been
recognised by our Government as within the sovereign right of the
Ceylon Government; but the question of mitigating hardship to
those of our nationals who are affected has been taken up with the
Ceylon Government and they have partially responded.
The Ceylon Government continued to lay stress on the
importance of repatriation of persons of Indian origin to India
as required under the Indo-Ceylon Agreement of 1964. The
two Governments are discussing certain proposals to simplify
procedures and expedite the repatriation of those who are
accepted for Indian citizenship, in keeping with the mutual
obligations of both Governments under the Agreement.
While purchases from India underlines of Government to
Government credits continued, the Government of, India also
responded promptly to the Government of Ceylon's request for
the purchase of sugar from India. Discussions on ways and
means to increase economic collaboration between the two
countries for mutual benefit continue.
The President of India visited Nepal from the 26th February
to the 3rd March. 1970, to attend the wedding of Nepal's Crown
Prince. The King expressed his gratitude to India for her
assistance in Nepal's development. En route to a visit abroad,
the King stopped over in Delhi in August, 1970, and had talks
with the Prime Minister and the Minister for External Affairs
on matters of bilateral interest.
In August, 1970, the Foreign Minister of Nepal, Shri
Gahendra, Bahadur Rajbhandari. visited India at the invitation
of our Minister for External Affairs. He was accompanied by
a team of Nepalese officials, including the Secretaries for
<pg8>
Foreign Affairs, Finance, Industry and Commerce and the
Secretary to the Government of Nepal.
Discussions on matters of mutual interest were held between
the Nepalese Foreign Minister and our Ministers for External
Affairs and Foreign Trade. Discussions also took place between

officials on both sides on various subjects of common concern.
The Minister for Commerce, Government of Nepal, Shri
Navraj Subedi visited India in October, 1971. Negotiations for
a new Treaty of Trade and Transit in place of the one that
expired in October, 1970, had to be adjourned in view of disagreement on a few points. It is expected that they will. resume in
the near, future. In the meanwhile to obviate any difficulties
or hardship to the people of Nepal, new arrangements were
unilaterally introduced by India to ensure that there would be no
interruption in the flow of essential commodities and other supplies to Nepal. The arrangements are expected to continue
in force till a new treaty is signed.
The Indian Military Liaison Group which had gone to Nepal
at the request of the Nepalese Government, returned to India
in August, 1970, on the completion of their task in Nepal, in
accordance with the request of the Nepalese Government. At
Nepal's request India also withdrew her civilian personnel from
certain checkposts after training the Nepalese personnel.
India continued to provide training facilities to Nepalese
students, in various educational institutions in India for higher
studies in Engineering, Medicine and other fields, both on
scholarships and on a self-financing basis. During 1970-71, 217
seats were reserved for Nepalese students under the Technical
Cooperation Scheme of the Colombo Plan, and 54 self-financing
were admitted to various institutions in India.
Indo-Nepalese cooperation on development projects in Nepal
continued throughout the year. By March 31, 1970, India bad
spent a sum of over Rs. 70 crores in Nepal. For the year
1970-71. a sum of Rs. 12.55 crores has been earmarked.
<pg9>
The year saw the completion of the Trisuli-Hydel Project in
Nepal at a total cost of Rs. 12.17 crores and also the inauguration
of the Chatra Canal Project which is expected to cost Rs. 9.28
crores. The Trisuli-Hydel Project will: supply 21,000 KW of
power to the Kathmandu Valley and other parts of Nepal, while
Chatra, Canal is expected to irrigate 12.02 lakh acres of land
in Eastern Nepal.
Other major projects like the Eastern Sector of the Mahendra
Rajmarg (East-West Highway) and the Sonauli-Pokhara Road
made satisfactory progress. The latter is complete except for
the single-span bridge over the Gandaki River. Survey and
preparatory work on the 278-km. long Central Sector of the
Mahendra Rajmarg is progressing satisfactorily. The
Engineering-cum-Traffic survey for laying a broad-gauge railway
line from Raxaul on the Indian border to Hitauda. in Nepal is
also nearing completion. In Kathmandu a block of buildings
consisting of 20 residental flats for the `Professors of the
Tribhuvan University and a girls' hostel with an attached

Warden's flat, were inaugurated during the year.
Three pairs of lines of the carrier trunk, telephone link
between Kathmandu and Raxaul were commissioned during the
year. The construction of telephone exchanges at Birganj,
Amlekhganj, Simra, Hitauda, Bhainse, Palung and Kathmandu
is progressing satisfactorily. The 12-channel VFT system
linking Kathmandu by telephone, and telex with Delhi, Calcutta
and Patna, which was temporarily installed at the time of the
wedding of the Crown Prince of Nepal, has been retained at
Nepal's request. It will be shifted to the new building now
being constructed in Kathmandu with Indian assistance.
In order to cater to the needs of the local population along
the Sonauli-Pokhara Road, 5 medical units are being established
along this alignment. Apart from this, a scheme was started
in June, 1970, to distribute packets of essential medicines to the
local population in the area. This scheme is progressing well.
Now that many new roads have been completed in Nepal through
<pg10>
the Indian Cooperation Mission, it has been possible to make
use of 3 mobile cinema vans for the entertainment of the local
population.
Nepal has now entered its Fourth Five-Year Plan. and
discussions are expected to take place shortly on the quantum
of Indian assistance to the Plan.
The basic approach of our policy towards Pakistan was stated
by the Minister for External Affairs in reply to the Foreign
Affairs debate in the Rajya Sabha on August 26, 1970, in the
following terms: "Our objective should be to work patiently for
improving relations, because we have got long borders and we
are neighbours. Ultimately we have to live in peace."
Our approach was reiterated by the Minister for External
Affairs in the United Nations General Assembly on September
29, 1970, in the following words: "Our basic approach to all
problems between India and Pakistan is that they must be discussed, negotiated and eventually settled by the representatives of
the two countries. There should be no pre-conditions and there
should be no insistence that one side must accept in advance the
priorities of the other side. It was in this spirit that we signed
the Tashkent Declaration ......"
It is a matter of profound regret that Pakistan's response
throughout the year 1970 continued to be negative and discouraging. The broadcasts by the President of Pakistan on March 28,
and July 28, reiterated Pakistan's well-known rigid position and
gave no indication of any possible change of mind. The Government of India nevertheless continued to pursue their policy of
consistent endeavour to lower the barriers between the two

countries and people.
During the year, two Secretary-level meetings were held with
Pakistan on the question of Farakka, the first at Islamabad in
February, and the second at New Delhi in July, 1970. During
these talks, Pakistan recognised for the first time that India really
needed the waters of the Ganga. It is expected that another
<pg11>
meeting will take place shortly and furher progress will be made
towards an amicable settlement.
The Secretary-level talks held in New Delhi were remarkable
for arriving quickly at the following agreed recommendations to
the respective governments:
(i) The point of delivery of supplies to Pakistan of such
quantum of water as may be agreed upon will be
at Farakka.
(ii) The constitution of a body consisting of one representative from each of the two countries for ensuring
delivery of agreed supplies at Farakka is acceptable
in principle.
(iii) A meeting be held in 3 to 6 months time at a level
to be agreed to by the two governments to consider
the quantum of water to be supplied to Pakistan
at Farakka and other unresolved issues relating
thereto, and to Eastern Rivers, which have been the
subject matter of discussions in this series.
In pursuance of recommendations at No. (iii), the Government
of India were considering the holding of a meeting at the level
of Ministers. However, it was felt that in view of the decision
to hold General Elections in India in March, 1971, it would not
be practicable to hold such a meeting at present, and that this
would only be possible after the General Elections were over.
The Government of Pakistan were informed accordingly. They
were also informed that the Government of India would be
agreeable to holding a meeting at the level of Secretaries for
preparing the ground for further discussions to be held later,
if the Government of Pakistan so desired. Pakistan has agreed
to this and it is expected that a meeting at the level of Secretaries
will be held shortly.
The demarcation of the boundary in the Western Sector
has been almost completed except for a length of approximately
0.825 kms. in the Rajasthan Sector and the boundary in the Sir
Creek and from the top of the Sir Creek to the Western Terminus in the Kutch Tribunal Award.
<pg12>

In the West Bengal-East Pakistan Sector, out of a total
boundary of 2,156 kms. only 153 kms. remain to be demarcated.
In the Assam-East Pakistan Sector, out of a, total length of 992
kms. boundary pillars have been erected over a length of 682
kms. In the Tripura-East Pakistan Sector, out of a total length
of approximately 885 kms. boundary pillars have so far been
embedded over 365 kms.
During the period under review, the Ministry continued its
efforts to persuade Pakistan to start negotiations on the question
of mutual restoration of properties seized by either side during
and after the 1965 conflict. In spite of repeated protests and
reminders, the Government of Pakistan did not care to send
any reply indicating willingness to start discussions on the
subject. On the other hand, they continued to advertise the
sale of seized properties.
The minorities in East Pakistan have continued to suffer
from certain disabilities and difficulties like cultural starvation,
religious persecution, discrimination in various spheres of life,
lack of security, etc. The Government of India repeatedly took
up these questions with the Government of Pakistan in terms of
the Nehru-Liaquat Agreement of 1950. Minority unrest took
a particularly serious turn in 1970 leading to large-scale migration of Hindus from East Pakistan to India. The peak of this
migration was reached in the month of June when the rate of
arrival was, about 2,000 a day. The total migration from
January to mid-December, 1970 was 2,50,647 persons, of whom
2,48,218 came from East Pakistan. The Government of
Pakistan appeared to have taken note of our representations and
attempted to rectify the situation which had given rise to the
migration. The rate of migration has since fallen to about 100
a day.
Exchange of pilgrim parties between the two countries
continued during the year.
<pg13>
A cyclone of unprecedented intensity struck five districts and
a number of offshore islands of East Pakistan on November 12,
1970, causing enormous loss of life and damage of property.
The official estimate of the death toll was 2 lakhs. although
unofficial figures put it at 10 lakhs. On hearing of the disaster,
the Prime Minister announced an initial token contribution of
Rs. 5 lakhs for relief of the cyclone-affected people. As it
became, known that the magnitude and extent of the damage
were much greater than was originally thought, India's contribution was raised to Rs. 1 crore.
The Government of India also offered to send to East
Pakistan two mobile 50-bed hospitals fitted with X-Ray and
other facilities as well as to make available the services of rivercraft with crew for assisting in the transportation of relief

supplies. IAF helicopters and IAF transport aircraft were also
offered for the same purpose. These, offers, however, were not
accepted by Pakistan. Nevertheless, the Government gave blanket
clearance to, Pakistani aircraft to overfly Indian territory for
carrying urgently needed relief supplies and immediate clearances
were also accorded to all foreign military aircraft carrying relief
supplies, woiving the usual requirements of notice periods or
technical landings. Many countries availed of these facilities
which enabled a large number of flights carrying relief supplies
to reach the devastated area without delay.
Pakistan permitted the use of the surface route via the
Benapole checkpost for the transport of Indian relief supplies.
These included milk-powder, medical supplies, lungis, saris,
kerosene oil, etc., and were received by the people of East
Pakistan with appreciation. The East Pakistani Press also noticed
our action favourably.
Pakistan's rearmament programme, which is aimed only
against India, continued during the year. Pakistan acquired
arms from various sources, including the Soviet Union, China,
USA and France. On September 30, 1970, the United States
decided to make an exception to its previous policy and sell
43 M of EA-2.
<pg14>
to Pakistan certain aircraft and armoured personnel vehicles and
maritime reconnaissance aircraft, etc.
Our Government naturally noted this development with
concern and protested to the USA as it had done earlier to the
USSR Government. The USSR Government have indicated that
they have not entered into any kind of agreement with Pakistan
for supply of arms.
The Government of India's endeavours to normalise relations
with Pakistan received a severe setback on account of the
connivance, encouragement and abetment of the Pakistani authorities in hijacking and blowing up an Indian Airlines' Fokker
Friendship aircraft. The aircraft was on a scheduled flight
from Srinagar to Jammu with 28 passengers and four crew on
board, but was diverted at gun-point by two of the passengers to
Lahore on 30 January, 1971. The Government of India
requested the Pakistan Government for the immediate return of
the aircraft, its passengers and crew and its cargo, baggage and
mail. The Pakistan Government informed the Government of
India of its decision to allow the aircraft with its passengers and
crew to fly back to India. Despite this, they did not allow relief
aircraft from India to go to pick them up, nor did they permit
the passengers and crew to fly back by the Ariana (Afghan)
aricraft which landed at Lahore ariport on 31 January,
1971 on which seats had been booked. They took more than

48 hours to send the passengers and crew by road to Hussainiwala checkpost on the Indo-Pak border at 3.30 p.m. on 1
February, 1971, notwithstanding the Government of India's
repeated requests to Pakistan for the return of the aircraft and
the Pakistan Government's continued promises that the plane
would be returned. On 2 February, 1971 at 8.30 p.m.
it was reported that the plane had been blown up at Lahore
airport in full view of the airport authorities, troops and police
and its destruction was fully televised by the Lahore TV. It
was said that the two hijackers did not allow the fire brigade
to put out the flames until the aircraft had been almost totally
destroyed. It is clear that the Government of Pakistan failed
to take adequate measures to protect the aircraft.
<pg15>
The Government of Pakistan gave asylum to the hijackers
and expressed their sympathy for them and their associates;
they failed to disarm them or take them into custody; instead,
they were permitted to move and act freely, telephone their
accomplices in Pakistan and confer with prominent personalities
and others in Pakistan, in spite of having adequate forces available to apprehend them.
In view of the clear responsibility of the Government of
Pakistan for hijacking and blowing up of the Indian plane, the
Government of India demanded from Pakistan compensation for
the loss of the Indian plane, cargo, baggage and mail contained
in it. Pakistan had by their action violated international law
and conventions and threatened the safety of aviation and
endangered the national security of India. The Government of
India had, therefore, to suspend with immediate effect the overflights of all Pakistani aircraft, civil or military, over the territory
of India and requested that the two criminals who hijacked and
blew up the Indian plane, be returned immediately under escort
to the Indian authorities to face trial.
In reply, the Government of Pakistan rejected India's
contention that Pakistani authorities were responsible for the
hijacking and blowing up of the Indian plane, on the plea that
hijacking was done by persons outside Pakistan's territorial
jurisdiction, claimed that India's demand for compensation "is
not understood" and that the decision to suspend overflights of
Pakistani aircraft over Indian territory was "a serious breach of
international and bilateral commitments". Pakistan also requested
the Government of India to "rescind its decision to ban overflights to Pakistani aircraft" and rejected the request for the
return of the two hijackers.
In reply, the Government of India rejected the Pakistani
disclaimer of their responsibility for and involvement in the
hijacking and blowing up of the Indian plane, and referred to
incontrovertible facts proving the Pakistan Government's
responsibility. The Government of India pointed out that if the

<pg16>
Government of Pakistan were not willing to settle the matter of
compensation and to return the two hijackers to face trial in India,
"the situation may deteriorate, and the Government of Pakistan
will be wholly responsible for any consequences that may follow".
It was also pointed out that it was necessary to continue the
suspension of overffights until "the Government of Pakistan
accept their responsibility and make amends for what has been
done and give assurances about the future".
The end of the year saw Pakistan's provincial and general
elections. It is hoped a stable and peaceful Pakistan will emerge
and it will be possible to take steps towards establishment of
normal relations between the two countries.
The state of our relations with China was summed up by the
Foreign Minister in his speech in the Rajya Sabha on 26
August, 1970, in the following words: "We do notice a slight
change in the attitude of China towards, and propaganda against,
her neighbours including India, of late; but we have not yet
seen any change in the substantive matters so far as the Chinese
stand towards India is concerned."
Except for a relative lull between the months of May and
September, Chinese publicity continued to be critical of India.
The main anti-Indian publicity themes were the alleged armed
struggle in rural India, India's alleged collusion with Taiwan and
alleged support to the Dalai Lama and his followers. The visit
of a Pakistani delegation to China in the month of September,
followed by the visit of President Yahya Khan in November,
was utilised to put out further items of "news" against India,
particularly intended to please Pakistan.
China for the first time also took note of the Farakka issue
and expressed appreciation of Pakistan's stand for a peaceful
solution of the question.
At the end of the year, Peking publicity media played up
the failure of the Indo-Nepalese talks on the Trade and Transit
Treaty and blamed India.
<pg17>
India did not allow these publicity stunts to deflect her from
her basic policies or her objectives as regards China, as summed
up by the Foreign Minister in the Rajya Sabha on August 26,
1970:
"We are always prepared to settle all matters with our
neighbours, including China, peacefully, through bilateral negotiations, on the basis of respect fir our territorial integrity and
sovereignty, and the non-use of force or threat of force. We

hope that China will sooner or later change her hostile attitude
towards India and revert to the path of peace and reason.
"Neither China nor India can change the geographical fact
that both our countries have a long common border. It is in
the interest of both countries to settle the border question
peacefully and normalise relations in other fields as well, and
when China is willing to take, a concrete step in this direction,
she will not find us lacking in response."
The Special Treaty relations of India with Bhutan and
Sikkim continued and the friendly ties with both these close
neighbours were still further cemented during the year.
Relations with Bhutan were highlighted by the State Visit
of the President of India to Bhutan in April, 1970. Welcoming
the President, the King of Bhutan observed that the visit was a
historic event, not only because it was the first time that a
Head of State was visiting Bhutan, but also because it was a
proof of the strong bonds of goodwill and friendship between
the two countries. The President stated that India and Bhutan
were not merely two neighbouring countries but very close friends
sharing a common heritage and understanding throughout history.
There have been frequent visits of distinguished Persons
during the year both from Bhutan to India as well as from India
to Bhutan. In July, 1970, a goodwill mission consisting of His
Royal Highness Namgyal Wangchuk, Tengye Lyonpo (Minister
for Trade and Industry) and Lyonpo Sangye Penjore
(Minister of Communications) visited India. In NovemberDecember, 1970, a delegation of five judges of the Bhutan High
Court, led by the Chief Justice, visited India. The Minister for
<pg18>
Development, Lyonpe Dawa Tshering, visited India in December,
1970 and had talks with the Planning Commission on Bhutan's
Third Five-Year Plan. A Bhutanese dance troupe participated
in our Republic Day Celebrations in January, 1971. A delegation of Bhutanese women and a delegation of 15 members of
the Tsongdu (Bhutanese National Assembly) visited India in
February, 1971.
On our side, the President's visit was followed by the visit
of the Foreign Minister and the Foreign Secretary in May, 1970.
Bhutan's second Plan, involving an outlay of Rs. 20 crores,
has been entirely financed by the Government of India. For
the implementation of various development projects under the
Plan, the Government of India continued to provide the services
of specialists and experts. The Plan concentrates mainly on
agriculture, animal husbandry, forestry, power, education,
health and communications, etc. 170 Bhutanese students are
studying on scholarships in India.

Bhutan's application for membership of the U.N.O. was
submitted to the Secretary-General of the United Nations by
our Permanent Representative to the U.N. in December, 1970.
This is in keeping with the understanding between the Governments of India and Bhutan that India would sponsor and assist
Bhutan to become a member of the United Nations, when she
was willing and ready to fulfil the obligations of membership in
the U.N. The Government of India have also taken all
necessary steps to canvass support among other member-nations
for Bhutan's admission. The Government of Bhutan also sent
a team in October, 1970, consisting of H.R.H. Namgyal
Wangchuk and Lyonpo Sangye Penjore, Bhutan's Minister of
Communications, to New York in order to assess for themselves
the prospects of Bhutan's entry into the U.N. in 1971. The
Security Council has unanimously recommended to the General
Assembly the application of Bhutan for admission to the United
Nations.
The friendly relations with Sikkim have been further
cemented by important visits on both sides during the year under
<pg19>
review, The Chogyal and Gyalmo of Sikkim visited Delhi
officially in November, 1970, while, in December 1970, and
January, 1971, the Chogyal visited various places of religious
and cultural interest in India. The Foreign Secretary visited
Sikkim in July, 1970. Shri Bhakt Darshan, India's Minister of
State for Education and Youth Services, paid a visit to Sikkim
in October, 1970. Shri K. C. Pant, Minister of State for Home
Affairs, also visited Sikkim in December, 1970.
The Government of India have financed entirely Sikkim's
Third Five Year Plan (1966-71). The Plan, involving an outlay of over Rs. 9 crores, aims at increasing Sikkimese agricultural production, improving her transport and communication
facilities, expanding her social services and specialised
schemes, and setting up of agro-industries. The Government
of India have also provided a number of experts in various fields
connected with these projects.
During his official visit to Delhi in November, 1970, the
Chogyal held discussions with the Prime Minister, Finance
Minister, Defence Minister, Foreign Minister, Minister of Tourism
and Civil Aviation and the Minister of State in the Ministry of
Home Affairs on questions of mutual interest. A team of
officials from Sikkim which accompanied the Chogyal, held
discussions with officials in the Ministry of External Affairs, on
the further economic development of Sikkim.
The draft Fourth Five-Year Plan for Sikkim has now been
completed. A team from the Planning Commission visited
Sikkim from 15 to 21 February, 1971, to hold on-thespot discussions with a view to finalise the Plan.

Under the Cultural Activities Programme, a 10-member
Sikkimese Women's Delegation visited Delhi, Bombay, Bangalore
and Madras during February and March, 1970. Six Executive
Councillors of Sikkim are scheduled to visit India in March,
1971. Twelve village headmen from Sikkim undertook a Bharat
Darshan tour in January, 1971.
Over 200 Sikkimese scholars continue to receive scholarships
for studies in various educational institutions in India.
INDIA
AFGHANISTAN IRAN UNITED KINGDOM USA BURMA SRI LANKA NEPAL LATVIA CENTRAL
AFRICAN REPUBLIC PAKISTAN UZBEKISTAN CHINA FRANCE MALI TAIWAN BHUTAN
Jul 08, 1970

South East Asia
CHAPTER III
SOUTH EAST ASIA
During the period under review South East Asia has
witnessed some portents of change. The USA has endeavoured
to alter her profile on the Asian mainland, Japan and the
USSR have evinced an increasing interest in the region,
partial British withdrawal from Malaysia and Singapore has
become imminent and disenchantment with military alliances has
steadily increased amongst the countries of the region. Recently,
there have been signs of a more conciliatory diplomatic style
on the part of China, although Chinese assistance to subversive
movements has not ceased. Nationalistic forces remain the most
prominent within each country of the region. The Government of
India have reiterated the earlier proposal made by the Prime
Minister regarding an international convention to safeguard the
sovereignty, territorial integrity and independence of countries of
this region, and this proposal is now receiving wider support
from among them. The war in Indo-China was extended into
Cambodia. Although negotiations continued in Paris, and there
is some talk of a dialogue in Laos, no signs of any peace settlement in Indo-China have so far emerged.
There is also a very real desire on the part of all the countries
of the region to work together in suitable regional groupings for
economic cooperation, although the form and shape of such

cooperation has not yet been defined. India supports all
initiatives which promote regional economic cooperation, based
on sound bilateral relations, and without any military undertones
or overtones. The Asian Council of Ministers, which was
established with our support under the auspices of the ECAFE,
is in our view the most suitable framework for the promotion
of regional economic cooperation in South East Asia. Although
<pg20>
<pg21>
the recent Kabul meeting did not produce the results expected
in full, concrete progress in the institutional, as well as in
the policy field, has been made.
The situation developing in Combodia after March, 1970, was
a matter of concern to the Government of India. The Governmeat of India has recognised none of the changes in that country
for the present and continues to deal with the authorities in
Phnom Penh, while simultaneously maintaining contacts with
Prince Sihanouk.
India along with some other countries did not attend the
Djakarta Conference of some Asian countries, as it was felt
that attendance at the Conference would not help to ease tension
and would only divide the Asian countries and militate against
our efforts to maintain contacts with all parties, and our position
as Chairman of the International Commission for Supervision and
Control.
In response to appeals from the Cambodian Government and
from Prince Sihanouk, the Government of India co-sponsored a
resolution in a UNESCO meeting calling upon the belligerents
to safeguard the monuments of Angkor Wat from any damage.
The Foreign Minister of the Lon Nol regime, Mr. Koun
Wick, visited India in July, 1970, to seek our support for his
Government's admission to the Lusaka meeting of non-aligned
countries. Mr. Sarin Chaak and Mr. Chaan Youran, Minister
for Foreign Affairs and Minister for Education respectively, in
Prince Sihanouk's Government in exile, also visited India in July,
1970, for the same reason. The Government of India felt the
decision on Cambodia's participation at the non-aligned
conference would have to be decided by a consensus of the
members attending it.
The Prek Thnot Project in Cambodia continues to receive
assistance from the Government of India, although its progress.
is halting because of uncertain security.
<pg22>
A Parliamentary delegation from Fiji visited India in April,
1970, on its way to the Constitutional Conference in London.

The Speaker of the Lok Sabha represented India at the
Independence ceremonies of Fiji in October, 1970. Technical
and other assistance to Fiji is being continued. The services of
a small-scale industry adviser have been made available to Fiji.
In-service training facilities have been given to Fijian officials In
India. A number of scholarships are awarded every year to
those seeking educational facilities in India. These are expected
to increase considerably with Fiji's independence.
The Prime Minister of Fiji visited India in January, 1971.
Following this visit, it is expected that the already close relations
between India and Fiji will be further expanded. The two
Governments have agreed to the setting up of an Indian Cultural
Centre in Fiji.
The close and friendly relations between India and Indonesia
were further emphasised when the Indonesian Foreign Minister
Dr. Adam Malik, visited India from Mar 04, 1970 to 6 March, 1970. As
in the past two years, this was an opportunity for officials of
the two countries to have an exchange of views on matters of
mutual interest.
Major General Dr. Sjarif Thajeb, Vice-Chairman of the
Indonesian Parliament paid a visit to India from 25 February
to 1 March, 1970.
A 10-member Indian Parliamentary delegation led by Shri
A. P. Sharma, M.P., visited Indonesia between 5 and 8 February, 1970.
The Speaker of the Lok Sabha, Dr. G. S. Dhillon, visited
Indonesia from 12 to 17 September, 1970, at the invitation of
the Indonesian Government.
Mr. Mohd. Isnaeni, Chairman of the Indonesian Nationalist
Party and Deputy Speaker of the Indonesian Parliament, visited
India from 22 to 28 September, 1970.
Our participation in the Djakarta Fair in Indonesia was also
a considerable success this year, and indicated satisfactory
<pg23>
Prospects for increased trade collaboration in the future, provided
we remain competitive.
Certain Indian concerns have taken the initiative to set up
Joint ventures in Indonesia. Prominent among the Indian
companies are the Tatas, Mahindra and Mahindra, the Zenith
steel pipes of Birlas etc. Indo-Indonesia collaboration on
commodity arrangements is also being extended to pepper.
Arrangements are being made for the visit of an Indonesian
Railways Technical Team to India who would explore avenues
of aid/technical assistance which can be offered by India to

Indonesia in Railways and Communications Development.
In the field of Cultural Relations, it has been decided to set
up a Chair for Indian Studies at the University of Indonesia. An
Indian team is also participating in the Ramayana Ballet Festival
to be held in mid 1971.
His Majecty King Savang Vatthana of Laos visited India
from 24 to 25 February, 1970, on his way to Kathmandu.
There were some signs which gave cause for optimism in
the negotiations between the Royal Lao Government and the
Pathet Lao. In March, 1970, the Pathet Lao announced their
5-point plan for a settlement of the Laotian problem. Towards
the end of the year, efforts were being made for an early meeting
of Prince Souvanna Phouma and the Pathet Lao leader, Prince
Souphanouvong. The, International Control Commission
unanimously agreed to lend its good offices to the negotiations,
when approached.
However, the massive intervention by South Vietnamese
troops with American support into Southern Laos has caused the
situation to deteriorate considerably. The Government of
India, recognising the gravity of the situation, called on all concerned to exercise the maximum restraint.
Relations between India and Malaysia remained as cordial
as before. The annual Indo-Malaysian Officials Talks were
held in Kuala Lumpur from 2 to 5 February, 1970. During
these talks the two Governments were able to identify
further avenues for cooperation.
<pg24>
A 10-member Indian Parliamentary delegation led by Shri
A. P. Sharma, M.P., visited Kuala Lumpur from 31 January to,
3 February, 1970.
Tun Tan Siew Sin, Malaysian Finance Minister, visited India
from 4 April to 20 April, 1970.
A Cultural Agreement between the two countries is in thefinal stages of consideration. Malaysia and India have both
expressed a desire for the early conclusion of an agreement for
the avoidance of double taxation between the two countries. A
Trade Agreement and the Copyright Agreement between the two
countries are also under consideration. Malaysia and India havealso agreed on the desirability of an Extradition Agreement
between the two countries.
Under the MARA Agreement with Malaysia (Majlis Amanath
Ri'ayat trust for the advancement of indigenous peoples) 109
MARA trainees have been receiving training in India during the
current year, with the possibility of an increase in the number
next year.

There are at present six joint venture proposals In various,
fields like cotton textiles, steel furniture, precision tools, airconditioning etc., between the two countries. India is also
providing to Malaysia various scholarships in the fields of
technical education, medicine, engineering etc., under Colombo
Plan. the ITEC scheme etc.
The existing cordial relations with Australia and with New
Zealand continued. Official-level discussions were held between
the representatives of the Government of India and the Government of Australia. Views were exchanged on a wide range of
international issues. Detailed discussions were held on bilateral
issues. The Indian delegation pointed out that trade preferences
by Australia in favour of certain countries and the existing tariff
and customs valuation tended to restrict Indian exports to
Australia. It was also suggested by the Indian delegation that
major producers of iron ore should arrive at a commodity
<pg25>
agreement to prevent erosion of prices. As a result of discussions on joint ventures and the purchase by Australian firms
from India of components, particularly of the labour intensive
type, an Australian delegation of important importers of machine
tools is likely to visit India to survey the Indian Machine Tool
Industry. A cultural agreement between the Governments of
India and Australia is under consideration. Possibilities of
greater collaboration in economic and scientific fields have also
been discussed.
A delegation led by the General Manager of New Zealand
Railways visited India at the invitation of the State Trading
Corporation of India. They visited various railway research and
production units. A trade promotion delegation of Indian
businessmen also visited New Zealand. India won a contract for
the supply and fabrication of structural steel work to New
Zealand worth Rs. 8 million.
Relations with the Philippines, particularly in the economic
field, have grown stronger during the year and the visit of the
Hon'ble Alejandro Melchor, Executive Secretary to the President
of the Philippines, from 18 to 26 October, 1970, indicated
that the Philippines was desirous of increasing co-operation
with India in the future.
Shri K. Hanumanthaiya, Minister for Law and Social
Welfare, visited Manila from the 6 to 16 September, 1970,
as Leader of the Indian delegation to the Conference of
Ministers of Social Welfare in Asia.
An Indian Officials' Delegation led by Dr. Y. Nayudamma,
Director. Central Leather Research Institute, represented India
at the Conference of Ministers of Science of Asia, held in Manila,

in November, 1970.
Dr. K. L. Rao, Minister for Irrigation and Power, visited
Manila from 30 November to 6 December, 1970, at the invitation of the Hon'ble Alejandro Melchor, Executive Secretary to
the President of the Philippines.
<pg26>
The Government of India presented the Philippines Government with flood relief gifts, including medicines and medical
supplies, valued at Rs. 25,000, in November, 1970, following
upon floods in the Philippines.
Cordial relations between India and Singapore were further
cemented by the State visit of Mr. Lee Kuan Yew, Prime Minister
of Singapore, to India from 30 August to 5 September, 1970.
The exchange of views with the Prime Minister of Singapore
on a great variety of issues were extensive and revealed
a considerable similarity of attitude on various issues. It was
felt by both Governments that economic and technical cooperation between the two countries, which had not been as extensive
in the past as it should have been, should be expanded.
A 10-member Indian Parliamentary delegation led by Shri
A. P. Sharma, M.P., visited Singapore from 3 to 5 February,.
1970.
A Chair of Indian Studies was set up in Nanyang University
in August, 1970.
The Thai Foreign Minister, Mr. Thanat Khoman, who
stopped over for a day in Delhi on his way to Kabul for the
ECAFE meeting, and again on his way back home, exchanged
views with our Foreign Minister.
A Parliamentary Delegation from India paid a goodwill visit
to Thailand from 28 to 31 January, 1970.
A Memorandum of Understanding was signed between India
and Thailand on 20 August, 1970. The Memorandum
envisages a three-year arrangement under which the Government
of India will buy 1,00,000 tons of rice per year from Thailand
and Thailand will buy plant, equipment and machinery from
India of an equivalent value. The Memorandum of Understanding is a mile-stone in the economic relationship between the
two countries and is expected to generate a flow of trade on a
much larger scale. The first important follow-up stop in pur<pg27>
suance of the provisions of the Memorandum of Understanding
was when the Government of India signed a contract for the
purchase of 1,00,000 metric tons of rice on 22 September, 1970.

A 12-man delegation representing the All India Manufacturers' Organisation led by its President visited Thailand in the
month of September, 1970. A four-man team of specialists from
the Consultancy Services Engineering (Private Limited) visited
Bangkok from 29 June to 4 July, 1970, to explore
the possibility of undertaking consultancy assignments in
Thailand.
A Thai Dhamma Delegation led by its President Phrakru
Prakassmadhikun, is at present visiting India having arrived
here on 10 February. It is expected to be here till 26 February,
1971, in connection with the setting up of Indo-Thai
Buddhist Institution at Sarnath, Varanasi.
The Pasis Talks on Viet Nam have reached a stalemate.
Neither side seemed willing to compromise on its basic stand,
Madame Binh announced an 8-point clarification on behalf of
the PRG on 17 September, 1970, which was a further step
to elucidate last year's 10-point proposals. President Nixon
announced his position in the 5-point proposal of 7 October,
1970. The Government of India continued to be in,
touch with all the concerned parties and hoped that a peacefully negotiated settlement would become possible. The Government of India has repeatedly called for withdrawal of all
foreign forces, beginning with those of the United States, since
they are the largest, within a reasonable time-limit, and for the
formation of a broad-based government in South Vietnam, comprising all elements. These steps, it was felt, would facilitate
progress towards serious negotiations at the Paris Talks. A
political settlement in South Vietnam is the key to a long-term.,
settlement in Indo-China.
Madame, Nguyan Thi Binh, Foreign Minister of the
Provisional Revolutionary Government of South Vietnam, paid
a visit to India as a guest of our Foreign Minister in July, 1970.
USA
JAPAN MALAYSIA REPUBLIC OF SINGAPORE CHINA INDIA CAMBODIA FRANCE LAOS
AFGHANISTAN UNITED KINGDOM INDONESIA ZAMBIA FIJI MALI NEPAL VIETNAM SRI
LANKA AUSTRALIA NEW ZEALAND PHILIPPINES LATVIA OMAN THAILAND RUSSIA
Mar 04, 1970

East Asia
CHAPTER IV

EAST ASIA
An official Indian delegation visited the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea in the month of June, 1970, and exchanged
letters extending the long-term trade agreement between the two
countries by another two years. The Trade Plan for 1971 was
also finalised.
There were positive developments in relations with Japan.
The most notable event was the visit to India of the Japanese
Foreign Minister, Mr. K. Aiichi, in August, 1970. This was the
first visit to India of a Japanese Foreign Minister in 20 years.
The discussions covered a wide range of subjects of general and
mutual interest.
Earlier, on 20 July, Japan signed an agreement providing
US $ 7 million credit for the Vishakhapatnam Outer Harbour
Project.
The 4th Joint Meeting of the India-Japan Business Cooperation Committee was held in Kyoto in the first week of September.
It was attended by important businessmen, including Shri
Kothari, Chairman of the FICCI, and representatives of the
Japanese Government. The meeting decided to set up a highpowered Joint Standing Committee consisting of 12 members
from each side to provide continuing contact for the purposes of
increasing trade, exploring markets in third countries and examining the scope for joint ventures.
India participated in Expo' 70.
The sixth consultative meeting between the officials of the
Foreign Ministries of the two countries was held in Tokyo on
and Dec 22, 1970.
<pg28>
<pg29>
A comprehensive Cultural Agreement for the period 197
was signed between India and Mongolia on 22 May, 1970.
India decided to open a resident Mission in Ulan Bator and
appointed Mr. Sonam Norboo as Charge d'affaires a.i.
An official delegation from the Republic of Korea visited
India to explore the possibility of improving trade relations with
India. Secretary (East) paid a three-day official visit to the Republic of Korea at the end of December, 1970, in response to
an invitation of the ROK authorities.
43 M of EA-3.

INDIA
KOREA JAPAN USA MONGOLIA
Dec 22, 1970

West Asia and North Africa
CHAPTER V
WEST ASIA AND NORTH AFRICA
In West Asia, the non-implementation of the Security Council Resolution of Nov 22, 1967, continued to pose a
threat to peace in the region. Early in 1970, the intensification
of Israeli air raids on civilian and military targets in the UAR
led to the latter installing, with Soviet assistance, ground to air
missile batteries for the protection of the cities and military installations of the UAR. On May 1, 1970, the late President
Nasser drew attention to the seriousness of the situation and
made "a last appeal" to the United States to work for peace in
the region.
The US Secretary of State William Rogers announced on
19 June, 1970, a plan for the implementation of Security
Council Resolution No. 242 of 22 November, 1967. The
"Rogers Plan" envisaged the introduction of a cease-fire for a
period of three months, and the reactivisation of the mission of
Ambassador Jarring, Special Representative of the Secretary
General of the United Nations. The Plan was accepted by the
UAR on 23 July, by Jordan on 26 July and by Israel on 31
July. Subsequently, a cease-fire on the UAR-Israeli front came
into effect on 8 August. The expectation of meaningful talks
to be conducted by the two parties under the auspices of
Ambassador Jarring did not, however, materialise.
Before the period of cease-fire was over, on 5 November, the West Asian problem, was discussed in the General
Assembly of the United Nations. The General Assembly
adopted a 22-nation Afro-Asian Resolution on 4 November, urging the speedy implementation of the Security Council
Resolution No. 242 and called upon the parties to the dispute to
resume contacts with Ambassador Jarring "to enable him to carry
<pg30>

<pg31>
out, at the earliest possible date, his mandate for the implementation of the Security Council Resolution in all its parts". The
Resolution also took note of "the rights of the Arab people of
Palestine", and stressed that "respect" for these was an indispensable element in the establishment of a just and lasting peace
in the region.
In compliance with this Resolution, the UAR and Israel
announced the extension of the cease-fire for a period of three
months on 5 November. The US Government announced
$ 500 million arms credit to Israel for purchasing tanks, aircraft,
fighter aircraft, electronic equipment, etc. from the United States.
At the same time the Soviet Government gave on a number of
occasions assurances of their political and military support to the
UAR.
The Palestine Liberation Organisation did not accept the
"Rogers Plan". The members of the PLO saw in the Plan the
seeds of liquidation of their ideals. The King of Jordan handed
over power to a military Government on 16 September.
This resulted in heavy fighting between the Commando organisations and the government forces. The civil strife was, eventually,
brought to an end through the efforts of the late President Nasser
and of the other Arab leaders.
The Government of India, on several occasions during the
period under review, reiterated their stand that the Security
Council Resolution of 22 November, 1967, should be speedily
implemented in order to resolve the crisis in West Asia. Stating
India's policy, the Minister for External Affairs, Sardar Swaran
Singh, said on 2 October in the General Assembly of the
United Nations:
"Israel continues to occupy large Arab territories
seized in the 1967 conflict from which they must
withdraw. The human problem of Arab refugees
exiled from their homeland cannot be ignored and
the just rights of the Palestinian people must be
respected .... The foundations of a just and lasting
peace in West Asia were laid three years ago when
<pg32>
the Security Council adopted Resolution 242. This
Resolution must be fully implemented. My delegation hopes that the talks under the auspices of the
Secretary General's Special Representative will take
place without further delay or procrastination. We
share the general concern for peace in this
area. . . .
In January this year, Ambassador Jarring again commenced

discussions with the Governments of the UAR, Jordan and Israel
in an attempt to bring about an implementation of the Security
Council Resolution of November 22, 1967. The UAR Government in the meantime made it clear in a series of public pronouncements that further extension of the cease-fire beyond 5
February, would not be made unless "serious progress" is made
in the talks.
On 4 February, President Anwar al-Saddat informed
the UAR National Assembly that, in response to appeals made
by the U.N. Secretary General and other friendly countries, the
UAR Government had agreed to extend the cease-fire on the
UAR-Israeli front by one month. President Sadaat said that
the UAR had done so in order to avail of every chance to seek
a peaceful solution. At the same time, he suggested that a
definite time-table for Israeli withdrawal should be drawn up,
beginning with partial withdrawal from the Suez Canal zone so
that the UAR Government could undertake, without further
delay, the opening of the Canal for international maritime traffic.
He also expressed the hope that Israel (and the United States)
would give a positive response to this proposal.
The Sudan, the UAR and Libya announced on 8 November their decision to form a Federation. This declaration
of the Heads of State of three countries came in pursuance
of the Tripoli Charter signed by the late President Nasser,
General Nemeri and Col. Gaddafi at their first meeting in Tripoli
in December, 1969. After staging a military coup d'etat in Syria
on 13 November, the Syrian Prime Minister, Air Marshal
Hafez al-Assad expressed his desire for Syrian association with
the proposed Federation.
<pg33>
Relations with Iran in economic, technical and cultural spheres developed satisfactorily. The Foreign Minister led the Indian
team to the Third Meeting of the Indo-Iran Joint Commission
held in Teheran from 28 to 30 December, 1970, at which
agreement was reached for the import of sulphur and
phosphoric acid over the next few years. Possibilities of a greater exchange of expertise and components between industrial
units in India and Iran are being investigated India has offered
fellowships and the services of experts to help Iran in the development of its small scale industries.
The Minister for Tourism and Civil Aviation, Dr. Karan
Singh, visited Iran in June, 1970, as a guest of the Iranian
Foreign Minister. A large number of Iranian students have been
admitted to various educational and technical institutions in
India.
The Chief of Staff of the Iranian Armed Forces, Gen. F.
Djam, visited India in the month of November, 1970, in response
to an invitation from our Chief of Army Staff.

Political developments of significance are taking place in the
Gulf area. There has been talk of a power-vacuum as a result of
the intended British withdrawal from the area. The Government
of India, however, do not share this view as they feel that the
countries concerned will be able to look after their security
interests.
Economically, the area is assuming great importance. Oil
has been struck in most of the Trucial States resulting in a general
rise in the living standards of the people. It has also generated
increased economic activity in the area, thus opening up the
Possibility of new areas of cooperation. There is already a,
growing realisation in this part of the world about what India
has to offer in the development of the region. It is the desire
of the Government of India to share with the Governments in
the area the expertise developed by India since independence in
various fields, technical, economic and scientific, to mutual
advantage.
<pg34>
The visit of the then Defence Minister, Sardar Swaran Singh,
to Algeria in May, 1970, at the invitation of the Algerian Government further strengthened the existing friendly relations with that
country. During this visit, the Algerian Government expressed
its desire for exploring the possibilities of further cooperation
with India in the fields of trade, commerce, training and exchange
of experts.
Relations between India and Kuwait have developed further
with the signing of a Cultural Agreement between the two
countries during the period under review. The Agreement
provides for cultural exchanges between India and Kuwait.
There are numerous possibilities of increasing collaboration
between India and Kuwait in the fields of industry and trade. A
beginning has already been made in this regard with the
conclusion of an agreement between the Associated Cement Companies and the Government of Kuwait for the construction of a
Clinker Grinding and Packing Plant at an estimated cost of
Rs. 2 crores, which will almost entirely be fabricated in India.
This marks a notable success in the field of civil projects. Trade
between the two countries has also been on the increase. There
is a growing demand for Indian manufactured goods, especially
steel, steel manufactures and engineering goods.
The Deputy Minister for External Affairs paid a goodwill
visit to Iraq in September, 1970. The visit resulted in a better
appreciation of India's internal and external policies. A goodwill delegation, comprising Sarvashri A. P. Sharma, M.P., and
Mir Qasim, now President of the Pradesh Congress Committee
of Jammu and Kashmir, also visited Iraq in July, 1970.

There has been a further stepping up of technical collaboration between India and Iraq. The annual trade talks between
India and Iraq were held in Baghdad in September, 1970 and
an agreement was signed for increased trade turn-over.
Relations with Jordan were normalised and an Indian Charge
d'Affaires was again posted in Amman, after his predecessor had
been recalled in September, 1969.
<pg35>
A new trade agreement was signed between India and Jordan
in the month of January, 1971. It is anticipated that the total
trade turn-over for the year 1971 will be Rs. 7.5 crores.
A goodwill delegation consisting of Sarvashri A. P. Sharma
and Mir Qasim paid a visit to Lebanon in July, 1970. The
Government of India sent relief materials worth Rs. 50,000 to
Lebanon for the welfare of the Lebanese refugees from Southern
Lebanon.
A Libyan delegation visited India in October, 1970, with a
view to exploring training facilities for Libyan students in India
and for more technical and commercial cooperation between
India and Libya. An invitation was extended to Dr. Shibani,
Rector of the Libyan University, to visit India in the near future.
In view of our increasing political, commercial and other relations, it has been decided to appoint a resident Ambassador in
Libya.
Libya had terminated the services of about 700 foreigners
by the end of 1970 as part of their Libyanisation programme,
and, amongst the people affected, were a small number of
Indians.
A delegation consisting of Sarvashri A. P. Sharma and Mir
Qasim paid a goodwill visit to Libya in July, 1970.
The year under review witnessed the normalisation of relations between India and Morocco and India's Ambassador
resumed his post in Rabat in June, 1970. Morocco has shown
interest in the import of Indian green tea and other commodities.
An invitation has been extended to the Prime Minister of the
People's Democratic Republic of Yemen to visit India. It is
hoped that the visit will further strengthen the bonds of friendship between the two countries.
<pg36>
Because of the lack of adequate medical facilities in the
People's Democratic Republic of Yemen, it has been decided
to take 10 patients from the Republic for treatment in India
annually. The cost of the treatment will be met by our Govern-

meat.
Certain measures introduced by the Government of the
People's Democratic Republic of Yemen, have, among others,
affected people of Indian origin, resident in the Republic. These
measures are of a general nature and are not particularly directed
against the people of Indian origin. The Government of India
are taking all possible steps to reduce the hardship caused to the
repatriates coming to India for permanent settlement.
A 5-member Saudi Air delegation visited India in June, 1970.
to negotiate a bilateral Air Services Agreement between the two
countries. As a result, Air India has already started operating
a service to Europe and the USA via Dhahran. There is a
possibility or another service being started in the near future.
As in the previous years, an Indian goodwill delegation visited
Saudi Arabia at the time of Haj.
It is proposed to increase high-level contacts with a view to
enlarging the area of cooperation between India and Saudi
Arabia.
The annual turn-over of trade between India and Saudi Arabia registered a substantial increase in 1970.
The Government of Sudan introduced a scheme of nationalisation of foreign firms in June, 1970. Of the many foreign
firms and banks affected, six are Indian. The Sudanese Government considered sympathetically the request of these Indian
firms for compensation of their assets. There is increasing interest on the part of the Sudan in fruitful cooperation with
India in the political, economic, commercial and cultural fields.
A trade delegation from the, Sudan visited India in the month of
August, 1970, in order to discuss the streamlining of trade
between India and the Sudan.
<pg37>
The volume of trade between India and the Sudan showed
an appreciable increase in 1969-70. The latest trade agreement
included a provision for the export of certain non-traditional
items from India.
The Deputy Minister for External Affairs paid a goodwill
visit to Syria during September, 1970, which resulted in a better
understanding of India's internal and external policies. A goodwill delegation comprising Sarvashri A. P. Sharma and Mir Qasim
visited Syria in July, 1970. Two Syrian journalists visited India
in May, 1970.
A cultural agreement with Syria is being finalised.
The untimely death of President Gamel Abdel Nasser, caused
deep grief in India. The late President of the UAR was one of

the pillars of Afro-Asian solidarity and non-alignment. He had
also greatly strengthened the bonds of friendship between the
UAR and India. An Indian delegation led by the Vice-President
attended the funeral ceremony of the late President. Later, the
Prime Minister and the Foreign Minister paid a short visit to
Cairo to offer their condolences to the UAR leaders.
The new Government of the UAR, headed by President
Anwar al-Sadaat, have reiterated their adherence to the policies
of the late President. President Sadaat has also accepted an
invitation to visit India.
Relations between India and the UAR continued to be very
friendly and cordial during the year under review. Trade and
economic cooperation between the two countries has continued
to make satisfactory progress.
The Government of India welcomed the UAR's acceptance,
on July 22, 1970, of the US peace initiative calling for a ceasefire on the UAR-Israeli front and the reactivisation of the Jarring
Mission for the implementation of the Security Council Resolution No. 242 of 22 November, 1967.
<pg38>
A high level delegation led by Dr. Labid Shukair visited India
between 6 and 8 January, 1971. The delegation called
on the President, Vice-President, Prime Minister, Foreign
Minister, Minister for Parliamentary Affairs and the Speaker of
the Lok Sabha. The purpose of the visit of the delegation was
to acquaint the Government of India with its latest assessment
of the Arab-Israeli problem.
With the opening of a resident Mission in Sanaa, the bonds
of friendship between the Yemen Arab Republic and India have
been further strengthened. There are considerable possibilities
of cooperation in the matter of trade, consultancy services and
industries. It is the endeavour of the Government of India to
provide as much material assistance to the Government of
Yemen Arab Republic as possible, both in the matter of technical
personnel as well as in other fields.
A gift consignment of medicines of the value of Rs. 23,000
was airlifted to Sanaa to meet the urgent requirements of the
Republic.
ISRAEL
USA JORDAN CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC INDIA LIBYA SUDAN SYRIA IRAN ALGERIA
KUWAIT RUSSIA IRAQ MALI LEBANON MOROCCO YEMEN SAUDI ARABIA EGYPT UNITED
KINGDOM
Nov 22, 1967

Africa, South of Sahara
CHAPTER VI
AFRICA, SOUTH OF SAHARA
A major African event was the 7th Session of the OAU
Meeting of Heads of State/Government in Addis Ababa from
Sep 01, 1970 to 5 September, 1970, where Nigeria's reconciliation
tion with the States which had recognised secessionist Biafra,
namely, Tanzania, Zambia, Ivory Coast and Gabon took concrete shape. The Meeting also expressed solidarity with the
UAR and Algeria in the West Asian conflict, and a unanimous
resolution urged all members to use their influence to ensure full
implementation of the U.N. Security Council's Resolution of
22 November, 1967.
An attempted invasion of Guinea in November, 1970, by
foreign-based troops supported by Portugal was repelled.
Following this, an extraordinary meeting of the Council of
Ministers of the OAU in Lagos, which was held from 9 to
12 December, urged all member-States "to prevent entry,
passage or any activity by any mercenary or any Organisation
and individuals who use them against African States". The
OAU Secretariat was directed to prepare a Draft Convention
outlawing "recruitment, training, equipping and use of mercenaries, as well as prohibiting the passage of such mercenaries and
their equipment in all countries".
Nationalisation of foreign financial institutions was introduced
in Zambia and Uganda during this year. In October, 1970, President Kaunda of Zambia announced new economic laws, whereby
banks, insurance companies and certain large companies were
nationalised. Retail and wholesale, trading throughout Zambia
were to be Zambianised after 1 January, 1972. In May, 1970, the
Government of Uganda nationalised all banks, insurance companies, oil companies, transport companies, sugar plantations,
mines and certain manufacturing industries.
<pg39>
<pg40>
In July, 1970, Mr. Justice Edward Akufo Addo was elected
President of Ghana.
South Africa persisted in the rigorous enforcement of
apparthied despite strong condemnation by the OAU, the Non-

aligned Summit and the U.N. Even in regard to the so-called
African homelands, Bantustans, effective administration continued,
in the hands of white officials. To crush opposition to apartheid,
the Suppression of Communism Act and the Anti-Terrorism Act.
were freely utilised. The year saw a diplomatic offensive by
South Africa to reverse its increasing isolation in the African continent, and an attempt to widen and extend its economic, financial
and trade links with nearby States. Some African countries
supported a proposal for a "dialogue" with South Africa.
The UK Government's declaration of intent to resume arms.
sales to South Africa evoked hostile reactions from a large number of African countries, the OAU Summit, the Non-aligned,
Summit and, at the meeting of Commonwealth Prime Ministers,
in Singapore, from the vast majority of Commonwealth memberStates. The 1970, OAU Summit meeting declared its firm condemnation of States, such as France, West Germany and Britainfor their policies favouring arms sales to South Africa. A fourmember delegation consisting of President Kaunda of Zambia
and the Foreign Ministers of Kenya, Algeria and Mali visitedFrance, West Germany and the UK to dissuade these countries
from such arms sales.
In a Resolution on 29 July, 1970, the U.N. Security
Council requested the International Court of Justice for an
advisory opinion on the, legal consequences of the continued
presence of South Africa in Namibia, notwithstanding its earlier
resolution declaring such continued presence illegal, and calling
upon all States to refrain from dealing with the Government of
South Africa in respect of Namibia.
In March, 1970, the illegal regime in Rhodesia declared the
country a Republic. The U.N. Security Council passed a
Resolution calling upon all States to interrupt all transportation,
to and from Rhodesia. The effect of economic sanctions,
<pg41>
has so far been far from decisive, because they are not implemented by several countries, in particular South Africa and
Portugal. By announcing details of the "Property owners'
(Residential Protection) Bill" in November, 1970, the illegal
regime demonstrated its stubborn resolve to continue even more
vigorously the policy of racial oppression. The Bill seeks to
prevent the acquisition of property by non-whites in white
residential areas.
In Mozambique and Angola, increased investments from
West Europe and the USA, and growing settler populations have
added to the Portuguese capability to resist the Liberation
movements struggling for the emancipation of these territories.
India continued to lend its full moral and political support
at various international forums to the cause of the people in

Southern Africa, oppressed by racialism and colonialism.
India views with concern the British Government's declaration
of intent to resume arms sale to South Africa. Such sales
would not only further strengthen the racist regime in South
Africa and add to the tensions in the area, but would adversely
affect the security and vital interests of a number of countries
in Africa and Asia, and bring in Great Power rivalry and the
cold war into the Indian Ocean region. In regard to Zimbabwe,
India has refused to recognise acts of the illegal regime. It
considers that measures so far taken by the British Government
to ensure government on the basis of one-man-one-vote have
proved to be ineffective and that it is primarily the responsibility of the British Government, as the Administering Power, to
ensure majorty rule and to take all necessary measures to this
end, including the use of force.
The drive for Africanisation in the East and Central African
States brought new uncertainties to persons of Indian origin
who bad not adopted local citizenship. The majority of persons
affected were British passport-holders. They are anxious to
emigrate to Britain but are faced with the British Government's
limitation of the annual quota to only 1,500 families. Several
became human shuttlecocks between various capitals of the
world, having been unsuccessful in their attempt to enter
<pg42>
Britain. The Government of India repeatedly impressed upon
the British Government that British passport-holders are clearly
their responsibility and that entry into Britain should be free
from considerations of race or colour. Persons wishing to come
to India for permanent settlement and adoption of Indian citizenship from Kenya, Uganda, Zambia and Tanzania have been entitled to special customs and import trade control concessions.
These were further extended for one year. Persons from
Malawi were also brought within the scope of the concessions.
President Julius Nyerere of Tanzania paid a State visit to
India from 22 to 27 January, 1971, and was the principal
guest at India's Republic Day Celebrations. The visit provided
a fruitful opportunity for exchanging views on several matters
of mutual interest and a number of fields for increased mutual
cooperation were identified.
The Prime Minister of India paid a State visit top
Mauritius from 2 to 6 June, 1970, at the invitation of the
Prime Minister of Mauritius. The visit was a landmark in the
historic ties binding the two countries and afforded a unique
opportunity for increased economic and cultural cooperation.
Indian personnel have been made available in the fields of civil
aviation, airport construction, planning, broadcasting, spinning
and weaving and for designing for the Gandhi Memorial Institute at Port Louis.

The Prime Minister, on her return from Lusaka after attending the Non-aligned Summit Conference in September, 1970,
stopped over briefly at Nairobi, where discussions were held
with President Kenyatta and other Kenyan leaders.
A visit by a ten-member Indian Parliamentary delegation to
Ghana, Senegal and Guinea served to develop closer understanding and mutual goodwill with these countries. Services of
various Indian personnel were made available on a contract basis
to Ghana, Nigeria and Uganda and Government-financed personnel were deputed to Ethiopia and Upper Volta. A team of
Indian experts also carried out a study for the establishment of
small-scale industries in various fields in Nigeria, Togo and
Dahomey.
ETHIOPIA
NIGER NIGERIA GABON TANZANIA ZAMBIA ALGERIA USA GUINEA PORTUGAL UGANDA
RUSSIA GHANA SOUTH AFRICA UNITED KINGDOM REPUBLIC OF SINGAPORE FRANCE
GERMANY KENYA MALI NAMIBIA ANGOLA MOZAMBIQUE INDIA ZIMBABWE MALAWI
MAURITIUS SENEGAL CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC
Sep 01, 1970

Europe
CHAPTER VII
EUROPE
India's relations with European countries continued to be
based on cordiality and mutual respect. The continuing dialogue with the major powers of the area was further helped
by the annual bilateral consultations with the USSR, France,
FRG and the UK. There were hopeful signs that recent developments in Europe, would lead to a detente. India welcomed
the renunciation of the use of force in the treaties of the FRG
with the Soviet Union and Poland.
The passing away of ex-president de Gaulle on 9 November removed from the European, and world stage, a
towering personality. As token of India's esteem for the
departed leader and our friendly relations with France, the
Prime Minister represented India at the, Memorial Service in
Paris. France's share in the assistance programme of the "Aid
India Consortium" was increased. Under the Indo-French Tech-

nical Cooperation Agreement, France imparted training to 47
Indian trainees in various scientific and industrial fields. In
atomic energy, the cooperation between India and France has.
grown still stronger. The foreign exchange component required for the Heavy Water Plant at Baroda was covered by
French credit. France also showed keen interest in the Fast
Breeder Test Reactor at Kalpakkam. The collaboration between the French Space Agency, Societe National d'Etudes
Spatiales and its Indian counterpart in the field of space research also progressed satisfactorily. An agreement signed
between India and France on agricultural development in Anandpur district of Andhra Pradesh, provided for various methods
to improve agricultural techniques with a view to increasing
output. A high level delegation consisting of representatives
of French industry and trade visited India to explore further the
<pg43>
<pg44>
possibilities of greater collaboration between the two countries.
The bilateral talks held in July, 1970, in Paris also led to
a useful exchange of views on subjects of mutual interest and
on world issues.
Chancellor Brandt of the Federal Republic of Germany
signed a Non-Aggression Treaty with the Soviet Union and a
Normalisation of Mutual Relations Treaty with Poland. Recognising the realities of post-war Europe, the FRG also
appeared willing to have an intra-German dialogue. This was
demonstrated by the meeting between Chancellor Brandt and
Prime Minister Stoph in Erfurt in the GDR on Mar 19, 1970.
This historic meeting, the first ever between top leaders
of the FRG and the GDR, was followed by another meeting
in Kassel in the FRG on 21 May, 1970.
Following upon Vice-Chancellor Scheel's visit to India in
February, 1970, fruitful bilateral talks were held between India
and the FRG in June, 1970. A Parliamentary delegation led
by the Speaker of the German Bundestag visited India in November, 1970. As a member of the Aid India Consortium. the
FRG played a major role in assisting India's development efforts.
Relations between India and the German Democratic Republic continued to develop satisfactorily during the year. The
two Governments announced in August their decision to raise
the level of their representation in each other's territory with
a view to further strengthen the friendly relations and cooperation between them. As a result of this decision, the Trade
Representations of the two countries have been raised to Consulate-General. The GDR regional Trade Representations in
Bombay, Calcutta and Madras have also been raised to Consulates.

Exchanges of delegations on trade and cultural matters as
well as visits by Members of Parliament continued to help in
further strengthening the good relations between the two countries.
<pg45>
The Minister for External Affairs, Sardar Swaran Singh,
visited Turkey between 2 and 5 November, 1970, at the
invitation of the Turkish Foreign Minister, Mr. Ihsan Sabri
Caglayangil. Earlier, the Turkish Foreign Minister had visited
India in January, 1968. The visits helped to strengthen cooperation between Turkey and India in various fields.
The relations between India and the United Kingdom continued on an even keel during the year. The visit to India of.
Prime Minister Heath from 9 to 12 January, 1971, helped
to strengthen bilateral relations and to create a better
atmosphere for British investment in India, particularly in the
more sophisticated industries. India's concern and apprehension, however, about certain policies of the UK, which vitally
affected a number of countries, including India had previously
been conveyed to the British Government. These included the
British declaration of intent to sell arms to South Africa, the
joint UK-US decision to set up a communication centre at
Diego Garcia and the measures reportedly under consideration
of the Government of the UK concerning immigration from
Commonwealth countries. The visit of Mr. Heath provided a
useful opportunity for frank discussions of these issues at the
highest level.
Other notable visitors from the UK to India included the
then British Ministers for Defence Equipment and Overseas
Development, Mr. John Morris and Mrs. Judith Hart. Mr.
Frank Cousins, Chairman, Community Relations Commission
of UK, also visited India in August, 1970.
During the year, the friendly relations between India and
the Soviet Union continued to develop.
The President, accompanied by Shrimati Giri, paid a State
visit to the Soviet Union from 21 September to 1 October. While in the Soviet Union, the President paid visits
to Tashkent, Moscow, Leningrad, Tbilisi and Kiev. He had
discussions with the Soviet President, Mr. Podgorny, and other
important Soviet leaders.
43 M of EA-4.
<pg46>
The Prime Minister made a brief stop-over at Moscow on
20 October, en route to the U. N. Assembly Session,
in New York. She was received at the Moscow airport by
the Soviet Prime Minister, Mr. Kosygin, with whom she had

discussions on bilateral relations and international issues. The
Foreign Minister also made a brief stop-over at Moscow in.
September, 1970, and had discussions with the Soviet Foreign.
Minister, Mr. Gromyko.
The Government of India have time and again taken up
with the Soviet Government the unsatisfactory nature, of maps
published in the Soviet Union which erroneously depict the
international boundary of India with China. The Soviet Government have agreed to give consideration to India's representations in publishing future maps. Government hope that the
Soviet Government will take the earliest possible opportunity
to rectify the incorrect depiction of India's boundaries.
The second official-level bilateral talks between India and
the Soviet Union were held in Moscow in May. The Indian
team was led by the Foreign Secretary, Shri T. N. Kaul, and
included Shri Kewal Singh, the then Secretary (West), and the
Soviet team by Mr. Firyubin, Deputy Foreign Minister. The,
two sides had useful discussions on international and bilateral
questions.
The Soviet Minister for Foreign Trade, Mr. N. S. Patolichev,
visited India in December, for talks on the Five-Year IndoSoviet Trade Agreement for the period 1971-75. The newFive-Year Trade Agreement provides for an increase of 15
per cent in Indo-Soviet trade in 1971, and the same rate of
growth is expected to be sustained in the remaining four years.
The USSR is India's second biggest trading partner and the
Government of India appreciate the many-sided cooperation
extended by the Soviet Government.
Indo-Yugoslav relations during the year were in keeping
with the close and warm friendship that has characterised them
in the past. The two countries also cooperated closely in the
Non-aligned Summit Conference in Lusaka in September, 1970.
<pg47>
Distinguished visitors from Yugoslavia included the Foreign
Minister of Yugoslavia, Mr. Mirko Tepavac, and the Minister
for Foreign Trade, Mr. Hadzic.
High level visits from India to Yugoslavia included the
of Dr. Karan Singh, Minister for Tourism and Civil Aviation,
Shri I. K. Gujral, Minister of State for Information and Broadcasting, and Shri M. R. Krishna, Deputy Minister for Industrial
Development.
The President paid State visits to Switzerland and Poland
in June, 1970, and to Bulgaria and Hungary in October. The
welcome received by the President from the peoples of the countries he visited reflected the friendly relations existing between
them and India.

The Government of India donated various items, including
tea, coffee, clothing and medicians, for the relief of the vicitims
of floods in Hungary and Rumania in April-May, 1970.
The manifold contacts between India and Cyprus were continued during the year. The Deputy Minister for External
Affairs, Shri Surendra Pal Singh, paid a visit to Cyprus in September, 1970.
Distinguished visitors to India during the year included the
Home Minister of Rumania, Mr. Onescu, Rumania's Minister
for Petroleum, Mr. Nicolae Toader, and the Polish Minister
for Shipping, Mr. Szopa.
INDIA
FRANCE USA UNITED KINGDOM POLAND GERMANY MALI TURKEY SOUTH AFRICA RUSSIA
UKRAINE GEORGIA UZBEKISTAN CHINA ZAMBIA YUGOSLAVIA SWITZERLAND BULGARIA
HUNGARY CYPRUS
Mar 19, 1970

The Americas
CHAPTER VIII
THE AMERICAS
India's relations with the United States are varied and
friendly. During the year, there has been normal progress in
important spheres. The USA continues to be India's leading
trade partner; India appreciates the bilateral assistance and
economic cooperation which the US Government have extended.
A Parliamentary delegation from India, led by the Speaker
of the Lok Sabha, Dr. G. S. Dhillon, visited the USA in October, 1970. The Minister for Parliamentary Affairs, Shipping
and Transport, Shri K. Raghu Ramaiah, and the Deputy Chairman of the Rajya Sabha, Shri V. D. Khobaragade, were also
members of the delegation.
The decision of the US Government to supply American
arms to Pakistan was taken serious note of by the Government.
The strong feelings of our Parliament and people and India's

deep concern over the decision was communicated to the US
Government. They have given us an assurance, which they
have made public, that this supply is a "one-time exception".
India's relations with Canada, which have been traditionally
warm and friendly, continued to develop during the year. The
most important development was the State visit to India of the
Prime Minister of Canada, Mr. Pierre Elliott Trudeau, from
Jan 09, 1971 to 13 January, 1971. He was welcomed in India both as
a friend and as the head of a friendly Government
During his stay in India, he had discussions with the Prime
Minister on a wide range of subjects which covered bilateral
relations and the international situation. There was a similiarity
of views on several important issues.
<pg48>
<pg49>
There have been continuous discussions between the two
Governments on matters of mutual interest. Other important
visitors to India from Canada were Mr. Turner, Minister of
Justice, who came to attend the Commonwealth Law Conference, the Hon'ble Jean-Paul Deschatelets, PC, QC, Speaker
of the Canadian Senate, and the Hon'ble Lucien Lamoureux,
Speaker, Canadian House of Commons, who both came to
attend the Second Commonwealth Speakers' Conference from
28 December, 1970 to 1 January, 1971.
Amongst important Indians who visited Canada were Shri
K. L. Rao, Minister for Irrigation and Power and Shri K. Raghu
Ramaiah, Minister for Parliamentary Affairs, Shipping and
Transport.
Canada's continued assistance to India is appreciated.
Canadian aid to India at present amounts to $84 million per
annum. During the year, the Canadian Government set up in
Canada, the Canadian International Development Research
Centre. The main thrust of the Centre's activities is in the field
of rural welfare. Shri A. L. Dias, Lt. Governor of Tripura,
is at present one of the 11 Governors of the Centre.
There has been a normal flow of cultural relations between
the two countries., The Shastri Indo-Canadian Institute has been
working well and both sides are agreed that it should continue
to operate.
The Prime Minister of Guyana, Mr. Burnham, accompanied
by his wife and members of his party, visited India for five
days from 27 January, to 1 February, 1971. Mr. Bumham end the members of his party had discussions with
the Prime Minister, Foreign Minister and other officials on
Indo-Guyanese relations and on the Commonwealth. It was
agreed to conclude agreements for cultural and technical co-

operation between the two countries. Mr. Burnham welcomed
the proposal to set up an Indian Cultural Centre in Guyana. At
the request of the Government of Guyana, India will provide
facilities for the training of Guyanese nationals in India and also
make available to Guyana the assistance of Indian experts and
facilities for obtaining the services of consultancy organisations
<pg50>
for planning and implementing projects in agriculture, industry,
mining, irrigation and Power, and other fields. A team of
Indian experts will visit Guyana soon to identify suitable cooperation projects, including the setting up of joint ventures in
Guyana.
In spite of the geographical distance between India and the
countries of Latin America and the Caribbean several steps
were, taken during the year which will prove useful for closer
relations.
The Governments of India and Ecuador have agreed to
exchange Ambassadors. The Government of India have decided to establish a resident Mission in Bogota, Colombia. Arrangements in respect of both these decisions are being worked
out.
A Trade Agreement with Colombia was signed in Bogota
in July, 1970. Dr. Karan Singh, Minister for Tourism and
Civil Aviation, signed the Agreement on behalf of the Government of India. The Instruments of Ratification of the. IndoBrazil Agreement on Cooperation in Peaceful Uses of Atomic
Energy were exchanged between the two Governments in New
Delhi in March, 1970.
India participated in several trade fairs and exhibitions.
Amongst them were the Feira de Providencia in Rio de Janeiro,
the VIII Bogota International Fair in Colombia and the Exhibition of Postal Exhibits in Caracas.
Possibilities of joint industrial ventures with India are being
explored in Guyana and Trinidad and Tobago. These cover
fields such as textiles, processed food and leather manufactures.
---several Latin American countries, particularly in Argentina,
Brazil, Uruguay, Chile and Peru, Indian firms are competing
for international tenders. The products tendered include railway wagons, cars and bogies, steel structurals, power generation
and transmission equipment. Several part tenders for supply of
electrical equipment, and engineering goods have been won
<pg51>
by Indian firms in Argentina and elsewhere. An Indian firm has
been awarded a contract for the supply of 25,000 tonnes of steel
rails for the Argentine railways.

Negotiations for cultural agreements with some of the countries in the region are in progress.
India joined several other countries of the world in helping
Peru after the disastrous earthquake in that country in May,
1970. A sum of Rs. 1 lakh was sanctioned by the Prime
Minister fir the relief of the sufferers. Our recently-established Embassy in Lima organised a concert of Indian dances and
music in aid of the victims of the earthquake and the proceeds
of the concert were given to the Government of Peru.
India was represented at high level at the inauguration
ceremonies of the new Presidents of Chile and Mexico. Shri
Barkatullah Khan, Minister of Law and Power, Government of
Rajasthan, led the Indian delegation at the installation ceremonies of President Salvador Allende, of Chile (November 4)
and President Luis Echeverria Alvarez of Mexico (December
1).
The Deputy Minister of External Affairs, Shri Surendra
Pal Singh, visited Mexico, Guyana, Trinidad, Jamaica and
Surinam in October, 1970.
There were several other visits in both directions. Amongst
them was the visit of Mr. Rens, Minister for Economic Affairs
of Surinam and Dr. Caravilho, President of the National Commission for Nuclear Energy of Brazil to India. The VicePresident of Nicaragua, Mr. A. Callejas, and the ex-President
of Costa Rica, Mr. Mario Eshandi Jiminex, passed through
India. During their stay in India, they were the guests of the
Government of India. The farmer Foreign Minister of Panama,
Mr. Fernando Eleta Almaru, also visited India. Dr. K. L. Rao,
Union Minister for Irrigation and Power, visited Buenos Aires
to participate in the UN Panel of Experts on water resources.
INDIA
USA PAKISTAN CANADA LATVIA GUYANA CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC ECUADOR
COLOMBIA BRAZIL VENEZUELA TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO RUSSIA ARGENTINA CHILE PERU
URUGUAY MEXICO JAMAICA NICARAGUA COSTA!!PANAMA
Jan 09, 1971

United Nations and International Conferences
CHAPTER IX

UNITED NATIONS AND INTERNATIONAL
CONFERENCES
The apex of India's multilateral diplomatic activity in the
year under review was the Third Conference of Non-aligned
Countries held in Lusaka from Sep 08, 1970 to 10 September, 1970.
The Conference was preceded by a Foreign Ministers' Meeting on 6 and 7 September. The Indian delegation to
the Summit Conference, which was attended by 54 countries,
11 Observers and 7 guests, was led by the Prime Minister.
The Conference at Lusaka highlighted several points and its
decisions represented the consensus of fifty-three members of
the United Nations representing about half the human race. The
main themes of the Conference were: international peace,
freedom and equality of nations, economic development in the
developing countries and cooperation among non-aligned countries. The Conference adopted a Declaration on Peace, Independence, Development, Cooperation and Democratisation of
International Relations which has become popularly known as
the Lusaka Declaration. It also adopted statements on Economic Progress, the United Nations, Disarmament, Sea-Bed,
Decolonisation, Southern Rhodesia, Portuguese Colonies,
Namibia, apartheid, Cyprus and on the situations in the Middle
East and Indo-China.
Speaking at the Lusaka Conference, the Prime Minister
emphatically asserted that the policy of non-alignment had not
lost its relevance to the problems and issues confronting the
world today. She stated that non-alignment expressed "our
individual and collective sovereignty. our devotion to freedom
and peace and our urgent need to give to our people a better
life and the opportunity to live in freedom, in dignity and in
<pg52>
<pg53>
peace". She further stated: "Not only national honour butnational interest demands that, we do not mortgage our decisions
in domestic and in international affairs to foreign dictate. This
was one element of our policy of non-alignment. As the logical
corollary, we rejected the enemities of our erstwhile rulers." As
my father declared: "We are in no camp and in no military alliance. The only camp we should like to be in is the camp of peacewhich should include as many countries as possible......" There
was need, the Prime Minister pointed out, to complete the Unfinished Revolution of our times and for the non-aligned countries in particular to be "in the vanguard of the movement to
create the world of tomorrow and to enrich the content of human
life".
The Non-aligned Conference was marked by the comparative-

harmony with which it produced its recommendations. In
contrast to the Consultative Meeting held in Belgrade in July,
1969 and the Dar-es-Salaam Meeting of April, 1970, there was,
a clear realisation of who should be invited, what could and
should be achieved and far less polemics. The prolonged and
intensive preparatory consultations through special envoys sent
to the various capitals had clarified the issues and brought them
into focus. By and large, the Conference was successful in
achieving a fair measure of unity among the non-aligned courttries and in projecting non-alignment as a living, realistic and
dynamic policy. For India, the political and economic documents adopted by the Conference have opened up avenues for
closer bilateral and multilateral cooperation with a number of
countries in Africa and Asia. Secondly, the useful role which
India played in the preparatory work and in the Conference
itself has created a good climate for improving our position in
the non-aligned world and outside it.
The Commemorative Session, of the General Assembly of
the United Nations was held from 14 to 24th October, 1970.
Leading statesmen of 84 Member-States addressed the General Assembly, and among them were 18 Heads of State,
24 Heads of Governments, including the Prime Minister of
<pg54>
India, and 44 Special Envoys. In her address, the Prime Minister of India called upon the United Nations to "strive to bring
about an era of international transformation by consent, a new
era of justice and peace". She said: "Our independence coincided with a remarkable acceleration of communications. So
from the very beginning, our foreign policy was based on the,
premise that in a shrinking world, there could be no place for
war as an instrument of policy. The responsibility to help more
than five hundred million people to fulfil their aspirations gives
us a compelling interest in peace, especially with our neighbours.... The world is not for destruction, it is for development. Government and statesmen of the world, indeed citizens
of all nations, need to make earnest and well-considered efforts
to submerge national ambitions and rivalries in the wider interest of the preservation of civilisation and the survival of
humanity."
The General Assembly took substantive action in observance
of the Twentyfifth Anniversary by adopting:
(1) The Declaration of the Occasion of the Twentyfifth
Anniversary of the United Nations.
(2) An International Development Strategy for the Second
United Nations Development Decade.
(3) The Declaration on Principles of International Law
concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation among

States in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations.
(4) The Declaration on the Strengthening of International
Security, and
(5) A Programme of Action for the Full Implementation
of Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples.
<pg55>
In keeping with their fundamental policy of unswerving support for the World Organisation, the Government of India
established a National Committee, which, after careful deliberation, laid down the guidelines for a comprehensive programme
of action at the national and State levels. The programme culminated in a function held on United Nations Day (24th October)
which was attended by the President of India.
A World Youth Assembly was held at the U.N. Headquarters in July, 1970, as part of the celebrations of the Twentyfifth
Anniversary. India participated in it. The purpose was to
draw the attention of youth to the principal problems of the
UN and to provide opportunities for youth to give expression
to their views on the problems concerning peace and progress.
The General Assembly at its 25th Session instructed the Secretary
General to study the possibility and desirability of holding future
Youth Assemblies.
The regular session of the General Assembly was, as customary, inaugurated with a general debate on international problems. The Minister for External Affairs of India, in his statement sought "the widest support and cooperation of the Members
of the United Nations" in fulfilling the objectives to which the
non-aligned countries had subscribed at the Lusaka Conference.
Concretely, he called for the strengthening of "the edifice of
Peace" through the adoption of a declaration on the strengthening of international peace and security; systematic action to
eliminate the remnants of colonialism and to combat racial discrimination and apartheid in Southern Africa; agreement on
UN peacemaking and peace-keeping operations; measures to
enable all members of the international community to participate
in decision-making on issues of war and peace, economic development, independence and sovereignty, especially through the
United Nations; the university of membership of the World
Organisation, particularly through "the rightful participation of
<pg56>
the People's Republic of China"; general and complete disarmament, in particular nuclear disarmament; measures to enable
peaceful nuclear technology to be made available with all States
without discrimination; and the adoption of a meaningful strategy for the Second Development Decade.

In the political sphere, the most important achievement of
the 25th regular session of the General Assembly was the adoption of a Declaration on the Strengthening of International Security. Following the Lusaka consensus on the subject, a number
of non-aligned delegations submitted a Draft Declaration, but
separate drafts were also respectively tabled by the Western,
Latin American and Socialist groups. In the event an informal
working group, in which India, was represented, was successful
in marrying the four documents and in producing a single text
for adoption by the General Assembly.
The Declaration reaffirmed "the universal and unconditional
validity of the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations as the basis of relations among States irrespective
of their size, geographical location, level of development or political, economical and social system". It stated that "the breach
of these principles cannot be justified in any circumstances whatsoever". Further, it called upon all States to make efforts to
establish "an effective system of universal collective security,
without military alliances". It also affirmed the "close connection" between international security, disarmament and economic
development, and urged all States, particularly the nuclear
powers, to make "urgent and concerted efforts" towards disarmament.
On the Middle Fast question. the General Assembly adopted
Resolution 2628 (XXV) calling upon "the parties directly concerned.... to resume contact with the Special Representative
of the Secretary General (Dr. Jarring)" and recommending to
them "to extend the cease-fire for a period of three months" in
<pg57>
order to facilitate talks under the auspices of the Special Representative with a view to giving effect to Security Council Resolution 242(1967). Among other things, the Resolution also
reaffirmed that "the acquisition of territories by force is inadmissible and that, consequently, territories thus occupied must be
restored".
Another important event in the 25th session of the General
Assembly was the debate on the China question. The substantive Draft Resolution, which India supported, seeking to restore
the lawful rights of the People's Republic of China was not
adopted since it did not secure a two-thirds majority. Nevertheless, the vote disclosed that a majority supported the membership
of the PRC in the United Nations and, indeed this was the first
time, that such a majority was obtained.
As regards decolonisation and measures aimed at eliminating
apartheid and racialism, reference has already been made to the
adoption of the Programme of Action for the Full Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colo-

nial Countries and Peoples. This decision was supplemented
by separate resolutions relating to South Africa, Southern Rhodesia, Namibia (South West Africa), and Territories under
Portuguese Administration. India lent its fullest support to
those important resolutions. Through yet another resolution, the
General Assembly reiterated its declaration that "any attempt
aimed at the partial or total disruption of the national unity and
the territorial integrity of colonial territories and the establishment of military bases and installations in these territories is
incompatible with the purposes and principles of the Charter".
Deep concern was also expressed "at the policy of some administering powers in establishing and maintaining military bases
in some of the territories under their administration".
<pg58>
Considerable progress was made in the continuing consideration of the question of the sea-bed and ocean-floor beyond
the limits of national jurisdiction. The General Assembly
adopted a declaration stating that this area and its resources "are
the common heritage of mankind", that the area shall not be
subject to appropriation by States or persons, natural or juridical, and no State shall claim sovereign rights over any part of
it; that exploration of the area and exploitation of its resources
shall be carried out for the benefit of mankind as a whole; and
that the area shall be reserved exclusively for peaceful purposes.
By another resolution the General Assembly decided to
convene, in 1973, a Conference on the Law of the Sea, which
will attempt to establish a precise definition of the seabed and
ocean-floor beyond national limits and also discuss a broad
range of related issues, including fishing and conservation of
living resources, preservation of the marine environment and
scientific research.
On the economic and development side, the most crucial
decision was the proclamation of the Second United Nations
Decade. By adopting the International Development Strategy
for the Decade, Governments pledged themselves "to pursuepolicies designed to create a more just and rational world economy and social order in which equality of opportunites should
be as much a prerogative of nations as of individuals within a
nation". Among the goals and objectives agreed upon are: (a)
a 6 per cent annual growth in gross product of developing countries as a whole, with the possibility of higher rate in the second
half of the Decade; (b) a 3.5 per cent annual growth rate in
gross product per head in developing countries, with the possibility of accelerating it during the second half; and (c) aid
amounting to 1 per cent of GNP by the advanced countries to
the developing countries by the year 1972. The strategy also
contains a set of integrated policy measures requiring specific,
action by Governments in the fields of international trade; economic cooperation and integration among developing countries:
invisibles, including shipping, special measures in favour of the

<pg59>
least developed among the developing countries; special measures
in favour of land-locked countries; science and technology; human
development; expansion and diversification of production; and
plan formulation and implementation.
The drafting of the Strategy was entrusted to a Preparatory
Committee which was established in 1968, and on which India
was represented. India's delegation worked for the acceptance
of the idea that the success of the Strategy would depend on
the political will of nations and that adequate transfer of resources and technology from developed to developing countries
was a fundamental imperative.
India also played a significant role in the UNCTAD and
other forums of the United Nations system in shaping the conceptual design of the Strategy. Although it falls short in some
respects of the expectations of the developing countries, it is
likely to play a strategic role in the continuing effort to transform
the world economic structure of the present time. It can also
be legitimately described as a historic decision of the highest
importance, incorporating as it does a new concept in the
evolution of international cooperation.
By a separate resolution, the General Assembly decided to
convene the third session of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development in April/May, 1972. The Group of
"77" at New York, under the chairmanship of India, adopted
a Declaration stating that the UNCTAD III assumed particular
significance from the point of view of the contribution that it
could make to the implementation of the International Development Strategy for the Second Development Decade. The Groupfelt that it would be necessary, inter alia, to examine how the
institutional machinery of the UNCTAD could be geared to this
purpose and, consequently, it considered it important that there
should be adequate advance preparations for the Third Conference not only at the level of experts, but also at the Ministerial
level to provide the necessary political direction.
<pg60>
India pledged an amount of $3.75 million (in non-convertible rupees) for the year 1971 at the Pledging Conference for the
UNDP. This represents an increase of $2.5 million over the
pledge made in the previous year. India also increased its
contribution to the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, with the pledge for 1971, amounting to Rs.
1,00,000. India pledged all amount of $ 1,50,000 for the year
197 1, to the Capital Development Fund, and a sum of $ 50,000
to the United Nations Industrial Development Organisation.
Both pledges are in non-convertible rupees.
The 25th Session of the UNGA had seven disarmament items

on its agenda and adopted a number of resolutions on that
subject:
1. General and Complete Disarmament.
The following questions were considered under this item:
(a) Draft treaty on sea-bed.--A resolution commending the
US-USSR Draft Treaty was adopted by 104-2-2. We voted for
the Resolution having expressed our interpretation of and special
concern on the subject.
(b) SALT (Strategic Arms Limitation Talks).--We cosponsored the Resolution which called for an immediate halt in
the nuclear arms race and the cessation of testing and deployment of nuclear weapon systems. The Resolution was adopted
by 102-0-14.
(c) Implication of new techniques of uranium enrichment.We abstained on the Maltese Resolution on this subject, which
was adopted by 107-0-7.
(d) Question of Comprehensive Programme of Disarmament.--We voted for the Mexico-Sweden-Yugoslav Draft Resolution after it was revised. As a result of that Resolution, the
CCD would now consider not only the three-power comprehensive programme of disarmament. but also any other proposals
which may be in the field.
<pg61>
2. Question of C & B Weapons.
The Group of Twelve members of the CCD (which includes
India( tabled a Draft Resolution based on their Joint Memorandum to the CCD which was adopted by 113-0-2. The subject
will now be further discussed by the CCD.
3. Suspension of tests.
A Canadian Draft Resolution on the question of international
exchange of seismological data was adopted by 102-0-13. We
Noted for it.
Nine members including India, of the Group of Twelve of
the CCD, tabled a Draft Resolution calling for suspension of
all nuclear testing and requesting the CCD to continue negotiations on an underground test-ban treaty. It was adopted by
112-0-1.
4. Implementation of the results of the Conference of Non-nuclear Weapon States.
The Netherlands Draft Resolution of a procedural type was

adopted by 106-0-9.
5. Establishment within the framework of IAEA of an international service for nuclear explosion for peaceful purposes.
Australia's Draft Resolution commending IAEA for its
efforts to compile and disseminate information on the technology
of peaceful nuclear explosions was adopted by 109-0-5. We
voted for it and made a statement in explanation of our vote.
6. Implementation of UNGA Resolution 2456-B(XXIII).
A Draft Resolution inter alia deploring that not all nuclear
weapon States had as yet signed Protocol II of the Latin American Denuclearisation Treaty was adopted by 104-0-12. India
voted for the Resolution.
43 Mof EA--5.
<pg62>
7. Economic and Social Consequences of the armaments race
India co-sponsored the Rumanian Draft Resolution requesting the Secretary General to prepare, with the assistance of Consultant experts, a report on the economic and social consequences
of the armaments race and of military expenditures. The Resolution was adopted unanimously.
During the year, the Conference Committee on Disarmament
(CCD) held two sessions from 17 February, to 30 April, and
from 16 June, to 3 September, 1970, consisting of 46 formal
plenary meetings and 5 informal plenary meetings without
records. In addition, members of the Committee met frequently
for informal multilateral consultations on disarmament question
of common interest. The Group of 12, of which India is a
member, held 26 meetings.
The Committee had before it a number of subjects which
were referred to it by the UN General Assembly. It devoted
particular attention to:
(i) The question of Chemical and Bacteriological (Biological) weapons;
(ii) Suspension of nuclear and thermonuclear tests;
(iii) Disarmament programme in the context of the Disarmament Decade; and
(iv) Treaty on Sea-bed.
Besides oral statements, a number of formal proposals and
working papers were presented by the members. Towards the

close of the session, the USA and the USSR further revised their
Joint Draft Treaty on the prohibition of nuclear and other
weapons of mass destruction on the sea-bed which, it was decided
should be submitted to the 25th Session of the U.N. General
Assembly. The Group of Twelve submitted a joint memorandum on the question of Chemical and Bacteriological (Biological) methods of warfare.
In the field of disarmament, the two most important developments were the progress made in the Strategic Arms Limitation Talks between the two Super Powers and the formulations
<pg63>
of a treaty banning arms from the sea-bed. The Soviet and
the US delegation have had three meetings so far, two in Helsinki and one in Vienna, for the control and reduction of strategic arms. The Government of India welcomed these talks and
is of the view that an agreement on strategic arms limitation
will be an important step forward in achieving general and
complete disarmament.
The Treaty barring arms from the sea-bed was the result
of a Joint Draft submitted to the Conference Committee on
Disarmament by the Soviet Union and the USA. The Government of India endorsed the Treaty in the General Assembly,
though it had reservations about certain clauses relating to
definition and technical interpretation in the Treaty.
Dr. Vikram Sarabhai, Chairman of the Atomic Energy
Commission, was elected President of the 14th General Conference of the International Atomic Energy Agency. Shri V. C.
Trivedi, the Indian Ambassador in Vienna, was at the same time
elected the presiding officer of the executive organ of the Agency.
He was elected the Chairman of the Board of Governors of the
IAEA. Both the elections were without opposition.
The Government of India supported the 7 convening of the
Fourth Moms for Peace Conference during the, autumn of 1971,
both at the IAEA and in the UN. The Conference is expected to be held in Geneva, in September or October this year.
Being one, of the most advanced among the developing countries
of Africa and Asia in the sphere of nuclear activities, India is
bound to play an important role in this Conference. The Government of India's endeavour will be to. encourage, by example
and assistance the development of nuclear technology for peacefull purposes in the less developed countries of the world.
During 1970, the Indian delegation actively participated in
the activities of the IAEA relating to the evolution of a foolproof safeguard system against the diversion of nuclear material
for military purposes. India also played a constructive role in
expanding the IAEA's technical assistance programmes for the
development of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes among

member-States of the organisation.
<pg64>
India continued to play a significant role in the progressive
development of international law through the United Nations and
its different committees/bodies. During the year under review,
our representatives actively participated in the work of the Special Committee on Principles of International Law concerning
Friendly Relations and Cooperation among States, the UN
Commission on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL) and its
Working Groups, the Committee on Peaceful Uses of the Seabed, and the Committee on Peaceful Uses of Outer Space.
The Special Committee on Principles of International Law
concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation among States,
which was established by the U.N. General Assembly in 1962
for the progressive development and codification of the principles of the UN Charter, so as to secure their more effective
application, successfully completed its work in the summer of
1970 by recommending a Draft Declaration on the seven principles of the Charter entrusted to it for examination, namely the
principles of non-use of force, peaceful settlement of disputes,
equal rights and self-determination of peoples, sovereign equality
of States, good faith, duty of all States to cooperate with one an
other and the principle of non-intervention. India has played
an active role in the work of this Committee since 1964. The
Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning
Friendly Relations and Cooperation among States, recommended by this Committee, was adopted by the U.N. General Assembly on October 24, 1970, as a fitting tribute to the commemoration of the XXV anniversary of the United Nations.
The substantive work commenced by UNCITRAL (United
Nations Commission on International Trade Law) in 1969 towards the unification and harmonisation of International Trade
Law on topics like International Sale of Goods was carried forward during the year under review. India played an active role
in the deliberations of UNCITRAL and its Working Group on
Sales. The provisions of the Uniform Law on International Sale
of Goods annexed to the Hague Convention of 1964 are now being examined by UNCITRAL in detail to see which modifications
of existing texts would render them capable of wider acceptance
<pg65>
by countries having different legal systems. Already the first
seventeen Articles of this law, relating to its sphere of application and the general provisions, have been examined by the
UNCITRAL Working Group on Sales which has recommended
revised texts for these Articles.
India played an active role in the adoption of both the
resolutions on the sea-bed, referred to earlier in this Report.
The Statement adopted unanimously at the Non-aligned Conference in Lusaka on the sea-bed and its resources influenced

the adoption of the UN. Declaration of Principles relating to
the Sea-bed. The Asian-African Legal Consultative Committee.
an intergovernmental organisation consisting of 20 members.
including India, at its session held in Colombo in January, 1971,
discussed these developments in order to prepare adequately for
the Conference' on the Law of the Sea in 1973. A small Working Group has been established to make recommendations as to
the future course of action in this regard. India is a member
of this Working Group.
In February, 1971, India participated in Oral Proceedings
held by the International Court of Justice in the case of Namibia
(South West Africa). The Security Council of the United
Nations had requested the Court on 29 July, 1970, to give
its opinion on the following question:
"What are the, legal consequences for States of the
continued presence of South Africa in Namibia, notwithstanding Security Council Resolution 276
(1970)?"
The General Assembly by Resolution 2145 (XXI) adopted
on the 27th October, 1966, terminated the mandate of South
Africa and assumed direct administration over the territory of
South-West Africa, pending its independence. The Security
Council recognised this termination and called upon the Government of South Africa immediately to withdraw from this.
territory. Notwithstanding these resolutions, South Africa continued to be in possession of the territory of South-West
Africa.
<pg66>
India submitted its Written Statement to the Court in
November, 1970. Shri M. C. Chagla, former Foreign Minister,
represented the Government of India in the Oral Proceedings
in the case and made his Statement on 11 February, 1971.
He emphasised that the Mandate of South Africa over Namibia
having been terminated, it was incumbent on South Africa to
withdraw its administration from the territory. It was the duty
of all States to cooperate with the United Nations, to recognise
the inalienable right of the people of Namibia to self-determination and independence, and not to recognise the authority of
South Africa over the Territory.
India concluded 53 treaties and agreements during the-year
under review. A list of these agreements is given in Appendix
VII.
The Commonwealth Prime Ministers' Conference was hold
in Singapore from 14 to 22 January, 1971. The Indian
delegation, led by the Foreign Minister, Sardar Swaran
Singh, played a leading role in opposing the sale of British arms
to South Africa and the establishment of foreign bases in the

Indian Ocean region.
The Indian delegation strongly supported the Zambian Draft
Declaration of Commonwealth Principles, which laid down
guidelines for the Commonwealth. The Declaration condemned
the practice of racial discrimination as an unmitigated social evil
which should be resisted, and suggested that Commonwealth
countries should deny assistance to a country practising racial
discrimination, if, in their judgment, such assistance contributed
towards consolidating and strengthening the regime concerned
in the pursuit of its policy of racial discrimination. India was
nominated a member of the 8-member Study Group to consider
the factors affecting the security of maritime trade routes in
the South Atlantic and Indian Ocean.
In regard to the consequences of British entry into the EEC,
it wag agreed by the Conference that every possible effort should
be made to mitigate its adverse effects on intra Commonwealth
trade.
INDIA
USA ZAMBIA CYPRUS NAMIBIA CHINA YUGOSLAVIA PERU CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC
SOUTH AFRICA MEXICO SWEDEN THE NETHERLANDS AUSTRALIA AUSTRIA SWITZERLAND
SRI LANKA REPUBLIC OF SINGAPORE
Sep 08, 1970

Technical and Economic Cooperation
CHAPTER X
TECHNICAL AND ECONOMIC COOPERATION
Increased emphasis on technical and economic cooperation,
particularly with the developing countries of Asia, Africa and
the Carribean and Latin America, was maintained during the
year under review. Deputation of Indian personnel to these
countries, training in India of the nominees of these countries,
and the preparation of studies and reports on their behalf were
some of the means through, which such cooperation has been
strengthened under the Indian Technical and Economic Cooperation (ITEC) Programme. A concerted plan for widening the basis of economic collaboration between India and
some countries has been chartered through discussions at Joint
Commissions, specifically etsablished for this purpose, and at
other forums of bilateral consultations. The Ministry also

took part in various conferences and programmes at multilateral and international levels aimed at economic and technical
cooperation.
Deputation of Indian personnel financed under the ITEC
Programme covered a wide variety of fields and regions of the
globe. Important amongst these are the Indian personnel for
(i) Mauritius, in a number of fields; (ii) Afghanistan, a Chief
coordinator for the establishment of an Agricultural Researchcum-Extension Project, a lecturer, a teacher and a Registrar
for the University; (iii) Fiji, an expert in the sugar industry; (iv)
Maldives, six teachers; (v) Malaysia, five instructors for a
vocational training institute; (vi) Indonesia, five teachers for
service in the Gandhi Memorial School, Djakarta, and an expert
in planning; (vii) Ethiopia, a Gynaecologist; (viii) Upper
Volta, a telecommunications engineer; and (ix) Uruguay, an
expert in sugarcane cultivation. Besides, the services of
<pg67>
<pg68>
various Indian personnel on a contract basis were made available
to Afghanistan, Syria, Saudi Arabia and several African countries.
Another equally important aspect of the ITEC programme,
namely the provision of training facilities in India, has
been implemented satisfactorily. The fields of training have
been as varied as the country-wise distribution of the trainees
who availed themselves of our facilities. Important amongst
such trainees are those from (i) Malaysia: 60 trainees completed their courses in July, 1970, and another batch of 37 trainees
arrived for training in various trades; (ii) UAR: 132 trainees
completed training in the various Central Training Institutes,
and a similar number of trainees succeeded them in these
Institutes; (iii) Fiji: trainees in social studies, labour studies,
forestry, district administration, fisheries, cooperative management and police administration; (iv) Afghanistan: trainees in
Parliamentary procedures and air traffic control; (v) People's
Democratic Republic of Yemen: trainees in accounts and
statistics, geometrical drawing and maintenance and overhauling of irrigation pumps; (vi) Indonesia: Engineer trainees
in the field of irrigation and power; (vii) A trainee each from
the Maldives, Ceylon, Syria, Nigeria, Lebanon and Senegal for
training in foreign service, moulding, irrigation engineering,
community development, journalism and films direction respectively.
Besides, placements for training in the Indian Army, Naval
and Air Force courses were arranged for the nominees of
friendly countries of Asia and Africa.
The preparation of studies and specific reports in various

fields provided another important avenue for the operation of
the ITEC programme during the year. In Mauritius, an,
Indian techno-economic survey team carried out a comprehensive survey, covering fisheries, livestock, forestry and mining
and manufacturing industries. An independent survey of a
reclamation project near Port Louis harbour was also carried
out. The report of this Survey has already been presented to
<pg69>
the Government of Mauritius. In Malaysia, Indian. personnel
assisted in the preparation of a feasibility report on the establishment of an independent airline. A study on. automatic telephone
exchange installations was. also carried out. In Iraq, an Indian.
railway team carried out a preliminary cost-cum-feasibility study
of a project covering 400 kilometres of railway line between
Baghdad and Abu Kemal near the Syrian border. In
Afghanistan, Indian personnel made on-the-spot studies of the
proposed Kandhar-Zahidan road project. In Iran, teams of,
Indian railway engineers have studied the working of the Iranian
Railways, their workshops, etc. A techno-economic survey
team has proceeded to Trinidad and Tobago and Surinam to
conduct surveys in the field of small-scale industries. Steps to
undertake a study on a. scrap smelting plant in Libya and a
feasibility study for setting up a cement plant at Oman have also
been taken.
Gifts of goods and machinery included (i) equipment for
use in the Chemistry Laboratory for undergraduates in the
South Pacific University and 15 irrigation pumps to Fiji; (ii)
25 and 15 irrigation pumps to the People's Democratic Republic
of Yemen and Burma respectively; (iii) a second lot of agricultural implements and rice, potato and wheat seeds to Afghanistan; (iv) two railway bogies to Malaysia; (v) eight typewriters
for use in schools in the Maldives; and (vi) medical books for:
Kenya.
The Nomination Scheme, under which the Ministry has beenassisting, for the past several years, self-financing students fromdeveloping countries in Africa and Asia to secure admissions
to medical and engineering colleges in India, was continued
during the year. In 1970, the Ministry arranged in medical and
engineering colleges the admission of a total of 199 such foreign
students, of which 87 were to medical colleges and 112 to
engineering colleges. Out of these, 55 students were from
Africa, 34 from West Asia, 69 from South-East Asia and 41
from other countries.
<pg70>
Applications for medical and engineering courses have more
than doubled during the last five years and indicate a better
appreciation abroad of the courses of study and allied facilities
available in India.

Notable progress has been made in the working of the IndoIran and Indo-Czechoslovak Joint Commission/Committee for
Economic, Trade and Technical Cooperation. Exchange of
officials visits in connection with the Indo-Iran Joint Commission preceded the third meeting of the Commission at Tehran
in December, 1970, at which the Indian delegation was led by
the Minister for External Affairs. The Commission expressed
overall satisfaction at the progress made since its last meeting and
directed that the sub-committees and the Coordination and
Implementation Committee should continue to hold frequent
meetings of the Commission. Several Czechoslovak delegations
visited India for detailed discussions with Indian authorities In
connection with the working of the Indo-Czechoslovak Committee for Economic, Trade and Technical Cooperation. At
the second session of the Committee, a number of specific areas
of cooperation were identified. Preparatory work was also
undertaken in connection with the Indo-Ceylon Joint Committee
on Economic Cooperation. Important bilateral discussions at
official level were also held with the USSR, Japan and Malaysia.
In keeping with the importance which we have always
attached to the concept of international cooperation in development, India played an active role in the negotiations leading to
the adoption of an international development strategy for the
Second Development Decade on the occasion of the 25th
anniversary of the United Nations. This strategy provides the
framework for international economic cooperation to supplement the efforts of the developing countries towards rapid
economic and social development.
In accordance with our policy of placing increasing emphasis
on the development of economic cooperation in South and
South East Asia, the Ministry continued to take an active interest
in the meetings of ECAFE. The Minister for External Affairs
led the Indian delegation to the meeting of the Council of
<pg71>
Ministers for Asian Economic Cooperation in Kabul in December, 1970, at which the Kabul Declaration was adopted. This
Declaration laid the foundation for the schemes for Regional
Trade and established institutional machinery for the launching
of the Asian Clearing-Union and the Asian Trade Expansion
Programme. An Indian expert was made available under the
ITEC programme to assist the ECAFE Task Force in work
connected with the Integrated Strategy for Regional Economic
Cooperation.
CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC
INDIA USA AFGHANISTAN MAURITIUS FIJI MALAYSIA MALDIVES INDONESIA ETHIOPIA
URUGUAY SAUDI ARABIA SYRIA YEMEN LATVIA LEBANON NIGER NIGERIA SENEGAL
RUSSIA IRAQ TOTO IRAN TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO LIBYA OMAN BURMA KENYA NORWAY
JAPAN

Sep 08, 1970

External Publicity
CHAPTER XI
EXTERNAL PUBLICITY
Our External Publicity has to be assisted or projected not
only abroad but also here at home. Much of it originates
in India itself. Our publicity abroad depends on news reports
originating in India, from various special correspondents; news
reports flashed around the world by international wire agency
representatives here; editorial comment which is usually made
abroad; news stories on radio and television networks; publicity
derived through projection of Indian music, art, painting, books,
exhibitions etc. The spectrum of the work of the External
Publicity Division, therefore, is wide. In this situation, before
India can be projected appropriately and favourably abroad, the
Division has necessarily to ensure that the coverage of Indian
foreign policy in the Indian Press itself is accurate, full and
objective. This is necessary because most foreign Pressmen,
Journalists, reporters and television and radio representatives
from abroad, living in India, derive part, if not most, of their
news, views and comments from the Indian Press itself. Hence
the necessity for a continuing process of detailed and intensive
briefing of our own journalists about our foreign relations.
The Division of External Publicity continued to work in close
coordination with the various Divisions of the Ministry and with
other concerned Ministries in the Government of India. A close
working rapport was maintained in particular with All India
Radio. especially its External Services Division, with the Press
Information Bureau, the Photo Division and the Films Division
of the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting and the Commercial Publicity Wing of the Ministry of Foreign Trade.
<pg72>
<pg73>
The Division maintained daily contact with 59 Indian
Missions abroad through radio transmissions sent through
telecast machines. Teleprinter links with our Missions abroad
were utilised for transmitting news, statements and background material. On the basis of these transmissions most of

our publicity posts abroad are able to issue daily and periodical
news bulletins and news digests in English and other local
languages. These bulletins were broadcast twice a day (at
2.00 P.M. and 8.00 P.m. IST).
The Production Unit of the Division maintained a continuous
flow of material to our Missions abroad. 64 feature articles.
including photo-features, on various aspects of India were prepared and sent to our Missions. These articles sought to project an image of India steadily advancing in the economic and
industrial spheres and also provided a glimpse of India's heritage
and social and cultural life.
The Production Unit also published pamphlets and periodicals.
During the year 25 pamphlets were produced. 107 newspapers and journals were supplied to our Missions abroad. The
regular publications of the Division, Foreign Affairs Record,
(Monthly), Indian and Foreign Review (Fortnightly) and its
French language version Courrier de l `Inde (Fortnightly), were
continued. Our Missions brought out approximately 82 regular
periodical publications and 27 ad hoc ones. Foreign-language
versions of some pamphlets covering 10 languages were produced by our Missions for local distribution.
Approximately 3,875 books an different subjects were added
to the External Publicity Division Library and to the libraries of
Indian Missions. 5,250 copies of Hindi books were supplied
to our Missions in Mauritius and Burma for presentation to
schools and learned Associations and Clubs, for publicity purposes.
<pg74>
The audio-visual medium was extensively used to project the
image of India and to counter anti-Indian propaganda. Nearly
33,930 photographs on various subjects, including 1,773 largesize photographs, were distributed to our Missions for publicity
and display purposes.
Five sets of 119 photographs entitled Our India, depicting
various aspects of India's industrial, social, cultural and economic
life, were exhibited in Moscow, Lagos, Cairo, Djakarta, Rangoon and Dar-es-Salaam. Special photographic material was
supplied during the year to Djakarta for holding an exhibition
in connection with the Islamic Conference.
Large-size photographs, books, reproductions of paintings,
handicrafts, textiles, folk paintings and plaster-casts were supplied to our Missions in Vientiane for participation in the That
Luang Festival. Photographs, films, reproductions of paintings
and drawings and a set of books on Tagore were supplied to our
Mission in Caracas to commemorate the birthday of Gurudev
Rabindranath Tagore.

On the occasion of the Buddhist Month Celebration, 127
books on Buddhism were supplied during the year to the Indian
Embassy in Kathmandu for distribution.
In connection with the birthday of Mahatma Gandhi, tapes
of favourite bhajans of Bapu together with Ram Dhun were
supplied to Indian Missions in Belgrade and Caracas.
The Indian Mission in Buenos Aires organised a Book Fair
in which books projecting the image of India were exhibited.
About 1,000 prints of various documentary films were
supplied by us to our Missions. 12 documentary films were
assigned for production to the Films Division by the Ministry of
External Affairs during the year.
<pg75>
A film on India and the United Nations entitled, United
Endeavour, was produced in connection with the celebration
of the Silver Jubilee of the United Nations. Another film, NonAlignment for Peace and Progress, was produced in connection
with the Summit Conference of Non-Aligned Nations at Lusaka.
During the period under review 29 documentary films were
previewed and approved for supply to our Missions for noncommercial exhibition abroad.
Six documentary films, including one on the visit to India,
of Dr. Ramgoolam, Prime Minister of Mauritius, four on.
Buddhism and one on physical education were presented during the period.
The Films Division were asked to make compilation films
on the visits of the President to the USSR and other East European countries and the Prime Minister to Mauritius, Lusaka
and New York.
It is proposed to buy 5 prints each of 4 feature films and,
4 children's feature films. Each set will be sub-titled in
English, French, Spanish and Arabic respectively, These sets
will then be circulated to our Missions abroad in four different
zones, enabling our Missions to hold informal film-weeks in
their areas.
The following audio-visual equipment was supplied to
Indian Missions abroad: one projector each to Singapore,
Medan, Baghdad, Phnom Penh, Addis Ababa and Peking; a
cinema, van each to Georgetown, Kathmandu and Suva; a taperecorder each to Vientiane and Rabat and a radio set to Sofia.
Gramophone records were supplied to our Missions in accordance with their demands.
During the period under review, 486 Press releases were
issued on various subjects. The material from these releases,

was used by the local Press, All India Radio and the Transmission Unit of the External Publicity Division.
<pg76>
Logistic facilities and assistance were provided to 39 visiting foreign journalists and 7 TV teams from Japan, Sweden,
Switzerland, West Germany, France, Yugoslavia and the United
Kingdom.
Press and Radio/TV delegations from Sudan, Iran, France.
Turkey, Australia, UAR, Chile, Afghanistan, Mauritius,
Malaysia, Syria, West Germany, Kenya, Nigeria, Fiji, Malawi,
Yugoslavia, Poland, Czechoslovakia and Hungary were invited
to visit India. Local hospitality was extended to these journalists and delegations numbering 36 in all.
Travel facilities were also provided to a representative of
the Times of India to visit East Europeon countries during the
period under review. In addition, logistic and professional facilities were also provided to 51 Indian journalists.
The Head of the Division in the Ministry of External Affairs
is the official spokesman and is incharge of briefing Indian and
foreign Press correspondents in Delhi. He is available to the
Press every day, and also holds special briefing sessions once a
week, when Parliament is not in session. During the Parliament
session, while journalists are welcome to see him for backround information, etc., no formal briefings are given.
INDIA
USA BURMA MAURITIUS RUSSIA EGYPT INDONESIA LAOS CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC
VENEZUELA NEPAL YUGOSLAVIA ARGENTINA ZAMBIA REPUBLIC OF SINGAPORE CAMBODIA
ETHIOPIA IRAQ FIJI GUYANA BULGARIA MOROCCO JAPAN SWEDEN FRANCE GERMANY
SWITZERLAND IRAN SUDAN AFGHANISTAN AUSTRALIA CHILE TURKEY KENYA MALAWI
MALAYSIA NIGER NIGERIA SYRIA HUNGARY NORWAY POLAND SLOVAKIA
Sep 08, 1970

Cultural Centres
CHAPTER XII
CULTURAL CENTRES
The Government of India gave full effect this year to its
long-standing policy, in accordance with the Vienna Conven-

tion, that foreign Missions may be permitted to run branch
offices, including cultural centres, only in places where they
have diplomatic or consular representation. Such offices in
non-consular cities were required to be closed by May 16, 1970.
The Government also drew up a framework within which
the activities of foreign cultural centres in India can be promoted
in accordance with national requirements. The policy of the
Government of India continues to be to develop cultural relations with friendly foreign countries in the light of our country's
own requirements.
The Government have given consideration to expanding the
activities of the Indian Council for Cultural Relations, administrative control of which has been transferred to the Ministry
of External Affairs with effect from April, 1970. The Governing Body of ICCR have given approval to a number of new
schemes for this purpose, including the establishment of Indian
cultural centres abroad, improvement of source material on
India, orientation programmes for Indian and foreign scholars,
academic exchanges, and centres and chairs of Indian studies
in foreign universities, with special emphasis on linking research
projects, besides expansion of existing programmes for translation of Indian works into foreign languages, for publications and
for the welfare of foreign students.
43 M of EA-6.
<pg77>
INDIA
AUSTRIA
May 16, 1970

Protocol Matters
CHAPTER XIII
PROTOCOL MATTERS
During the period under review the Government of Panama
proposed the establishment of diplomatic relations with India
by concurrently accrediting their Ambassador in Cairo to New
Delhi. Senor Licenciado Armando Moreno Guleen has been
nominated concurrently as the Ambassador of Panama to India.

The Government of Guyana have also proposed the establishment of diplomatic relations with India by Concurrent Accreditation. The proposal has been-agreed to in principle.
Consular Relations were established with the German Democratic Republic at the level of a Consulate General.
The Government of Pakistan has opened an Assistant High
Commissioner's Office at Bombay.
The total number of Diplomatic, Missions in India is 75. A
list of the Diplomatic Missions in India and Sub-Offices of the
High Commissions is given at Appendix IV.
The total number of Consular Posts at present is 111. A list
of Consular Posts is given at Appendix V.
<pg78>
PANAMA
INDIA EGYPT GUYANA PAKISTAN
May 16, 1970

Passport, Visa & Consular Services
CHAPTER XIV
PASSPORT, VISA & CONSULAR SERVICES
The Passport and Visa Division continues to be responsible
for the implementation of the passport and emigration policy of
the Government and for the control of the Central Passport and
Emigration Organisation and the Regional Passport and Emigration Offices in Bombay, Calcutta, Delhi, Lucknow, Madras,
Chandigarh and Ahmedabad.
The number of passport applications carried over from the
previous year and those received during 1970 (up to 30th November) was 1,82,472. Against this, 1,59,283 passports were
issued. The percentage of rejected applications was a little more
than .001 per cent of the total number of applications received.
The remaining applications were under consideration on that
date (Nov 30, 1970).
At Headquarters, 3,069 official passports and 656 diplomatic

passports were provided. 2,786 visas were issued to foreigners.
Agreement has been reached between the Governments of
India and Yugoslavia for the abolition of short-term visas for
Yugoslav nationals visiting India and Indian nationals visiting
Yugoslavia. Under the Agreement, nationals of India and Yugoslavia holding valid passports are permitted visa-free entry for
a stay of up to 90 days. The waiver of visas does not exempt
Compliance with the rules and regulations in force in India and
Yugoslavia regarding employment and residence.
Action is being taken to revise the Passport Rules, 1967,
with a view to streamlining procedures and facilitating the quicker
issue of travel documents.
<pg79>
<pg80>
According to the statistics published by the British Government, Indian visitors to Britain during 1969 numbered 59,319 as
against 65,665 during 1968. The net inflow of Indian nationals,
to Britain, after deducting the number of those who left Britain.
during 1969, came to 12,338. The corresponding figures in.
earlier years were 28,340 in 1968, 22,638 in 1967, 18,402 in.
1966, 18,815 in 1965 and 15,513 in 1964. During 1970 (up to
30th November), 824 employment-vouchers were issued by
the British Government to Indian nationals for employment, in,
Britain, against 2,438 during 1969, 3,892 during 1968, and
4,126 during 1967.
During 1970 (up to 30th November), 688 Indian nationals,
had to return after reaching Britain as they were refused admission into that country by the British immigration authorities,
mostly on the ground that they were seeking employment in
Britain without employment-vouchers.
The Protector of Emigrants at air and sea-ports registered,
under the Emigration Act, 1962, the departure of 1,819 skilled
workers, most of whom went to Persian-Gulf and East African
countries.
INDIA
CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC USA YUGOSLAVIA
Nov 30, 1970

Administration and Organisation

CHAPTER XV
ADMINISTRATION AND ORGANISATION
Sardar Swaran Singh took over the portfolio of Minister of
External Affairs from Jun 27, 1970, from Shri Dinesh
Singh. Shri Surendra Pal Singh continues as Deputy Minister.
Shri V. H. Coelho relinquished charge of the post of Secretary (East) in June, consequent on his appointment as Ambassador to Japan. Shri S. K. Banerjee assumed charge of the post of
Secretary (East) in July, 1970. Shri S. Krishnamurti, Additional
Secretary (Administration) was appointed as Secretary (West)
from 3rd November, 1970, in place of Shri Kewal Singh,
who was appointed Ambassador to the Federal Republic of
Germany.
Shri Avtar Singh, formerly High Commissioner in Kenya,
joined at Headquarters as Additional Secretary (Administration)
in November, 1970. The post of Additional Secretary (Legal &
Treaties) fell vacant in November, 1970, on the demise of Dr. K.
Krishna Rao.
In order to provide more effective representation and better
coordination With various U.N. Offices in Europe, India's Consulate-General in Geneva was converted into a Permanent Mission
to U.N. Offices in Europe from 10th September, 1970 and
Shri N. Krishnan was appointed Ambassador to U.N. Offices in
Europe. Simultaneously, a Vice-Consulate was set up in
Geneva to look after Consular activities. An Embassy was
established in Sanaa (Yemen Arab Republic) with effect from
20th October, 1970. For the present, it is headed by a
Charge d'Affaires of the rank of First Secretary. A Mission at
Embassy level with a resident Charge d'Affaires has started
functioning in Ulan Bator (Mongolia).
<pg81>
<pg82>
India has 102 resident Missions (excluding 10 Trade Missions
under the Ministry of Foreign Trade and two Special Offices in
Bhutan and Sikkim) with a total strength of 566 officers and
2,843 staff members, including locally-recruited staff. These Missions, together with concurrent accreditations, carry Indian representation to 174 capitals and cities. A list of Indian Missions and
Posts is given in Appendix VI.
In accordance with the instructions of the Ministry of Home
Affairs, special efforts are being made to increase the use of Hindi
in official work at Headquarters and in our Missions abroad.

It is proposed to create 10 posts of Hindi Attaches in selected
Missions.
The Cabinet has approved the re-organisation of the stenographers sub-cadre of the Indian Foreign Service, Branch `B',
on the pattern of the Central Secretariat Stenographers Service.
Efforts were continued during the year to achieve progressive
officer-orientation in the Indian Foreign Service with a view to
cutting out delays and for more efficient performance.
During the year, the Foreign Service Inspectors undertook
four inspection tours of fortyfour Missions, viz., Nairobi, Mogadiscio, Dar-es-Salaam, Lusaka, Blantyre, Kampala, Conakry,
Dakar, Buenos Aires, Rio-de-Janeiro, Santiago, Lima, Havana,
San Francisco, New York (Permanent Mission and Consulate
General), London, Washington, Colombo, Kandy, Kathmandu,
Moscow, Berlin (East and West), Hamburg, Frankfurt, Bonn,
Oslo, Copenhagen, The Hague, Brussels, Geneva, Berne, Prague,
Sofia, Bucharest, Belgrade, Paris, Rome Ankara, Kunwait, Bahrain, Muscat and Dubai. On the basis of their recommendations,
staffing patterns, and the quantum of foreign allowance,
representational grant and daily allowance have been revised. The
adequacy of allowances is kept under constant review on the basis
of data relating to the prevailing prices of consumer goods, etc.
furnished from time to time by our Missions.
<pg83>
The expenditure of this Ministry during 1970-71 is estimated
to be of the order of Rs. 4609.79 lakhs, details of which are
as follows:
(a) EXTERNAL AFFAIRS.

(Rs. in lakhs)

Headquarters

270.19

missions/Posts

1241.54

OTHER ITEMS:
Contributions to the United
Nations and Commonwealth
Secretariat, etc.
Demarcation of Boundaries

376.98
61.40

Central Passport & Emigration
Organisation.

47.72

Other miscellopeous items

587.94
2585.77

(b) OTHER REVENUE EXPENDITURE
SUBSIDIES AND AID:
Subsidy to Sikkim

260.00

Subsidy to Bhutan

638.25

Aid to Napal

1004.85

Aid to other developing Countries
in Asia and Africa

60.00

OTHER ITEMS:
External Affairs Hostel

2.55

I.C.M. Directorate (Nepal)

15.28

Grant-in-aid, contributions, etc.

43.09
TOTAL 2024.02
GRAND TOTAL 4609.79

<pg84>
Details of sub-headwise expenditure on Headquarters, Missions/Posts abroad and on External Publicity are given in
Appendix VIII.
The expenditure of Rs. 12.41 crores on our Missions/Posts
abroad is small compared to the total expenditure of about
190.00 crores incurred on Administrative Services from the Cen-

tral Revenues; it works out to 0.4 per cent of the Government's
total disbursements from revenue. Indian plays an important
role in international affairs and require wide representation
abroad for the promotion of her interests. Our Missions have a
minimum complement of staff and are run at a low cost compared
to Missions of most other countries. The staffing patterns acid
the expenditure on Missions are kept under constant review to
ensure the utmost economy, without detriment to efficient performance.
In order to give incentives for efficient performance promotions to grades I to V of the I.F.S. are made strictly on merit
For lower grades promotion is on a basis of seniority-cum-merit
Accelerated promotion from IFS(B) to IFS(A) and from lower
to higher grades are also made on merit in order to give incentives for meritorious work.
A Welfare Organisation in the Ministry exists to look after
the social, educational and other needs of all those serving at
Headquarters and abroad. Special attention is given to the
needs and requirements of the lower grades e.g. peons, chaffeurs
and others particularly in regard to accommodation.
JAPAN
GERMANY KENYA INDIA USA SWITZERLAND YEMEN MONGOLIA BHUTAN CENTRAL
AFRICAN REPUBLIC GUINEA UGANDA ZAMBIA ARGENTINA CHILE CUBA PERU SENEGAL
NEPAL SRI LANKA UNITED KINGDOM RUSSIA BELGIUM CZECH REPUBLIC DENMARK
NORWAY BULGARIA FRANCE ITALY ROMANIA TURKEY YUGOSLAVIA OMAN
Jun 27, 1970

Appendix I INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCES,
CONGRESSES, SEMINARS
APPENDIX I
INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCES, CONGRESSES, SEMINARS, ETC. IN WHICH
INDIA PARTICIPATED IN 1970
ABROAD
1. ECAFE-26th Session, Bangkok, Apr 14, 1970 -27 April, 1970.
2. ECAFE-15th Session of the Asian Industrial Development Council,
Bangkok, 15-21 January, 1970.
3.

ECAFE-Transport and Communications Committee-18th Session
Bangkok, 16-24 February, 1970.

4.

ECAFE-Committee on Trade, 13th Session, 2-11 February, 1970,
Bangkok.

5.

ECAFE-Second Meeting of the Representatives of the National
Units. Bangkok, 17-19 February 1970.

6.

ECAFE-Meeting of the Prominent Regional Economists to discuss
economic situation and policies, Bangkok, 29-31 January,
1970.

7.

ECAFE-Inter-Governmental Consultations on Regional Cooperation
in Rice in Asia, Bangkok, 26 February-9 March, 1970.

8.

ECAFE-Seminar on Statistics of Price and Quanta, Bangkok, 15-22
June, 1970.

9.

ECAFE-Second Asian Conference on Industrialization, Tokyo, 8-21
September, 1970.

10.

ECAFE--Meeting of Working Group of Experts on Construction
Statistics, Bangkok, 25-30 May, 1970.

11.

ECAFE--joint Session of Working Party of Sen or Geologists and SubCommittee on Mineral Resources Development, Bandung, 20-31
August, 1970.

12.

ECAFE-Seminar on Economic Development Problems: Recent
Development in Planning Techniques, Dushambe, the USSR,
9-22 September, 1970.

13. ECAFE/UNIDO-Preliminary Training Seminar on Low Cost Automation-Quezon City, Philippines, 3-29 September, 1970.
14.

SEAMES (South East Asian Ministers of Education Secretariat)-Fifth
Regional English Language Centre Seminar on English Language,
Testing, Bangkok, 25-30 May, 1970.
<pg85>
<pg86>

15. ECAFE-Sixth Session of the Asian Highway Coordinating Committee, Bangkok, 26-28 October, 1970.
16. ECAFE-Ninth session of Water Transport Sub-Committee, Bangkok,
15-22 October, 1970.
17.

ECAFE-Regional Seminar on the Role of Youth in National Development, Bangkok, 24 September-3 October, 1970.

18.

ECAFE.. Second Session of the Telecommunication Sub-Committee,
Bangkok, 16-20 November, 1970.

19.

ECAFE-Workshop on Uraban Traffic and Transportation, Bangkok,
8-17 December, 1970

20.

ECAFE-Second Session of Asian Coconut Community, Bangkok,
7-9 January, 1970.

21.

ECAFE-Third Session of the Asian Coconut Community, Manila,

29 September-5 October, 1970.
22.

ECAFE-First Session of Second Asian Highway Motor Rally Committee, Islamabad, Pakistan, 9-10 February 1970.

23.

ECAFE-Second Session of Second Asian Highway Motor Rally,
Teheran, March/April, 1970.

24.

ECAFE-Third Session of Second Asian Highway Motor Rally, Kabul,
6-7 June. 1970.

25.

ECAFE-Fifth Session of Second Asian Highway Meter Rally,
Kathmandu, 22-23 September, 1970.

26.

ECAFE-Sixth Session of Second Asian Highway Motor Rally Da---14 November, 1970.

27.

ECAFE-Workshop of the Computer Processing of Censuses of Pepulation, Bangkok, 22 September-9 October, 1970.

28.

ECAFE-Conference of Asian Statisticians, loth Session, Kuala
Lumpur (Malaysia), 2-14 December, 1970.

29.

ECAFE-Sixth Working Group of Experts on
Bangkok, 17-23 December, 1970.

30.

ECAFE-Working Party of Experts on Trans-Asian Railway, Bangkok
26 November-5 December, 1970.

31.

ECAFE-Working Party on Social Developement, Bangkok, 8-15
December, 1970.

32.

ECAFE-Informal Meeting of National Units, Bangkok, 6-9 November, 1970.
<pg87>

National Accounts,

33. ECAFE/IMF-Informal Consultations on Regional Trade and Monetary Cooperation, Copenhagen, 24 September, 1970.
34. ECAFE-Meeting of Government and Central Bank Officials on Regional Trade and Monetary Cooperation, Bangkok, 2-9 November,
1970.
35. ECAFE-Fourth Meeting of Council of Ministers for Asian
Economic Cooperation, Kabul, 16-19 December, 1970.
36. 26th Session of the UN Commission on Human Rights, New York, 24
February--27 March, 1970.
37.

21st Session of the UN Commission for Social Development, Geneva,
4-20 March, 1970.

38.

Third International Tamil Conference, Paris, 15-18 July, 1970.

39.

Fourth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the
Treatment of Offenders, Tokyo, 17-26 August, 1970.

40.

Second Special Session of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs, Geneva,
28 September-2 October 1970.

41.

Fifth Regional Conference of Asian National Commissions for Cooperation with UNESCO, Teheran, 5-10 September, 1970.

42.

16th General Conference of UNESCO, Paris, 12 October-14 November,
1970.

43.

1970 Pledging Conference for the UN/FAO World Food Programme,
New York, 23 January, 1970.

44.

6th UN Regional Cartorgraphic Conference for Asia and the Far East,
Tehran, 24 November-6 October, 1970.

45.

International Seminar on the role of Youth in the Promotion and protection of Human Rights, Belgrade, 2-12 June, 1970.

46.

World Youth Assembly, New York, 9-17 July, 1970.

47.

BIRPI-Meeting of the Preimlinary Working Group on the Draft patent
Cooperation Treaty. Geneva, 9-20 March, 1970.

48.

IUOTO-Meeting held in Geneva, 2-7 February, 1970.

49.

Inter-Parliamentary Union Spring Meeting, Monaco, March-April, 1970

50.

Diplomatic Conference on Patent Cooperation Treaty, 1970.
ton, 25 May, 1970.

51.

First Ordinary Session of the General Assembly of the World Intellectual Property Organisation (WIPO), Geneva, 21-29 September, 1970.

52.

General Assembly (Extraodinary) of the Interpational Union of Official
Travel Organisation (IUOTO), Mexico, 7-12 September, 1970.
<pg88>

53.

BIRPI-Administrative Meeting, Geneva, 21-29 September, 1970

54.

Ad-hoc Preparatory Committee for Reunion of the Berne Convention,
Geneva, 19-21 May, 1970.

55.

10th International Congress of Radiation Research, Evan (France), 28
June-4 July, 1970.

56.

49th Session of the UNIDROIT Governing Council, Rome, 13-16
July, 1970.

57.

Extraordinary Session of the Permanent Committee of BIRPI, Geneva,
14-18 September, 1970.

58.

10th Meeting of UNIDROIT Financial Committee, Rome, 22 June
1970.

59.

International Parliamentary Conference, Cairo, 2-5 February, 1970.

60.

1970 International
March, 1970.

61.

Third Congress of the Eastern Regional Organisation for Planning &
Housing (EROPH) and the Canberra Forum-70, Canberra, 23-29
May, 1970.

Washing-

Solar Energy Society Conference, Melbourne,

62.

International Science Council Meeting of the Standing Committee
on Environmental Disruption, Tokyo, 5-20, March, 1970.

63.

XX International Congress of AIESEC (Association Internationale
des Students en Science Economique at Commerciale), Tokyo, 8-16
March, 1970 and the Asian Pre-Congress in Osaka, 2-4 March, 1970.

64.

III International Congress on Asian Archaeology, Bahrain, FebruaryMarch, 1970.

65.

XI International Grassland Congress, Surfers Paradise (Queensland),
Australia, 13-23 April, 1970.

66.

Annual International Rice Research Conference held at Las Banos
(Philippines) from 20-24 April, 1970.

67.

XVIII International Dairy Congress, Sydney, October, 1970.

68.

Third Assembly of the Press Foundation of Asia. Manila, 11-13 April
1970.

69.

Symposium on Food, Science & Nutritional Diseases in the Middle East,
Shiraj (Iran). 27-30, April. 1970.

70.

8th Near East & South Asia Irrigation Practices Seminar, Kabul, 19
September-1st October. 1970.

71.

International Institute of Adult Literacy Methods-Meeting of the Advisory Committee, Tehran, 27-28 April, 1970.

72.

International Coop. Alliance Commodity Conference and Regional
Seminar on Cooperative Marketing of Fruits and Vegetables, Tokyo,
12-27 May, 1970.
<pg89>

73.

Asian Regional Meeting 1970 of Commonwealth Pharmaceutical Association, Karachi, 6-8 July, 1970.

74.

International Conference on Ferrites, Tokyo, 6-9 July, 1970.

75.

XV Congress of the international Society of Urology, Tokyo, 17-18
July, 1970.

76.

International Conference on Micro Electronics, Sydney, 18-21 August,
1970.

77.

Afro-Asian Rural Reconstruction Organization-Conference, Tokyo.

78.

Sixth Asian Pacific Dental Congress, Bangkok, 18-22 November, 1970.

79.

14th Session of the Indo-Pacific Fisheries Council, Bangkok, 18-22
November, 1970.

80.

International Symposium on Results of Research on Representative &
Experimental Basis, Wellington (New Zealand), 1-9 December,
1970.

81.

Working Party Session of the IRC, Teheran, 30 November-14 December, 1970.

82.

Sixth General Assembly of the Asian Parliamentarians Union Siagon
8-12 December, 1970.

83.

2nd Congress of the Asian-Oceanic Postal Convention, Kyoto, 5-17
November, 1970.

84.

FAO Technical Conference on Marine Pollution and its Effects on
Living Resources, Rome, 9-18 December, 1970.

85.

Seventeenth Session of the Inter-Governmental Committee of the World;
Food Programme, Rome, 6-15 April, 1970.

86.

FAO-Second International Congress on Dairy Education & Training,
Copenhagen, 24-30 August, 1970.

87.

FAO-55th Session of the FAO Council, Rome, 16 November-1 December, 1970.

88.

ECOSOC-Committee on Non-Governmental Organization Meeting,
February, 1970, New York.

89.

Seminar on Participation of Women in the Economic Life of their
Countries", Moscow, 8-21 September, 1970.

90.

3rd International Congress of Transplatation Society to be held at
The Hague, 7-11 September, 1970.

91.

39th Conference of the Sugar Technologists Association of Cuba, Havana,.
5-7 October, 1970.

92.

1st International Domiciliary Nursing Congress, Melbuurne, 1-8
February, 1970.
<pg90>

93.

Medical Women International Congress to be held in Melbourne, February, 1970.

94.

21st Conference on Analytical Chemistry Applied Spectorscopy, London,
26 February-24 March. 1970.

95.

4th International Symposium on Colour Chemistry at Lindan Lake
Constance, West Germany and Switzerland, 11-15 May, 1970.

96.

Mediterranean and Middle Eastern Orthopaedic Surgery and Traumatology Congress, Turkey, 7-13 May, 1970.

97.

Sixth World Highway Conference, Montreal (Canada), 6-10 October,
1970.

98.

Sixth World Congress of Gynaecology and Obstetrics, New York, 1318 April, 1970.

99.

15th Session of International Commission for Uniform Method of
Sugar Analysis, London, 10-15 May, 1970.

100. Symposium on Arthropod Cell Cultures, Bethsade (USA), 17-18
March, 1970.
101. First Argentine Congress on Pedriatics and New Born Babies Pathology,

Mar Plate, Argentine, 3-6 December, 1970.
102. 12th International Symposium (Bio-Chemical Engineering Service),
Budapest, 10-13 March, 1970.
103. 22nd Meeting of the Bureau of the Intelligence Social Security
Association, Brussels (Belgium), February, 1970.
104. International Conference on Social Work Education Population and
Family Planning, Hawaii (Honolulu), 8-13 March, 1970.
105. International Symposium of the ISP Commission VII (Photo-Interpretation), Dresden (GDR), 10-16 September, 1970.
106. VII International Congress of Criminology, Madrid, 21-27 September, 1970.
107. International Assembly Convened by the American Association of
junior Colleges, Honolulu (USA), 26-5 March, 1970.
108. International Macy Conference on Development, Migration and Medical
Manpower, Italy, 4-10 October, 1970.
109. International Conference on "Planning Rodent Control", Lake Come,
Italy, 18-20 March, 1970.
110. XIV International Conference of Agriculture Economists, Soviet Union
24 August-2 September, 1970.
111. 11th Congress of the International Gas Union, Soviet Union, 9-13
June, 1970.
112. International School of Physics "Enrice Ferni", Verenna (Italy), 29
June-8 August, 1970.
<pg91>
113. V International Festival of Folk Songs, Rio de Janeiro, 23 September4 October, 1970.
114. Third International Congress of Odontiology-cum-Stomatology, Athens
(Greece), 5-8 October, 1970.
115. International Petroleum Exposition at Tulsa (USA), 15-23 May, 1970.
116. Fifth Maritime Container Service and Equipment Exhibition and Symposium, Chicago, 12-30 April, 1970.
117. 7th International Congress of Plant Protection, Paris, 21-25 September, 1970.
118. 39th Meeting of the Organisation of Criminal Police, Belgium, 5-10
October, 1970.
119. Fourth Session of the Council of the International Sugar Organisation,
London, 19-25 March, 1970.
120. Seminar on Land Utilisation and Cultivation Planning, Berlin, 17
April-14 May, 1970.
121. International Committee of Legal Metrology, The Hague (Nether-

land) from 20-24 April, 1970.
122. 5th International Tobacco Scientific Congress, Hamburg, 14-19
September, 1970.
123. XXVIII International Competition of Artistic Ceramics, Feenza (Italy),
26 July-4 October, 1970.
124. XII International Congress of General Physicians, IGLS/TYROL,
Austria, September, 1970.
125. Symposium on Solar Terrenal Physic 1970, Leningrad, 11-19 May,
1970.
126. 13th Plenary General Assembly of COSPAR, Leningrad, 22-29 May,
1970.
127. Symposium on Future Application of Satellite Beacon Experience,
Liandan, 2-4 June, 1970.
123. North American Fuel Technology Conference, Ottawa (Canada),
31 May-3 June, 970.
129. U.N. Panel Meeting of Water Resources Development Policies, Buenos
Aires, June, 1970.
130. 38th General Conference of the OIE, Paris, 25-30 May, 1970.
131. Sixth Congress of the Federation Prestressed Conference Concrete
Structure in Czechoslovakia, France and Baghdad, May, 1970.
132. Fifth International Conference on Cartography, Strese (Italy), 3-9
May, 1970.
<pg92>
133.

Fourth International Conference of the Institute for Conservation of
Historic & Artistic Work, New York, 7-13 June, 1970.

134.

Symposium on Social Policy and Planning, Denmark, 20 June-2nd
July, 1970.

135.

Inter-Regional on Financing of Housing and Urban Development,
Copenhagen, 25 May-10 June, 1970.

136.

Symposium Overcoming Protein Malnutrition in
Countries, Frankfurt, 19-23 May, 1970.

137.

International Town Planning Competition starts from 23 to 30 September, 1970, in Vienna.

138.

Tenth Congress of the International Commission on Large Dams,
Montreal, 1-5 June, 1970.

Developing

139.

VII International Television Festival, Prague, 15-21 June, 1970.

140.

Meeting of the Smithsonian Institute, Washington, 16-19 May, 1970.

141.

1970-Congress and General Assembly of International Silk Association, Paris, 11-15 May, 1970.

142.

First International Symposium on Traffic Control, Paris, 1 to 5
June, 1970.

143.

Twentyfirst Exchange Meeting of the International Commission on.
Irrigation & Draining, Ankara, 24-27 June, 1970.

144.

1970 Seminar on Problems of Manpower Resources Development,.
Washington, 20 May for a period Of 13 weeks.

145.

Seminar on Industrial Processing of Agricultural Products, Berlin, 24June-17 July, 1970.

146.

International Symposium on the Biology of the Spuncula, Kotor,
Yugoslavia, 17-26 June, 1970.

147.

International Union for Child Welfare, Geneva on 18 June, 1970.

148.

International Congress of Historical Sciences, Russia, August, 1970.

149.

First Session of the 29th Plenary Meeting of the International Cotton,
Advisory Committee, 18 June, 1970, Washington.

150.

International Electrical and Telecommunication Centre Fair, Lima,.
23-29 November, 1970.

151.

IX Biennial International Congress of Poetry, Knokke (Belgium), 3
to 7 September, 1970.

152.

Colloquim, National Institute of Health, Bethesda Maryland, 20-21
July, 1970.

153.

Second Asian Population Conference, Bangkok, 10-13 June, 1970.
<pg93>

154.

Conference on Human Survival, U.N. Headquarters, 25-28 May, 1970.

155.

Second International Congress of Parasitology, Washington, 6-12
September, 1970.

156.

IX International Congress of Analomist, Leningrad (USSR), 17-22
August, 1970.

157.

VII International Mining Congress, Lima, 1970.

158.

International Study Conference on the Current and Future Problems of
Acridology, London, 6-16 July, 1970.

159.

Conference on Role of Science and Technology in Economics Development, 2-4 December, 1970.

160.

9th Commonwealth Entomological Conference, London, 1-13 July
1970.

161.

Fifth Symposium of the International Association for Hydraulic Research, Stockholm, 23-26 August, 1970.

162.

International Conference on Educational and Professionalism in Hote
and Catering Industry at UK.

163.

Inter-regional Seminar on Control of Echivococedr (Hydatidoss), Buenos

Aires, 14-19 September, 1970.
164.

International Seminar and Research & Education in Physics in the University of Uppsala, Sweden, 1969-70.

165.

5th international Advanced Course for Young Medical Officers, Ecole
Federale, Macolin, 14-24 September, 1970.

166.

Third International Congress of Food Service & Technology, Washington, 9-I4 August, 1970.

167.

23rd Session of International Conference on Large High Tension Electric System (CIGRE), Paris, 24 August-2 September, 1970.

168.

International Congress of Historical Sciences, Moscow, 16-23 August,
1970.

169.

Annual Meeting of the Permanent and Enlarged Committee of the
International Union of Forestry Research Org., Rome, 16-18
September, 1970.

170.
Meeting of the Executive Committee of International Council in
Archives,
London, 7-9 September, 1970.
171. International Congress of Mathematics at Nice, France,
September, 1970.
172.
173.

1-10

International Evaluative Conference on Cross Cultural Research at
Paris, 24-29 August, 1970.
Second World Economatric Congress, England, 8 September, 1970.

43 M. of H.A.-7.

<pg94>

174.

Second International Symposium and Literchange on Tropical Root
and Tuber Crops, University of Hawaii, 2-31 August, 1970.

175.

Symposium on the Development and Utilisation of Geothermal Resources, Pisa, Italy, 22 September-1 October, 1970.

176.

International Union of Pure and Allied Physics, USA, 17-21 August,
1970.
177. Second Congress of the International Society for Rock Mechanics,
Belgrade in September, 1970.
178.

6th Meeting of the Commonwealth Scientific Committee, Jamaica,
1-14 November, 1970.

179.

XIII International Congress of Haematology, Munich, 2-8 August,
1970.

180.

VI Congress of the World Federation of Hemophilia, Badan (Vienna),
25-27 July, 1970.

181.

Regional Congress of the International Union of Physiological Science,
Brasov (Romania), 10-16 August, 1970.

182.

VI Three yearly Congress of the International Union for Moral and
Social Action, Brussels, 21-24 September, 1970.

183.

First World Symposium on Arid Zones, Mexico City, 9-12 November.
1970.

184.
185.
186.
187.
188.

International Fair, Vienna (Austria), 6-13 September, 1970.
International Congress of Mathematicians, Nice (France) from 3 September, 1970.
55 Esperanto World Congress, Vienna, 1-8 August, 1970.
X International Congress of Microbiology, Mexico City, 4-15 August,
1970.
V General Conference in Montreal, 30 August-5 September, 1970.

189.

Third International Congress of Food Science and Technology, Washington, 9-14 August, 1970.

190.

Science of Survival International Congress "SOS/70", Washington,
9-14 August, 1970.

191.

Mini Seminar on Cooperative Education, Sweden, 31 August, 1970.

192.

132nd Annual Meeting of the British Association for the Advancement of Science, Dirhan (UK) from 2-9 September. 1970.

193.

International Publishers Association, London, 30 September 2 October, 1970.

194.

International Machine Tool Exhibition at Hanover (West Germany),
6-15 September, 1970.
<pg95>

195.

International Machine Tool Design and Research Conference, Birmingham (UK), September, 1970.

196. International Conference on Copper and its Alloys, Amsterdam (Netherlands).
197. VI World Congress of Cardiology held in London from 6-12 September, 1970.
198. 7th International Congress on Diabetes held in Buenos Aires from 23-28
August, 1970.
199. 13th International Symposium on Combustion in USA during last
week of August, 1970.
200. First International Post Graduate Course in Geothermics held in Pisa
(Italy) from 21 September-1 October, 1970.
201. International Symposium on Photogrammetry held in Dresden (GDR)
from 10-16 September, 1970.
202. Third International Health Conference held in London during Septem-

ber, 1970.
203. Round Table Conference "Training of Research Workers in the Medical Sciences International Aspects" held in Geneva from 10-11
September, 1970.
204. V International Competition and Festival "George Evescu" held in
Bucharest in September, 1970.
205. General Assembly of the International Astronomical Union and its
Executive meetings held at Brighton, Sussex (England) from 16-27
August, 1970.
206. Conference for the Restoration of the Fourth International in Paris or
Brussels.
207. 16th International Convention on Civilisation Diseases, Nutrition and
Living Conditions at Trier (West Germany) and Luxembourg from
14-20 September, 1970.
208. Symposium on Evaluation of Plants to be held in Hungary from 1-4
September, 1970.
209. Third Chronosona Conference at Oxford (UK) from 22-25 September,
1970.
210. Inter-governmental Conference on Institutional Administrative and
Financial Aspects of Cultural Policies to be held at Venice from
24 August-2 September, 1970.
211. Second FAO International Conference on Dairy Education & Training
at Copenhagen from 24-31 August, 1970.
212. 18th International Conference of Transport and Communications to
be held at Genoa (Italy) from 12-16 October, 1970.
<pg96>
213. Conference on Burns to be held in Prague (Czechoslovakia) from 20-25
September, 1970.
214. Sixth Meetings of International Gravity Commission held in Paris from
7-12 September, 1970.
215. International Symposium on Hydrometry held at Koblenz (West
Germany) from 14-18 September, 1970.
216. XVII General Assembly the meeting of the Council & Permanent
Committee of the ISSA from 21-30 September, 1970 in Cologne (FR
Germany).
217. Course of Rehabilitation of Tranmatic Cases held at Poland from 12
October-7 November, 1970.
218. Conference of the International Law Associations held at The Hague
from 21 August, 1970.
219. International Biological Programme Technical Meeting on Biological
Nitrogen Fixation held at Waseningen from 31 August-4 September, 1970.

220. International Seminar on Physical and Town Planning in Overall
Development held in Berlin from 5-30 October, 1970.
221. XII International Workshop on Seed Pathology to be held in Solve
(Sweden) from 31 August-5 September, 1970.
222. Seminar on Frequency Management and Use of Radio Frequency
Spectrum held at Geneva from 7-18 September, 1970.
223. Third International Symposium on Traffic Education to be held at
San Marino (Italy) from 11-13 September, 1970.
224. International Fair St. Erichs held at Stockholm (Sweden) from 2-13
September, 1970.
225. 19th Session of the Legal Sub-Committee on Peaceful Use of Outer
Space at Geneva held from 8 June-3 July, 1970.
226. Meeting of UNCITRAL Working Group on International Sale of
Goods at New York from 5-16 January, 1970.
227. Third Session of United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law (UNCITRAL) in New York from 6 April-18 May, 1970.
228. Republican Meeting on Theoretical and Inorganic Chemistry held in
Gluy (Romania) from 6 October, 1970.
229. XIII International Conference on Coordination Chemistry held in
Grecow and Zakopane from 14-22 September, 1970.
230. World Consultation on the Use of Wood in Housing held in
Vancoouver BC from 5-16 July, 1970.
<pg97>
231. Meeting of the Temporary Advisers on Administrative Principals of
Drug Management held at Geneva from 8-11 September, 1970.
232. 7th International Congress of Supreme Audit Institutions held
at Montreal from 7-16 September, 1970.
233. Meeting and Study Tour to be held in Hungary from 6-16 September,
1970.
234. X International Nematology Symposium held at Pascare (Italy)
from 8-11 September, 1970.
235. Third International Liquid Conference held at Berlin from 23-28
August, 1970.
236. Planning Committee Tele-Council and Operations & Maintenance
Committee Meeting held at Montreal in September, 1970.
237. International Symposium on the Ecological Base for Environmental
Management and the Associated Meeting held at Rome from
28 September-2 October, 1970.
238. International Association for the Evaluation of Educational Achievement
to be held in Netherland from 26-30 October, 1970.
239. VII World Congress on Sociology to be held in Varna (Bulgaria) from

14-19 September, 1970.
240. International Union for Biological Sciences Meeting in Washington
from 4-11 September, 1970.
241. International Symposia of ISP Commission II, IV and VII to be held
between 8-21 September, 1970 at Delft (Netherland), Dresden
(GDR) and Munich (West Germany).
242. Second International Conference on Cooperative Thrift and Credit
to be held at Paris from 21 September-26 September, 1970.
243. Seminar on Transfer and Innovation in the Technological Field to
be held in Medellin (Colombia) in the Second half of September, 1970.
244. 3rd International Congress for Social physhiatry to be held at Zagreb
(Yugoslavia) from 21-27 September, 1970.
245. 35th Conference in Buenos Aires from 4-14 September, 1970.
246. 3rd International (Oxford) Chromosome Conference to be held at
Oxford from 22-25 September, 1970.
247. Third International Consultative Conference of the Graphic (Printing)
Workers Trade Union Representatives to be held in Warsaw (Poland)
from 13-16 October, 1970.
248. Symposium on Indian Art to be held in USA from 1-30 October, 1970.
249. Meeting of the All National Technical Officer., to be held in Rome from
16-21 November, 1970.
<pg98>
250. Third International Symposium on Fresh Water from Sea to be held
in Duprovink (Yugoslavia) from 13-17 September, 1970.
251. Course on Sector and Project Planning in Transportation to be held
in Washington from 9 October-17 December, 1970.
252. Third International Health Seminar to be held at Dusseldorf, West
Germany from 4-16 October, 1970.
253. 29tb Plenary Meeting of the International Cotton Advisory Committee to be held in Washington from 12 to 21 October, 1970.
254.

Annual Statutory Meeting of the Executive Committee of the International Institute of Refrigeration to be held in Paris from 20
September-16 October, 1970.

255. Meeting of the Scientific Group of Medical Manpower Planning to
be held in Geneva from 2-10 November, 1970.
256. Meeting of Panel of Experts on Human Resources Indicators to be
held in Paris from 16-19 December, 1970.
257. Meeting of the IUFRO Working Group to be held in Reinbek (West
Germany) from 23-27 November, 1970.
258. Seminar on the Development of the Cooperative Movement to be
held in Bulgaria from 30 September-30 October, 1970.

259. Second World Conference on National Parks to be held at Yellowstone
from 18-26 September, 1970.
260. Conference on Chemistry and the Living Place to be held at Bari from
9-10 October, 1970.
261. Prague Quadrennial 1971 to be held in Prague from 8-27 June, 1971.
262. Symposium Organised by the International Committee on Prosphetics
and Orthotics to be held in Copenhagen from 6-15 November1970.
263. 6th World Conference Trade Union International of Agri. & Forestry
Products Works, Nicosia from 22-26 October, 1970.
264. Seminar on Problem of Collective Contracts and Wage Trend in the
Chemical and Rubber Industries, Moscow from 20-22 October,
1970.
265. 4th International Conference at Prague from 26-31 October, 1970.
266. Meeting of Working Group Experts of Technical Panel on the Supersonic Transport Operations to be held at Paris from 27-31 October,
1970.
267. International Seminar on Social Problems to be held in Berlin from 12
November-4 December, 1970.
268.

First World Congress of Sophrology to be held at Barcelone (Spaiu)
from 1-5 October, 1970.
<pg99>

269. 6th International Trade Conference of Trade Unions of Workers in
the Metal Industries at Budapest (Hungary) from 10-14
November, 1970.
270. International Seminar of Mobilisation on Human Resources for Social
and Economic Development to be held in Strasbor (France) from
26 November, 1970.
271. Second International Clean Air Congress to be held in Washington
from 6-11 December, 1970.
272. World Congress of Vice Chancellors and Principals of Universities and
Colleges to be held at Buenos Aires in September, 1970.
273. First meeting of the World Federation of Engineering Orgs. to be
held in Monte Carlo, Monaco from 1-3 December, 1970.
274. Meeting of the Expert Committee on Biological Standardisation to be
held in Geneva from 17-25 November, 1970.
275. Conference on Population convened by the International Union for
Scientific Study on Population to be held in London from 1-3
December, 1970.
276. Third Annual Population Conference to be held in Paris from 1-4
December, 1970.

277. First Session of the International Hydrological Decade Coordinating
Council Constitute an Ad hoc Working Group to be held at Pans
from 8-11 December, 1970.
278. 21St Session of the Maritime Safety Committee held in London from
23-27 February, 1970.
279. 24th Session of the Council & Meeting on Working Group of IMCO
held in London, 11-15 May, 1970.
280. Extraordinary Session of the Assembly of ICAO in Montreal from
16-30 June, 1970.
281. 4th Session of the Ad hoc Working Group on Facilitation set up
by IMCO in London, from 31 August-4 September, 1970.
282. 25th Session of IMCO Council in London from 3-6 November, 1970.
283. International Conferences of Plenipotentiaries Convention by
at Hague from 1-16 December, 1970.

ICAO

284. Third Session from 14th to 18th December, 1970 of the IMCO Working
Group on International Compensation Fund for Oil Pollution Damage in London.
285. Meeting of the Ad hoc Committee on Iron Ore of UNCTAD at Geneva
from 19-23 January, 1970.
286. 40th Session of Committee on Mfgrs. of UNCTAD held at Geneva from
19-30 January, 1970.
287. 26th Session of the Contracting Parties to the GATT at Geneva 16-28
February, 1970.
<pg100>
288. Fourth Session of the Special Committee on Preferences of the UNCTAD
at Geneva from 31 March-17 April, 1970.
289. Second Resumed 9th Session of the Trade and Development Board at
Geneva from 2 February-13 February, 1970.
290. First Meeting of the IMCO Working Group on International
Compensation Fund for Oil Pollution Damage in London, 1 June5 June, 1970.
291. Fourth Session of the Committee on Shipping of the UNCTAD held
at Geneva from 20 April-1 May, 1970.
292. UNCTAD-2nd Meeting of the Expert Group on landlocked countries in Geneva, from 11 May-5 June, 1970.
293. Second Session of IMCO Working Group on International Compensation Fund for Oil Pollution Damage in London from 21-25
September, 1970.
294. Fourth Session of the Spl. Committee on Preferences of the UNCTAD
held at Geneva from 21 September-9 October, 1970.
295. Tenth Session of the UNCTAD Trade & Development held in Geneva,
from 26 August-18 September, 1970.

296. Meeting of the Group of Experts in Geneva from 7-15 October, 1970.
297. Inter-regional Seminar on the Planning of the Foreign Trade Sector
held in Geneva from 21 September-2 October, 1970.
298. 48th Session of ECOSOC, New York, from 11-28 May, 1970.
299. 49th Session of ECOSOC, New York from 6-31 July, 1970.
300. Inter-Regional Seminar on Pre-vocational Training, Education and
Vocational held in Moscow from 12-31 October, 1970.
301. 23rd World Health Assembly held in Geneva from 5 May, 1970.
302. Meeting on National Health Planning, Bangkok from 12-14 October, 1970.
303. Inter-regional Seminar on Organisation of Cholera ProgrammeManila, 6-9 October, 1970.
304. Symposium on joint activities of WHO Virus Reference Centre and
National Virus Laboratories in Tokyo, from 16 November-5 Decber, 1970.
305. Third Regional Conference of Internaational Hospital
held in Sydney from 27 September-2 October, 1970.

Federation

306. WHO Seminar on Water Pollution Control held at Bangkok from
414 November, 1970.
307. International Symposium on Criteria and Methodology of Nutritional
Status held in Tokyo in November, 1970.
308. Inter-country Workshop on Health Education in Schools, at Bangkok
from 16-27 November, 1970.
<pg101>
309. Inter-Regional Training Course on Public Health Aspects of Environmental Pollution Control in Osaka (Japan) from 23 November
-19 December, 1970.
310. 178th Session of the Governing Body of ILO and Meetings of Working
Party on structure of ILO Geneva, January-March, 1970.
311. 5th Session of the I.L. Conference of ILO, Geneva, 3-25 January,
1970.
312. 9th Session of the Coal Mines Committee of ILO-Geneva, 4-10
March, 1970.
313. 178th Session of the Governing Body for the ILO-Geneva, 23
February--6 March, 1970.
314. Sixth Session of ILO Committee on Work on Plantation, Geneva,
7-18 December, 1970.
315. 9th Session of the Metal Trades Committee of ILO, Geneva, 14-25
September, 1970.
316. 1970 Seminar on problems of Manpower Resources Development at
Washington and ILO H. Qrs., at Geneva.

317. 55th (Maritime) Session of the International Labour Conference of the
ILO, Geneva, 14-31 October, 1970.
318. 14th Session of the Asian Advisory Committee of the ILO in Bandung
(Indonesia), 14-25 September, 1970.
319. Meeting of the ILO Panel of Consultants on Workers' Education at
Geneva in September-October, 1970.
320. Seminar on Trade Union Youth participation in National Education and
Development Programme, Florence 16-25 September, 1970.
321. Inter-Regional Seminar on Institutional Aspects of Rural Development (Sofia), 21 September-10 October, 1970.
322. 181st Session of the Governing Body of the ILO at Geneva from 16
November to 20 November, 1970.
323. Intensive Top-level Symposiumon Future Industrial Relations
Development, Kandy (Ceylon), 25-30 October, 1970.
324. UNIDO-Industrial Development Board-4th Session held in Vienna
from 20-30 April, 1970.
325. Third International Conference on Asian Archaeology held in Behrain.
326. International Federation for Documentation held in Tokyo.
327. 9th International Ineral Processing Congress held in Prague
1-6 June, 1970.

from

328. 32nd Session of the International Conference on Education held in
Geneva from 1-9 July, 1970.
<pg102>
329. 36th Session of the International Organisation of Library Works for
20 days in Moscow from 28 August, 70.
330. 14th Session of the International Head & Zinc Study Group held in
Geneva from 11-20 November, 1970.
331. International Organisation for Standardisation held in Stockholm from
16-23 April, 1970.
332. WMO-Conference on Global Atmospheric Research Programme at
Brussels from 16-20 March, 1970.
333. UNDP Pledging Conference for 1970.
334. UNESCO-IX International Conference of ISSUE (International Society on the Musical Education) held in Moscow from 9-14
July, 1970.
335. International Conference on the Institutional, Administrative and Financial aspects of culture policies held in Venice (Italy) from 24
August-2 September, 1970.
336. Meetings of Ironores held in Ottawa from 21 September-22 October,
1970.

337. Meeting of Leather held in Ankara from 21-29 September, 1970.
338. Meeting of Agricultural Food Products and its Sub-Committees held in
Ankara from 21-25 September, 1970.
339. Meeting of Spinning Preparatory held in Milan (Italy) on
and 29 October, 1970.

28

340. Meeting of ISO/TC Ship-building Details held in London from 79 October, 1970.
341. APO Symposium for Small Business Management Trainers and Consultants in Honolulu from 24 November, 1970 for 5 days.
342. Meeting of ISO/TC-134 (Fertilizers and Soil Improvers held in
Paris from 20-22 October, 1970.
343. Seminar on Modem Training Methods in Hong Kong under APO
from 2-14 November, 1970.
344. APO Seminar on "Value Analysis" held in Manila from
November, 1970.

23-27

345. Symposium on Storage and Transportation of Food Grain held in Tokyo
from 14 to 19 October, 1970.
346. Meeting of UNCITRAL Working Group on International Sale of
Goods at Geneva from 7-18 December, 1970.
347. Meeting of Non-aligned Asian States held in Colombo held on 23
and 24 March, 1970.
<pg103>
348. Session of the Special Committee on Principles of International Law
concerning Friendly Relations and cooperation among States held
in Geneva from 30 March-1 May, 1970.
349. Preparatory Meeting of Non-aligned States held in Dar-es-Salaam from
13 - 17 April, 1970.
350. 22nd Session of the International Law Commission held in Geneva
from 4 May-10 July, 1970.
351. Meeting of the U.N Committee on Sea-bed held in Geneva from 328 August, 1970.
352. Third Summit Conference of Non-aligned Countries held in Lusaka
from 8-10 September, 1970.
353. Commemorative Session of the United Nations held in New York from
14-24 October, 1970.
354. 25th Session of the U. N. General Assembly held in New York from 15
September - 17 December, 1970.
355. Second Meeting of the representatives of the National Units held in
Bangkok (17-19 February, 1970) (ECAFE).
356. 26th Session of the ECAFE held in Bangkok (14-27 April, 1970)-

357. Council of Minister's Conference held in Kabul (16-19 December.
1970). (under the auspices of ECAFE).
358. First Asian Conference of Ministers responsible for Social Welfare held
in Manila.
359. One Asian Assembly held in Manila.
360. 5th Ministerial Meeting of the Asian & Pacific Council held in Wellington.
361.
362. 21st Colombo Plan Consulatative Committee Meeting held in Manila.
363. Annual Conference of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association
held in Canberra.
364. AMSA held in Manila.

<pg104>
IN INDIA

1. ECAFE-4th Session of Second Asian Highway Motor Rally Committee,
New Delhi, 17-18 August, 1970.
2. Conference of University Vice-Chancellors of Asian and South Pacific
countries organised by the University Adult Education Association
with the assistance of UNESCO, Madras, 26-30 December, 1970.
3. Meeting of Experts on Life-Long Integrated Education organised by
Asian Institute of Educational Planning & Administration, New Delhi,
10-18 August, 1970.
4. 23rd Session of the WHO Regional Committee for SEA, New Delhi,
22-28 September, 1970.
5. Conference on Teaching of Human Reproduction in Medical Schools,
New Delhi, 7-11 December, 1970.
6.

23rd Session of the Committee for SEA, New Delhi, 22-28 September,
1970.

7.

Regional Meeting in Health Laboratory Services, New Delhi, 16-20
November, 1970

8.

Seminar on Teaching of Psychiatry, New Delhi, 17-19 September, 1970.

9.

WHO International Seminar on Surveillance and Assessment in Small
Pox Eradication at New Delhi from 30 November-5 December, 1970.

10.

Seminar on the Pre-School Child, Madras, 14-19 December, 1970.

11.

ILO Asian Regional Seminar on Workers' Role on Population question,
Bangalore, 16-18 May, 1970.

12.

International Conference on Shellac, Calcutta, 2-3 December, 1970.

13.

Afro-Asian Convention on Nehru, New Delhi, November, 1970.

14.

ICFTU-38th International Course of the Asian Trade Union College,
New Delhi, August, 1970.

15.

World Parliament of Religious for Unitive understanding, Sasthamcottah
(Kerala), September-October, 1970.

16.

International Seminar on Pulping Bagasse and Agricultural Residue,
New Delhi, 7-8 November, 1970.

17.

Post Graduate Training Course on the Chemistry of Natural Products
sponsored by the UNESCO held in the University of Delhi, Del
26 October - 19 December, 1970.
<pg105>

18. International Symposium on Pathological Wilting of Plants Organised at
the Centre of Advanced Study in Bombay by the University of
Madras in December, 1970.
19. Conference
Delhi.
20.

of the International Aeronautical Federation held in

International Seminar on World Philosophy organised jointly by
Madras University/Vishwa Bharati/BHU at Madras in November
-December, 1970.

21. First Asian Congress of Dermatology held at Madras from 29-31
January, To O.
22. 4th Training Course on Sociological and Economic problems in the
field of housing held in New Delhi from 11 May-22 June, 1970.
23. Seventh Conference of Commonwealth Statisticians held in New
Delhi in November, 1970.
24.

Conference of the 7th informal meeting of the Directors of Civil Aviation, South East Asia and South Pacific, New Delhi, OctoberNovember, 1970.

25.

Plenary Assembly Session of Consultative Committee of Radio and
International Telecommunications Union (under the aegis of U.N.)
held in Delhi from 21 January - 12 February, 1970.

26.

Conference on Management in Publishing under UNESCO auspices.

27. Seminar on the problems of Transition from Laboratory Research
to Industrial Application held in India (9-14 December, 1970,
by UNESCO's local Office of Scientific and Industrial Research.
28. ILO Asian Employers' Seminar on Population and Family Questions
held in India from 18-23 January 1970.
29. UNESCO-Regional Centre for Science and Technology for South
Asia-Seminar on integrated Survey and Range Ecology and Management at the Central Aid Zone Research Institute, jodhpur.
30.

4th International Symposium on Earthquake Engineering held in
Roorkee from November 14-16, 1970.

31.

Symposium on Development of Entreprennial talent held in New
Delhi from 14-18 December, 1970.

32.

ECOSOC-Seminar on Educational Statistics held in New Delhi from
7-18 December, 1970 jointly organised by UNESCO and Asian
Institute of Educational Planning and Administration.

33.

Seminar on Application of Modern Management Techniques to
Educational Administrative in New Delhi from 2-12 November,
1970.

34.

First Meeting of the Standing Committee of Non-aligned States held
in New Delhi on 8 and 9 June, 1970.

INDIA
USA JAPAN INDONESIA PHILIPPINES PAKISTAN AFGHANISTAN NEPAL MALAYSIA
DENMARK SWITZERLAND FRANCE CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC IRAN YUGOSLAVIA
MONACO MEXICO ITALY EGYPT AUSTRALIA BAHRAIN LATVIA NEW ZEALAND RUSSIA
CUBA UNITED KINGDOM GERMANY TURKEY CANADA HUNGARY BELGIUM SPAIN GREECE
AUSTRIA IRAQ NORWAY SLOVAKIA CZECH REPUBLIC PERU SWEDEN JAMAICA OMAN
ROMANIA THE NETHERLANDS ARGENTINA POLAND SAN MARINO BULGARIA COLOMBIA
CROATIA CYPRUS HONG KONG SRI LANKA ZAMBIA
Apr 14, 1970

Appendix II INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATION
APPENDIX II
INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATION OF WHICH INDIA IS A MEMBER:
UNITED NATIONS AND ITS SPECIALISED AGENCIES
1. General Assembly.
2. Committees and Commissions of the General Assembly:
(a) Committee of the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space.
(b) Committee on Agreements for a Conference for the purpose
Reviewing the Charter.

of

(c) Special Committee of 24 on the situation with regard to the implementation of the Declaration on the granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples:
(i) Its Working Group.
(ii) Sub-Committee on Petitions.
iii) Sub-Committee (Pacific Territories).
(d)

Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation.

(e)

Peace Observation Commission.

(f)

Disarmament Commission.

(g)

International Law Commission.

(h)

Administrative Tribunal.

(i)

Committee on Disarmament.

(j)

Investment Committee.

(k)

Scientific Advisory Committee.

(l)

Special Committee on Peace-Keeping Operation.

(m)
Special Committee on Principles of International Law concerning
Friendly Relations and Cooperation among States.
(n)

Committee on Conferences.

(o)

U.N. Council for Namibia.

(p)

U.N. Commission on International Trade Law.

(q) Sea-Bed-Committee on the Peaceful uses of the See-Bed and the
Ocean floor beyond the limits of National jurisdiction.
<pg106>
<pg107>
Special Committee on the Rationalization of the Procedures and Organisation of the General Assembly.
(s) Special Committee on Apartheid.
(t) A Special Ad hoc Committee of Government Experts for reviewing
salary structure of the U.N.
3. Functional Commissions and Committees of ECOSOC:
(a)

Commission of Human Rights.

(b)

Commission on Narcotic Drugs.

(c)

Statistical Commission.

(d)

Population Commission.

(e)

Commission for Social Development.

(f)

Regional Commission of the Economic and Social Council: Economic
Commission for Asia and the Far East (ECAFE).

(g)

Advisory Committee of Experts on the Prevention of Crime and
treatment of offenders.

(h)

Preparatory Committee for the U.N. Conference on Humar Environment.

(i)

Preparatory Committee for the Second Development Decade.

4.

Other Subsidiary Bodies of the Economic and Social Council:
(a) Executive Board of U.N. Children's Fund(UNICEF).
(b) UN/FAO Inter-Governmental Committee on the World Food
Programme.
(c) Advisory Committee on the Application of Science and Technology
and Development.
(d)

Committee for Programme and Coordination.

(e)

Committee on Non-Governmental Organisation.

(f)

Committee for Development Planning.

(g)

Ad hoc Working Group on the question of a Declaration on International Economic Cooperation.

(h)

Programme Committee of UNICEF.

(i)

FAO/UNICEF Joint Policy Committee.
<pg108>

5. U.N. Conference on Trade and Development (The Trade and Development Board):
(a)

Committee on Commodities.

(b)

Permanent

(c)

Sub-Committee on Commodities.

Committee on Manufactures.

(d)

Committee on Invisibles and Financing related to Trade.

(e)

Iater-Governmental Group on Supplementary Financing.

(f)

Committee on Shipping.

6. United Nations Industrial Development Organisation (UNIDO)-Industrial Development Board.
7. United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)-Government Council.
8. U.N. Specialised Agencies:
(a)

Food and Agricultural Organisaton (FAO)

(b)

International

Bank of Reconstruction and Development (IBRD).

(c)

International

Finance Corporation (IFC).

(d)

International

Monetary Fund (IMF).

(e)

International

Development Association.

(f)

International Civil Aviation Organisation(ICAO).

(g)

International

Telecommunication Union (ITU).

(h)

World Meteorological Organisation (WMO).

(i)

Universal Postal Union (UPU).

(j)

International Labour Organisation (ILO).

(k)

U.N. Educational Scientific and Cultural Organisation (UNESCO).

(l)

World Health Organisation(WHO).

(m)

Inter Governmental Maritime Consultative Organisation (IMCO).

9. International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA).
10.

Asian Institute for Economic Development & Planning, Bangkok.

11.

Asian Coconut Community, Manila.

12.

Asian Statistical Institute, Tokyo.

13. International Social Security Association.
<pg109>
14.

International Commission on Irrigation & Drainage, New Delhi

15.

International Commission on Large Dams, Paris.

16.

International Association of Hydraulic Research, Delft, Netherlands.

17.

International Association for Bridges and Structural Engineering.

18.

British Electrical and Allied Industries Research Association, Leather
Head, Surrey (England).

19.

World Energy Conference.

20.

Conference Internatinale des Grands Reseaux Electriques, Paris.

21.

International Society of Soil Mechanics and Foundation Engg.

22.

Permanent International Association of Navigation Congress, Brussels
(Belgium) (is a co-member with the Min. of Shipping and Transport).

23.

International Railway Congress Association, Brussels.

24.

International Union of Railways.

25.

UIC and Office for Research and Experiments, Paris.

26.

International Telecommunications Satellite Consortium (INTELSAT).

27.

Commonwealth Telecommunications Conference.

28.

Commonwealth Telecommunications Council.

29.

Commonwealth Telecommunications Bureau.

30.

Afro-Asian Rural Reconstruction Organisation (AARRO), New York.

31.

Commonwealth Agriculture Bureau (CAB), London.

32.

International Office of Epizootics (OIE), Paris.

33.

Commonwealth Forestry Institute, Oxford.

34.

International Council for Bird Preservation, London.

35.

International Dairy Federation, Brussels.

36.

International Seed Testing Association, Brussels.

37.

International Society for Horticultural Science, The Hague.

38.

World Poultry Science Association, London.

39.

International Agricultural Aviation, Centre, The Hague.

40.

International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources,
Switzerland.

41.

U.N. FAO Inter-Governmental Committee on the World Food Programme, Rome.

43

M. of E. A.-8.

<pg110>

42.

International Secretariat for Voluntary Service, Geneva.

43.

Commonwealth Air Transport Council (CARC).

44.

Commonwealth Advisory Aeronautical Research Council, London

45.

International Criminal Police Commission, Paris.

46.

International Lead and Zinc Study Group, New York.

47.

International Tin Council, London.

48.

International Union of Geodesy and Geophysics, Paris.

49.

International Union of Geological Science, Copenhagen.

50.

Asian Development Bank, Manila.

51.

Colombo Plan.

52.

Special Commonwealth Assistance Plan..

53.

International Union for Scientific Study of Population (IUSSP).

54.

International Statistical Institute.

55.

International Council of Building Research Studies and Documentation
Rotterdam.

56.

Afro-Asian: Housing Conference, Cairo (Since 1970).

57.

International

Astronomical Union.

58.

International

Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry,

59.

International

Scientific Radio Union.

60.

International

Union of Biological Science.

61.

International

Geographical Union.

62.

International

Union of Pure and Applied Physics.

63.

International

Union of Crystallography.

64.

International
History).

Union of History & Philosophy of Science (Division of

65.

International

Union of Biochemistry.

66.

International

Union of Theoretical & Applied Mechanics.

67.

International

Methematical Union.

68.

International

Union of Pure and Applied Biophysics.

69.

International

Union of Physiological Sciences.

70.

<pg111>
International Union of Nutritional Sicences.

71.

International Union of Geological Sciences.

72.

Special Committee of International Bilogical Programme (SCIBP).

73.

Special Committee on Oceanic Research (SCOR).

74.

Special Committee on Space Research (COSTAR).

75.

Asian Broadcasting Union (ABU).

76.

Commonwealth Broadcasting Conference (CBC).

77.

CILECT (Centre International De Liaison Des Ecoles de Cinema
El De Television at Paris.

78.

FIAP (International Federation of Film Archives), Brussels.

79.

International Council of Scientific Unions (ICSU).

80.

World Petroleum Congress.

81.

Asian Statisticians Conference.

82.

Commonwealth Statisticians Conference.

83.

International Statistical Institute, The Hague.

84.

Commonwealth War Graves Commission.

85.

International Committee on the History of the Second World War.

86.

Commonwealth Defence Science Organisation.

87.

Commonwealth Committee of Defence (Operational Clothing and
Combat Equipment).

88.

International Committee of Military Medicine and Pharmacy (Belgium).

89.

General Agreement on Tariffs & Trade.

90.

International Customs Tariff Bureau, Brussels.

INDIA
USA NAMIBIA RUSSIA PHILIPPINES JAPAN LATVIA FRANCE BELGIUM UNITED
KINGDOM SWITZERLAND ITALY CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC DENMARK SRI LANKA
EGYPT
Apr 14, 1970

Appendix III GOVERNING BODIES OF THE SPECIALISED AGENCIES AND OTHER AGENCIES

APPENDIX III
GOVERNING BODIES OF THE SPECIALISED AGENCIES AND OTHER AGENCIES
OF THE UNITED NATIONS OF WHICH INDIA IS A MEMBER
--------------------------------------------------------------------------Sl.
Name of Agency
Governing body
No.
on which India is
represented
--------------------------------------------------------------------------1. International Labour Organisation (ILO) Governing Body.
2.

Food & Agricultural Organisation (FAO)

Council.

3.

United Nations Educational Scientific
and Cultural Organisation (UNESCO)

Executive Board.

4.

World Meteorological Organisation
(WMO)

Executive Committee.

5.

International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO)

Executive Council.

6.

Intergovernmental Maritime Consultative Organisation (IMCO)

Executive Board.

7.

International Telecommunication Union
(ITU)

Administrative Council.

8.

Universal Postal Union (UPU)

Executive Council.

9.
10.
11.

International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA)
United Nations Children's Fund
(UNICEF)
United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development (UNCTAD)
Board.

12.

United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)

13.

United Nations Institute for Training
and Research (UNITAR)

14.

United Nations Industrial Development
Organisation (UNIDO)
Board.

15.

World Food Programme (WFP)
Committee.

Board of Governors.
Executive

Board.

Trade and Development

Governing Council.
Board of Trustees.

Industrial Development
Intergovernmental

<pg112>
<pg113>
--------------------------------------------------------------------------Sl.
Name of Agency
Governing body
No.
on which India is
represented
--------------------------------------------------------------------------In addition to the above, India is represented by an Executive Director on
each of the following Organisations :
1. International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD).
2. International Monetary Fund (IMF).
3. International Finance Corporation (IFC).
4. International Development Association (IDA).
--------------------------------------------------------------------------INDIA
USA
Apr 14, 1970

Appendix IV FOREIGN DIPLOMATIC MISSIONS IN INDIA
APPENDIX IV
FOREIGN DIPLOMATIC MISSIONS IN INDIA

(I) Embassies
1. Afghanistan
2. Algeria
3. Argentina
4. Austria
5. Belgium
6. Brazil]
7. Bulgaria
8. Burma
9. Cambodia
10. Chile
11. China
12. Colombia
at Tokyo)
13. Congo (Democratic Republic)
14. Cuba
15. Czechoslovakia
16. Denmark
17. Ethiopia
18. Finland
19. France
20. Germany (Federal Republic)
21. Greece
22. Holy See (Apostolic Nunciature)
23
Hungary
24. Indonesia
25. Iran
26. Iraq
27. Ireland
28. Italy

29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.
41.
42.
43.
44.
45.
46.
47.
48.
49.
50.
51.
52.
53.
54.
55.

Japan
Jordan
Kuwait
Laos
Lebanon
Mexico
Mongolia
Morocco
Nepal
Netherlands
Norway
Paraguay (stationed
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Rumania
Saudi Arabia
Spain
Sudan
Sweden
Switzerland
Syria:
Thailand
Turkey
U.S.S.R.
U.A.R.
U.S.A.

<pg114>
<pg115>
56. Uruguay

58. Yemen

57. Venezuela

59. Yugoslavia

(II) High Commissions
1.

Australia

2.

Britain

10.

Nigeria

3.

Canada

11.

Pakistan

4.

Ceylon

12.

Singapore

5.

Ghana

13.

Tanzania

6.

Kenya

14.

Trinidad and Tobago

7.

Malaysia

15.

Uganda

8.

Mauritius

(III) Legation
1. Albania (stationed at Baghdad)

9.

New Zealand

(IV) Sub-offices of High Commissions
1.

Office of the Deputy High Commission for Australia in Bombay.

2.

Office of the Deputy High Commission for Australia in Calcutta.

3.

Office of the Deputy High Commission for Britain in Bombay.

4.

Office of the Deputy High Commission for Britain in Calcutta.

5.

Office of the Deputy High Commission for Britain in Madras.

6.

Office of the Deputy High Commission for Ceylon in Madras.

7.

Office of the Assistant High Commission for Malaysia in Madras.

8.

Office of the Deputy High Commission for Pakistan in Calcutta.

9.

Office of the Assistant High Commission for Pakistan in Bombay.

INDIA
AFGHANISTAN JAPAN ALGERIA JORDAN ARGENTINA KUWAIT AUSTRIA LAOS USA
BELGIUM LEBANON BRAZIL MEXICO BULGARIA MONGOLIA BURMA MOROCCO CAMBODIA
NEPAL CHILE CHINA NORWAY COLOMBIA PARAGUAY CONGO PERU CUBA
PHILIPPINES POLAND SLOVAKIA DENMARK ETHIOPIA SAUDI ARABIA FINLAND SPAIN
FRANCE SUDAN GERMANY SWEDEN GREECE SWITZERLAND SYRIA HUNGARY THAILAND
INDONESIA TURKEY IRAN IRAQ IRELAND ITALY URUGUAY YEMEN VENEZUELA
YUGOSLAVIA AUSTRALIA NEW ZEALAND NIGER NIGERIA CANADA PAKISTAN REPUBLIC
OF SINGAPORE GHANA TANZANIA KENYA TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO MALAYSIA UGANDA
MAURITIUS ALBANIA
Apr 14, 1970

Appendix V FOREIGN CONSULAR OFFICES IN INDIA
APPENDIX V
FOREIGN CONSULAR OFFICES IN INDIA
--------------------------------------------------------------------------Sl.
No.
Country
Location
Status
--------------------------------------------------------------------------1.

Afghanistan

Bombay

Consulate General

2.

Austria

Bombay

Hony. Consulate General

3.

Austria

Madras

Hony. Consulate

4.

Austria

Calcutta

Hony. Vice Consulate

5.

Belgium

Bombay

Consulate General

6.

Belgium

Calcutta

Consulate General

7.

Belgium

Madras

Hony. Consulate

8.

Bolivia

Bombay

Hony. Consulate

9.

Bolivia

Calcutta

Hony. Consulate General

10.

Brazil

Bombay

Consulate

11.

Brazil

Calcutta

Hony. Consulate

12.

Brazil

Madras

Hony. Consulate

13.

Burma

Calcutta

Consulate General

14.

Colombia

Bombay

Hony. Consulate

15.

Costa Rica

Bombay

Hony. Consulate General

16.

Costa Pica

Madras

Hony. Consulate General

17.

Czechoslovakia

Bombay

Consulate General

18.

Czechoslovakia

Calcutta

Consulate General

19.

Denmark

Bombay

Hony. Consulate General

20.

Denmark

Calcutta

Hony. Consulate

21.

Denmark

Madras

Hony. Consulate

22. Dominican Republic
Bombay
Hony. Consulate General
--------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg116>
<pg117>
--------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
--------------------------------------------------------------------------23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.

Dominican Republic
Equador
El Salvador
Ethiopia
Ethiopia
Finland
Finland
Finland
France
France
France
France
Germany
Germany
Germany
Greece

Calcutta
Calcutta
Calcutta
Bombay
Calcutta
Bombay
Calcutta
Madras
Bombay
Calcutta
Cochin
Pondicherry
Calcutta
Madras
Bombay
Bombay

Hony. Consulate
Hony. Consulate
Hony. Consulate
Hony. Consulate General
Hony. Consulate General
Hony. Consulate
Hony. Consulate
Hony. Consulate
Consulate General
Consulate General
Hony. Consular Agent
Consulate General
Consulate General
Consulate General
Consulate General
Hony. Consulate General

39.
Greece
Calcutta
Hony. Consulate General
40.
Haiti
Calcutta
Hony. Consulate
41.
Haiti
Bombay
Hony. Consulate
42.
Indonesia
Bombay
Consulate
43.
Indonesia
Calcutta
Hony. Consulate
44.
Iran
Bombay
Consulate General
45.
Iran
Hyderabad
Consulate General
46.
Iraq
Bombay
Consulate General
47.
Israel
Bombay
Consulate
48.
Italy
Bombay
Consulate General
--------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg118>
--------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
--------------------------------------------------------------------------49.
50.
51.
52.
53.
54.
55.
56.
57.
58.
59.
60.
61.
62.
63.
64.
65.
66.
67.
68.
69.
70.
71.
72.
73.
74.

Italy
Italy
Japan
Japan
Japan
Jordan
Kuwait
Lebanon
Liberia
Mauritius
Nepal
Netherlands
Netherlands
Netherlands
Netherlands
Nicaragua
Nicaragua
Norway
Norway
Norway
Norway
Panama
Panama
Peru
Peru
Philippines

Calcutta
Cochin
Calcutta
Bombay
Madras
Bombay
Bombay
Calcutta
Calcutta
Bombay
Calcutta
Bombay
Calcutta
Madras
Cochin
Bombay
Calcutta
Bombay
Calcutta
Cochin
Madras
Bombay
Calcutta
Bombay
Calcutta
Bombay

Consulate General
Hony. Consular Agent
Consulate General
Consulate General
Consulate General
Hony. Consulate
Consulate General
Hony. Consulate
Hony. Consulate General
Hony. Consulate
Consulate General
Consulate General
Hony. Consulate General
Hony. Consulate
Hony. Consulate
Hony. Consulate
Hony. Consulate
Consulate General
Hony. Consulate General
Hony. Consulate
Hony. Consulate
Consulate General
Consulate General
Hony. Consulate
Consulate General
Hony. Consulate General

<pg119>
--------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
--------------------------------------------------------------------------75.

Philippines

Calcutta

Hony. Consulate General

76.

Philippines

Madras

Hony. Consulate General

77.

Poland

Bombay

Consulate

78.

Poland

Calcutta

Consulate

79.

Spain

Bombay

Hony. Vice Consulate

80.

Spain

Calcutta

Hony. Vice Consulate

81.

Spain

Madras

Hony. Vice Consulate

82.

Sudan

Bombay

Consulate General

83.

Sweden

Calcutta

Hony. Consulate

84.

Sweden

Bombay

Hony. Consulate General

85.

Sweden

Madras

Hony. Consulate

86.

Switzerland

Bombay

Consulate General

87.

Switzerland

Cochin

Hony. Consular Agent

88.

Syrian Arab Republic

Bombay

Consulate General

89.

Thailand

Bombay

Hony. Consulate General

90.

Thailand,.

Calcutta

Consulate General

91.

Turkey

Bombay

Hony. Consulate General

92.

Turkey

Calcutta

Hony. Consulate General

93.

Turkey

Madras

Hony. Consulate General

94.

U.S.S.R.

Bombay

Consulate General

95.

U.S.S.R.

Calcutta

Consulate General

96.

U.S.S.R.

Madras

Consulate General

97.

U.S.A.

Bombay

Consulate General

98.

U.S.A.

Calcutta

Consulate General

99.

U.S.A.

Madras

Consulate General

100.

Yugoslavia

Bombay
<pg120>

Consulate General

--------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
--------------------------------------------------------------------------101. Yugoslavia

Calcutta

Consulate General

102. German Democratic
Republic

New Delhi

Consulate General

103.

German Democratic
Republic

Bombay

Consulate

104.

German Democratic
Republic

Calcutta

Consulate

105.

German Democratic
Republic

Madras

Consulate

106.

Korea (DPR)

New Delhi

Consulate General

107.

Korea (Republic of)

New Delhi

Consulate General

108.

Monaco .

New Delhi

Hony. Consulate General

109.

San Marino

New Delhi

Hony Consulate General

110.

Viet Nam (DPR)

New Delhi

Consulate General

111. Viet Nam (Republic of) New Delhi
Consulate General
--------------------------------------------------------------------------INDIA
USA AFGHANISTAN AUSTRIA BELGIUM BOLIVIA BRAZIL BURMA COLOMBIA
COSTA!!NORWAY SLOVAKIA DENMARK DOMINICA EL SALVADOR ETHIOPIA FINLAND
FRANCE GERMANY GREECE HAITI INDONESIA IRAN IRAQ ISRAEL ITALY JAPAN
JORDAN KUWAIT LEBANON LIBERIA MAURITIUS NEPAL CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC
NICARAGUA PANAMA PERU PHILIPPINES POLAND SPAIN SUDAN SWEDEN
SWITZERLAND SYRIA THAILAND TURKEY YUGOSLAVIA KOREA MONACO SAN MARINO
Apr 14, 1970

Appendix VI INDIAN MISSIONS/POSTS ABROAD
APPENDIX VI
INDIAN MISSIONS/POSTS ABROAD
--------------------------------------------------------------------------Sl.
Country
Location
Remarks
No.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
--------------------------------------------------------------------------EMBASSIES-(a) Resident
1. Afghanistan

Kabul

2.

Algeria

Algiers

3.

Argentina

Buenos Aires

4.

Austria

Vienna

5.

Belgium

Brussels

Ambassador is concurrently
accredited to Paraguay and
Uruguay.

Ambassador is concurrently
accredited to Luxembourg.
He is also Special Representative for Economic, Financial and Commercial Affairs
in Europe. He is also accre-

dited to the European Economic Community and the
European Coal & Steel Community.
6. Brazil

Rio-de-Janeiro

7.

Bulgaria

Sofia

8.

Burma

Rangoon

9.

Cambodia

Phnom Penh

10.

Chile

Santiago
<pg122>

Ambassador is concurrently
accredited
to
Venezuela
and Bolivia.

Ambassador is concurrently
accredited to Colombia and
Peru.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
--------------------------------------------------------------------------11. China

Peking

Under the charge of Minister
Charge d'Affaires

12.

Congo

Kinshasa

Ambassador is concurrently
accredited to Gabon and
Congo (Brazaville).

13.

Cuba

Havana

Incharge of a Counsellor/
Charge d'Affaires. Ambassador is resident in Mexico
City.

14. Czechoslovakia

Prague

15.

Denmark

Copenhagen

16.

Ethiopia

Addis Ababa

17.

Finland

Helsinki

18.

France

Paris

19.

Federal Republic
of Germany

Bonn

20.

Guinea

Conakry

21.

Hungary

Budapest

22.

Italy

Rome

Ambassador is concurrently
accredited to Mali.

Ambassador is concurrently
accredited to Albania as
Minister and as High Commissioner to Malta. First
Secretary of the Embassy of
India. Italy is concurrently

accredited to the Republic
of San Marino as Consul?
General.
23. Indonesia

Djakarta

24. Iran

Tehran

25. Iraq

Baghdad

26. Ireland

Dublin
<pg123>

--------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
--------------------------------------------------------------------------27. Japan

Tokyo

28. Jordan

*Amman

Incharge of First Secretary/
Charge d'Affaires. Ambassador is resident in Beirut.

29. Kuwait

Kuwait

Ambassador's jurisdietion
extends to Gulf Sheikhdoms
viz., Bahrain, Dubai, Muscat.

30. Laos

Vientiane

31. Lebanon

Beirut

Ambassador is concurrently
accredited as Ambassador to
Jordan and as High Commissioner to Cyprus.

32. Libya

*Tripoli

Incharge of First Secretary/
Charge d'Affaires. Ambassador is resident in Cairo.

33. Madagascar

Tananarive

Ambassador is concurrently
accredited as Consul General
to Reunion Island and
Comores.

34. Mexico

Mexico City

Ambassador is concurrently
accredited to Cuba and
Panama.

35.

Morocco

Rabat

Ambassador is concurrently
accredited to Tunisia.

36.

Nepal

Kathmandu

37.

Netherlands

The Hague

38.

Norway

Oslo

39.

Peru

*Lima

Incharge of First Secretary/
Charge d'Affaires. Ambassador is resident in Santiago.

40.

Philippines

Manila

41.

People's Republic of
Southern Yemen

Aden

42.

Poland

Warsaw

43.

Rumania

Bucharest

*Under the control of the Ministry of Foreign Trade.
<pg124>
--------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
--------------------------------------------------------------------------44. Saudi Arabia
45.
Senegal
concurrentl
y

Jeddah
Dakar

Ambassador is
accredited as

Ambassador
to

Ivory Coast and Upper

Vo
lta

and

Hig
h

Mauritania and

Commissioner to Gambia.

46.

Somalia

Mogadishu

47.

Spain

Madid

48.

Sudan

Khartoum

49.

Sweden

Stockholm

50.

Syrian Arab
Republic

Damascus

51.

Switzerland

Berne

52.

Thailand

Bangkok

53.

Tanisia

*Tanis

Ambassador is concurrently
accredited to the Vatican.

Incharge of a First Secretary/
Charge d'Affaires. Ambassador is resident in Rabat.

54.

Turkey

Ankara

55.

United Arab
Republic

Cairo

Ambassador is concurrently
accredited to
Libya and

Yemen Arab Republic.

56.

Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics

57.

United States of
America

Washington

58.

Venezuela

*Caracas

Moscow

Ambassador is concurrently
accredited to Mongolia.

Incharge of First Secretary/
Charge d'Affaires. Ambassador is resident in Riode-Janeiro.

59. Yagoslavia

Belgrade

Ambassador is concurrently
accredited to Greece.

60. Yemen Arab
Republic

Sanna

Incharge of First Secretary/
Charge d'Affaires. Ambassador is resident in Cairo.

*Under the control of the Ministry of Foreign Trade.
<pg125>
--------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
--------------------------------------------------------------------------EMBASSIES--(b) NON-RESIDENT
1.

Bolivia

Ambassador resident in Rio-de-janeiro.

2.

Burundi

Ambassador resident in Kampala.

3.

Cameroon

Ambassador resident in Lagos.

4.

Colombia

Ambassador resident in Santiago.

5.

Congo (Brazaville)

Ambassador resident in Kinshasa.

6.

Costa Rica

Ambassador resident in New York.

7.

Dahomey

Ambassador resident in Lagos.

8.

Gabon

Ambassador resident in Kinshasa.

9.

Greece

Ambassador resident in Belgrade.

10.

Ivory

11.

Liberia

Ambassador resident in Accra.

12.

Luxembourg

Ambassador resident in Brussels.

13.

Maldive

Ambassador resident in Colombo.

12.

Mali

Ambassador resident in Conakry.

Coast

Ambassador resident in Dakar.

15.

Mauritania

Ambassador resident in Dakar.

16.

Panama

Ambassador resident in Mexico City.

17.

Paraguay

Ambassador resident in Buenos Aires.

18.

Togo

Ambassador resident in Lagos.

19.

Ruanda

Ambassador resident in Kampala

20.

Upper Volta

Ambassador resident in Dakar.

21

Uruguay

Ambassador resident in Buenos Aires.

43 M of E.A.-9

<pg126>

--------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
--------------------------------------------------------------------------22. Vatican

Ambassador resident in Berne.

23. Peru

Ambassador resident in Santiago.

24. Equador

Ambassador resident in Santiago.
HIGH COMMISSIONS-(a) RESIDENT

Australia

Canberra

2. Canada

Ottawa

3. Ceylon

Colombo

Jurisdiction extended to U.N.
Trust Territories of Papua
and New Guinea.

4. Fiji

Suva

5. Ghana

Accra

6.

Guyana

Georgetown

7.

Kenya

Nairobi

8.

Malawi

Blantyre

9.

Malaysia

Kuala Lumpur

10.

Mauritius

Port Louis

11.

New Zealand

Wellington

High Commissioner accredited
to Maldive Islands as
Ambassador.
Concurrently accredited as High
Commissioner of India to
Kingdom of Tongs.
High Commissioner accredited
to Libera as Ambassador and
as High Commissioner to
Sierra Leone.

Jurisdiction extended to Wes-

tern Samoa.
12.

Nigeria

Lagos

13. Pakistan

Islamabad

14. Singapore

Singapore
<pg127>

High Commissioner concurrently accredited to Togo,
Dahomey and Cameroon as
Ambassador.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
--------------------------------------------------------------------------15. Trinidad & Tobago

Port of Spain

16. Uganda

Kampala

17. United Kingdom

London

18.

Republic of Tanzania Dar-es-Salaam

19.

Zambia

High
Commissioner concurrently accredited as High
Commissioner to Jamaica,
Barbados, and as Commissioner to Antigua, Grenada,
Dominica, St. Kitts.,
St. Lucia, St. Vincent,
Montserrat and as Consul
General to Surinam.
High Commissioner concurrently accredited as Ambassador to Ruanda & Burundi

Lusaka
HIGH COMMISSIONS-(b) NON-RESIDENT

1.

Cyprus.

High Commissioner resident at Beirut.

2.

Sierra Leone

High Commissioner resident in Accra.

3.

Jamaica

High Commissioner resident in Port of Spain.

4.

Malta

High Commissioner resident in Rome.

5.

Gambia

High Commissioner resident in Dakar.

6.

Barbados

High Commissioner resident in Port of Spain.

7.

Kingdom of Tonga

High Commissioner resident in Suva.

DEPUTY HIGH COMMISSIONS/ASSISTANT
COMMISSIONS
1.

Ceylon

Kandy

Assistant High Commissioner.

2.

Pakistan

Dacca

Deputy High Commissioner.

3.

Australia

*Sydney

Deputy High Commissioner.

4.

Pakistan

Karachi

Assistant High Commissioner.

5.

U.K.

Birmingham

Assistant High Commissioner.

*Under the control of the Ministry of Foreign Trade.
<pg128>
--------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
--------------------------------------------------------------------------COMMISSIONS-(a) RESIDENT
1.

Hong Kong

Hong Kong.

2.

Kenya

Mombassa.
COMMISSIONS-(b)-NON-RESIDENT

1.

Antigua

Commissioner resident in Port of Spain.

2.

Dominica

Do.

3.

Grenada

Do.

4.

Montserrat

Do.

S.

St. Kitts

Do.

6.

St. Lucia

Do.

7.

St. Vincent

Do.

8.

The Balemas

Do.

9.

Cayman Islands

Do.
LEGATIONS-NON-RESIDENT

1. Albania.

Minister resident in Rome.
CONSULATES GENERAL-(a) RESIDENT

1. Belgium

Ghent

Hony. Consul General,
Ambassador resident in
Brussels.

2. Denmark

Copenhagen

Hony. Consul General (functioning under the Ambassador).

3. German
(Federal Republic)

Berlin

Consul General under Ambassador resident in Bonn.

<pg129>

--------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

4. Germany
(Federal Republic)

Frankfurt

5.

Do.

*Hamburg

6.

Do.

Munich

7.

Do.

Stuttgart

8.

Germany (GDR)

*Berlin

9.

Greece

Athens

Consul General under Ambassador resident in Bonn.
Do.
Hony. Consul General,
Ambassador resident in Bonn.
Do.

Hony. Consul General under
Ambassador resident in
Belgrade.

10.

Paraguay

Asuncion

Hony. Consul General under
Ambassador resident in
Buenos Aires.

11.

Uruguay

Montevideo

Hony. Consul General under
Ambassador resident in
Buenos Aires.

12.

Japan

Kobe

Consul General under
Ambassador resident in
Tokyo.

13.

Muscat

Muscat

14.

Democratic Republie
of Korea.

15.

Republic of

16.

U.S.A.

New York

17.

U.S.A.

San Francisco

18.

U.S.S.R.

Odessa

19.

Democratic Republic
of Vietnam

Hanoi

20.

Republic of Vietnam

Saigon

21.

Indonesia

Medan

Korea.

Pyong Yang
Seoul
Consul General under
Ambassador resident
in
Washington.
Do.
Consul General under
Ambassador in Moscow.

Consul General under
Ambassador in Djakarta.

*Under the control of the Ministry of Foreign Trade.
<pg130>
--------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
--------------------------------------------------------------------------CONSULATES GENERAL-(b) NON-RESIDENT

1.

Camores

Consul General resident in Tananarive.

2.

Republic of
Marino

3.

Reunion Island

Consul resident in Tananarive.

4.

Surinam

Consul General resident in Port of Spain.

San

Consul General resident in Rome.

CONSULATES-RESIDENT
1.

Afghanistan

Jalalabad

Consul under Ambassador
resident in Kabul.

2.

Afghanistan

Kandhar

Consul under Ambassador resident in Kabul.

3.

Burma

Mandalay

Consul under Ambassador resident in Rangoon.

4.

Canary Islands

Las Palmas

Hony. Consul.

5. French territories of
Affairs and Issas Djibouti

Hony. Consul.

6.

Iran

Khorramshahr

Consul under Ambassador
resident in Tehran.

7.

Italy

Genoa

Hony. Consul under Ambassador resident in Rome.

8.

Iraq

Basra

9.

U.S.A.

Cleveland

Consul under Ambassador
resident in Baghdad.
Hony. Consul under Ambassa
dor in Washington.

10.

U.S.A.

Honolulu

11.

Panama

Bandar Abbas

Hony. Consul under Ambassador resident in Mexico.

12.

Spain

Barcelona

Hony. Consul under Ambassador resident in Madrid.

<pg131>

Do.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
--------------------------------------------------------------------------VICE-CONSULATES-RESIDENT
1. Iran
2. Switzerland

Zahidan
Geneva

Vice Consul under Ambassador
resident in Tehran.
Vice Consul under Ambassador
resident in Berne.

TRADE COMMISSIONS AND OFFICES-RESIDENT

1. Canada

*Vancouver

High Commissioner resident
in Ottawa.

2.

Bahrain

Bahrain

Incharge of a Trade Agent.

3.

Dubai

Dubai

Do.

SPECIAL MISSIONS-(a)-RESIDENT
1.

Political Office Sikkim Gangtok

2. Special Office
Thimpu (Bhutan)
Officer

Thimpu

Political Officer.
Special Officer. Political
resident in Gangtok.

3.

P.M.I. to U.N.

New York

Permanent Representative..

4

P.M.I. to U.N.
Offices in Geneva

Geneva

Permanent Representative..

NEW RESIDENT MISSIONS BEING OPENED
1.

Mongolia

Ulan Bator

Under the charge of Counsellor
Charge d'Affaires, Ambassador resident in Moscow.

*Under the control of the Ministry of Foreign Trade.
INDIA
AFGHANISTAN ALGERIA ARGENTINA PARAGUAY URUGUAY AUSTRIA USA BELGIUM
BRAZIL VENEZUELA BOLIVIA BULGARIA BURMA CAMBODIA CHILE COLOMBIA PERU
CHINA CONGO ZAIRE GABON CUBA MEXICO CZECH REPUBLIC NORWAY SLOVAKIA
DENMARK ETHIOPIA FINLAND FRANCE GERMANY GUINEA MALI HUNGARY ITALY
ALBANIA MALTA SAN MARINO INDONESIA IRAN IRAQ IRELAND JAPAN JORDAN
LEBANON KUWAIT BAHRAIN OMAN LAOS CYPRUS LIBYA EGYPT CENTRAL AFRICAN
REPUBLIC MADAGASCAR PANAMA MOROCCO TUNISIA NEPAL PHILIPPINES YEMEN
POLAND ROMANIA SAUDI ARABIA SENEGAL MAURITANIA SOMALIA SPAIN SUDAN
SWEDEN SYRIA SWITZERLAND THAILAND TURKEY RUSSIA MONGOLIA YUGOSLAVIA
GREECE BURUNDI UGANDA CAMEROON COSTA!!GHANA LIBERIA SRI LANKA AUSTRALIA
CANADA FIJI SIERRA LEONE GUYANA KENYA MALAWI MALAYSIA MAURITIUS NEW
ZEALAND NIGER NIGERIA PAKISTAN REPUBLIC OF SINGAPORE JAMAICA GRENADA
DOMINICA MONTSERRAT UNITED KINGDOM TANZANIA ZAMBIA TONGA HONG KONG
CAYMAN ISLANDS KOREA VIETNAM DJIBOUTI BHUTAN
Apr 14, 1970

Appendix VII TREATIES/CONVENTIONS/AGREEMENTS CONCLUDED* OR RENEWED BY INDIA
APPENDIX VII

TREATIES/CONVENTIONS/AGREEMENTS CONCLUDED* OR RENEWED BY INDIA WITH OTHER
COUNT
RIES IN 1970
*This List is not exhaustive
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------Sl. Title of Convention/Treaty/Agreement
No.
Date of
Date of
Date on
Remarks
Signature
Ratification/
which entered
Acceptance
into force
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
5
6
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
1. Credit No. 176 IN
(a) Development Credit Agreement for
KADANA Irrigation Project.

Feb 09, 1970

(b) Project Agreement for KADANA
Irrigation Project.

9th February,
1970.

2.

Credit No. 182 IN

Development Credit Agreement regarding
Sixth Industrial Imports Project.

24th April, 1970

3. Credit No. 191 IN
(a) Development Credit Agreement regarding Gujarat Agricultural Credit
Project.
<pg132>
(b) Project Agreement regarding Gujarat
Agricultural Credit Project signed with
the International Development Association by the Agricultural Refinance
Corporation and the Gujarat State
Cooperative Land Development Bank
Ltd.
(c) Gujarat Agreement regarding Gujarat
Agricultural Credit Project signed with
the International Development Association by the Government of Gujarat.
4. Credit No. 203

IN

3rd Tune. 1970

3rd June, 1970.

3rd June, 1970.

(a) Development Credit Agreement regarding Punjab Agricultural Project.

24th June, 1970.

(b) Project Agreement regarding Punjab
Agricultural Credit Project signed by
the Agricultural Refinance Corporation,
the Punjab State Cooperative Land
Mortgage Bank Ltd. and Punjab AgroIndustries Corporation Ltd.

24th June, 1970.

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT
5. Loan No. 683 IN
(a) Loan Agreement regarding Eighth
Industrial and Investment Project between International Bank for Reconstruction and Development and Industrial Credit and Investment Corporation of India Limited.

3rd June, 1970.

<pg133>
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
5
6
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------(b) Guarantee Agreement between the
Government of India and International
Bank for Reconstruction and Development.

3rd June, 1970.

UNITED NATIONS HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR REFUGEES (UNHCR)
6. Agreement between the Government of
India and the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees for providing assistance to the extent of Us
$ 300,000 for the rehabilitation of
Tibetan Refugees in India.
Project No. 69/LS/IND.4(b)
Type of Assistance to Project-Land
F
ebruary,
Settlements, India (Provision for multipurpose food for Chandragiri)
7. Agreement between the Government of
India and the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees for providing assistance to the extent of US
$ 300,000 for the rehabilitation of
Tibetan Refugees in India.

27th February, 1970

27th
1970.

Project No. 70/LS/IND. 1(b)
Type of Project-Assistance to Health
facilities for Tibetan kefugees in
India.

22nd June, 1970

<pg134>
8. Agreement between the Government of
India and the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees for providing assistance to the extent of Us
$ 300,000 for the rehabilitation of
Tibetan Refugees in India.
Project No. 69/LS/IND 5(c)
Type of Project-Assistance towards

10th August,

10th August,

local settlements, India.

1970.

1970.

9. Agreement between the Government of
India and the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees for providing assistance to the extent of US
$ 300,000 for the rehabilitation of
Tibetan Refugees in India.
Project No. 70/LS/IND. 4(b)
Type of Project-Vocational Training
197
0

31st October, 1970

1st August,

10. Agreement between the Government of
India and the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees for providing assistance to the extent of US
$ 300,000 for the rehabilitation of
Tibetan Refugees in India and at its
twentieth session has approved a further allocation of US $ 300,000 for the
same purpose.
<pg135>
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
5
6
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------Project No. 69-70/LS/IND. 2
Type of Project-Rehabilitation of the
1970
.

31st October, 1970.

1st April,

Buxa Lamas in the State of Mysore,
India.
11. Agreement between the Government of
India and the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees for providing assistance to the extent of US
$ 300,000 for the rehabilitation of
Tibetan Refugees in India.
Project No. 70/LS/IND. 4(c)
Type of Project-Vocational Training
1970
.

5th December, 1970.

1st October,

AUSTRIA
12. Agreement on Capital Repayment 1970/71
19
70.
between the Government of India and
the Austrian Federal Government.

29th June, 1970.

29th June,

CANADA
13. Canadian Development Loan Agreement
for seventeen million Canadian dollars
for Industrial Commodities and/or fertilizers.

22nd April,
1970.

<pg136>
14.
Exchange of letters regarding Agreement in the reduction of the development Loan amount in respect of Geological Survey of India Project from
nine million Canadian dollars to two
million Canadian dollars.
15. Sub-Loan Agreement for three lacs
Canadian dollars between the Governments of India and Canada relating
to Import from Canada of Seats for
I.A.C.'s Boeing Aircraft

28th April, 1970

13th May, 1970

16. Canadian Loan Agreement for Rajasthan
Atomic Power Project Stage I for two
million Canadian dollars.

22nd May, 1970

17. Canadian Development Loan Agreement for thirteen million Canadian
dollars.

25th August,
1970.

18. Plan of operation for a Project of Technical Cooperation between the Government of India and the Government of
Canada on Ground Water Exploration
and Training.

25th August,
1970.

19. Canadian Development Loan of C $ 6

2nd September, 1970

million for purchase of Low components by DLW, VARANASI.
<pg137>
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
5
6
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------DENMARK
20. Agreement between the Government of
February
, 1970.
India and the Government of the
Kingdom of Denmark concerning
technical cooperation.

16th February, 1970.

16th

FRANCE
21. Indo-French Agreement on Agricultural

11th March,

1st January,

Development Project in the SemiArid Zones of Andhra Pradesh State.

1970.

1970.

22. Agreement between the Government of
21st March,
India and the Government of the
1970.
French Republic for the Avoidance
of Double Taxation in respect of Taxes
on Income.

26th
1969.

23. (a) Financial Protocol relating to the
alleviation of the Indian External debt.
(b) Exchange of letters with reference
to Article VII of the Financial Protocol date 15th April, 1970 specifying
the modalities of application of the said
Protocol.
INDONESIA

18th February,
1970.

15th April, 1970
15th April, 1970

<pg138>

24. Agreement between the Government of
15t
h June, 1970
India and the Government of the Republic of Indonesia for air services
between and beyond their respective
territories.
JAPAN

March,

18th September,
1968.

15th June, 1970

25. Agreement between the Government of
19
th August,
Japan and the Government of India
19
70.
concerning the Agricultural Development Project in the PARAL KOTE
ZONE, DANDAKARANYA, India.

19th August,
1970.

NEPAL
26. Exchange of Letters between the Government of India and His Majesty's
Government of Nepal for the disposal
of surplus machinery from the TRISULI
HYDEL PROJECT [Indian
Cooperation Mission, Kathmandu (Nepal)] to His Majesty's Government.

11th December, 1970

NETHERLANDS
27. Loan Agreement for forty million
21st March,
Netherlands guilders between the
1970.
Government of India and De Nederlandse Investerings Bank Voor Ontwikkelingsl anden.

9th January,

21st March,

1970.

1970.

<pg139>
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
5
6
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------28. Third Addendum to the Loan Agreements
for debt relief with the De Nederlandse
Investerings Bank Voor Ontiwikkelingslanden (Dutch National Investment
Bank).

28th july, 1970

29. Fifteenth Loan Agreement of forty million
9t
h December, 1970
Netherlands guilders for India's Development Plans.

28th October,

9th December,

1970

1970.

NORWAY
30. Agreement regarding Plan of Operation
concerning supply of fertilizer between
the Government of India and Government of Norway.
31. Agreement on Grant of Fertilizer between

15th july, 1970

3rd August, 1970

3
rd August, 1970
the Government of India and the
(Provisionally)
Government of the Kingdom of Norway.
SWEDEN
32. Reciprocal arrangements by the Government of India with the Government of
Sweden for taking the evidence of
witnesses residing in Sweden/residing
in India through commissions.
<pg140>
SWITZERLAND

15th July, 1970

33. Exchange of letters for the extension
of Indo-Swiss Agreement regarding
Agricultural Development Project in
Kerala for Cattle Breeding Fodder
Production and Diary Science up to
31st March, 1970.

8th April, 1970

34. Exchange of letters between the Govern1st April, 1969
ment of India and the Government of
Switzerland to provide assistance in
rehabilitating the Tibetan Refugees at,
BYLAKUPPE, CHANDRAGIRI AND
MUNDGOD settlements.

17th April, 1970

35. Agreement between the Government of
1st April, 1970
India and the Swiss Confederation
concerning Technical Cooperation with
a view to developing Cattle Breeding
Dairy and Fodder Production in
Kerala.

24th July, 1970

UNITED KINGDOM
36. Exchange of notes regarding United
Kingdom maintenance Loan Agreement-1970 for nine million pounds.

11th February, 1970

37. Exchange of letters regarding Agreement
11th February, 1970
between the Government of India
and United Kingdom for Wheat Grant
to India under IGA (International
Grains Arrangement) for us
$ 2,880,000.
<pg141>
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
5
6
------------------------------------------------------------------------------

-------------38. Exchange of Notes regarding India Debt
Refinancing Loan, 1970 for seven
million five hundred thousand pounds
sterling for the purpose of reimbursing
the Government of India for payments
made to the Board of Trade of the
Government of the United Kingdom
during the period 1st April, 1969 to
31st March; 1970 (both dates inclusive).

24th March, 1970

39. Exchange of letters regarding "Amendment to UK/India Food Aid Grant"
Agreement, dt. 11th Feb., 1970.

21st July, 1970

40. Exchange of notes regarding the amendment of notes dt. 28th Nov., 1969 dealing with Capital Investment Loan, 1969.

3rd September, 1970

41. Exchange of notes for an interest free
loan for a sum of three million one
hundred thousand pounds sterling for
the purchase of spares, rolls and capital
renewal items for the Durgapur Steel
Works.

24th September, 1970

42. Exchange of notes for an interest free
loan for twenty six million pounds
sterling to enable the purchase of
certain goods and services in the
United Kingdom.

24th September, 1970

<pg142>
43. Exchange of letters for the amendment
of the United Kingdom-India (Durgapur Extension) Credit Agreement,
1962.

9th October, 1970

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
44. PL 480 Loan Agreement No. 386-G-205
for Rs. 144, 460,800 signed with US
AID on 14th January, 1970 covering
the Loan Funds arising under supplement dated 25th April, 1969 to the
PL, 480 Commodity Agreement of 20th
February, 1967.

14th January,
1970.

45. Exchange of letters for Amendment to
17t
h March, 1970
PL 480 Agreement of 13th Oct. 1969.

17th March, 1970

Credit No. 2694
46. Loan Agreement for fifteen million US
dollars between the Government of
India and the Export-Import Bank
of U.S.A.

22nd April, 1970

AID Loan No. 386-H-207
47. US AID Production Loan, 1970 for
one hundred sixty million United States
dollars to India.

23rd June, 1970

<pg143>
48. Promissory note executed regarding
postponement of principal and interest
payments for ten years.

25th June, 1970

49. Exchange of letters regarding Amendment
2
6th June, 1970
to the PL 480 Agreement of 13th
October, 1969.

26th June, 1970

AID Grant No. 386-H-601
50. USA Grant Agreement for Family Planning Programme for twenty million US
dollars.
51. Agreement with Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland, U.S.A. regarding Medical Research Centres in
Calcutta and Punjab.
PL 480 Loan Agreement No. 386-G-211
52. Agreement between the Government of
India and the Government of the
U.S.A. for a Loan of Rs. 500,657,600/accruing under supplement dated
13th October, 1969 to the PL 480
Commodity Agreement dated 20th
Feb., 1967.

30th June, 1970

10th September, 1970

3rd

December, 1970

YUGOSLAVIA
53. Agreement on the abolition of Visa
16th
May, 1970
between India and Yugoslavia.

5th May, 1970

<pg144>
INDIA
USA LATVIA AUSTRIA
NEPAL NORWAY SWEDEN
Feb 09, 1970

CANADA DENMARK FRANCE INDONESIA JAPAN
SWITZERLAND UNITED KINGDOM YUGOSLAVIA

SENEGAL

Appendix VIII EXPENDITURE ON HEADQUARTERS AND MISSIONS/POSTS ABROAD

APPENDIX VIII
EXPENDITURE ON HEADQUARTERS AND MISSIONS/POSTS ABROAD
DURING 1970-71
The expenditure during 1970-71 On Headquarters of this
Ministry is of the order Rs. 270.19 lakhs. A sum of Rs. 131.37
lakhs is towards establishment charges, a sum of Rs. 107.14 lakhs
for publicity, cables, diplomatic bags service etc., a sum of
Rs. 29.68 lakhs is for travelling expenses and the balance of
Rs. 2.00 lakhs for the Foreign Service Inspectorate.
The expenditure on Missions/Posts including the two special
offices in Thimpu and Gangtok is Rs. 1241.54 lakhs, out of which
a sum of Rs. 699 lakhs is spent on establishment charges including foreign and other compensatory allowances, a sum of
Rs. 83.87 lakhs, on passages for transfers and local tours,
Rs. 35.33 lakhs on publicity contingencies and Rs. 423.34 lakhs
on official and residential accommodation, P&T Charges and
other office contingencies. The average expenditure per Mission
comes to Rs. 11.93 lakhs.
The expenditure mentioned above (viz. Rs. 1511.73 lakhs
as per attached statement) on Headquarters and Missions/Posts
abroad includes expenditure on External Publicity programme/
activities. The break-up of this expenditure, is as under:
Rs. lakhs
(a) Headquarters Salaries (officers 32, Staff 112)

9.35

Travelling Expenses

1.50
<pg145>

Rs. lakhs

Publicity, Contingent charges

30.51
41.36

(b) Missions/Posts Salaries (officers 70, staff 408)

40.91

Foreign Allowance, Compensatory Allowance &
Passages

36.77

Publicity Contingencies

35.33

Other charges including rent of residential accommodation and other office contingencies

21.00
134.01

Total External Publicity
The expenditure On External Publicity

175.37
as detailed

above

comes to 11.60 per cent of the expenditure on Headquarters and
Missions/Posts abroad.
DETAILS OF EXPENDITURE ON HEADQUARTERS AND MISSIONS/
POSTS ABROAD DUTING 1970-71
(In lakhs of rupees)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------EstablishTravelling Other
Total
ment
Expenses
Charges
Charges
--------------------------------------------------------------------------1. Secretariat:
(a) Headquarters
(b) External Publicity
Division

122.02

28.18

78.63

228.83

9.35

1.50

30.51

41.36

29.68

109.14

270.19

131.37
<pg147>

(In lakhs of rupees)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------EstablishTravelling Other
Total
ment
Expenses
Charges
Charges
--------------------------------------------------------------------------II.

Overseas Establishment:

(a) Missions and Posts
abroad
(b) Publicity Wings

GRAND TOTAL

626.00

79.19

402.34

1107.53

73.00

4.68

56.33

134.01

699.00

83.87

458.67

1241.54

830.37

113.55

567.81

1511.73

GMGIPND-L-43 E. A.-13-4-71--3,500

Feb 09, 1970


