1951-52

Content
Jan 01, 1951
Report
of the
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS
<pg1>
REPORT OF THE MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS, 1951-52.
The report falls into five parts:Part I describes the administrative structure and problems of
organization at headquarters and representatives abroad;
Part II deals with points of special interest in those countries
where India is represented;
Part

III deals with international conferences;

Part

IV

deals with emigration; and

Port

V

with Information Services.

INDIA

Jan 01, 1951

Administration
Jan 01, 1951
PART I
Administration

(A) Organisation of the Ministry
A Chart showing the administrative set up of the Ministry can be
seen at Appendix "A".
The work is divided on geographical as well as on a functional
basis amongst the officers of the Ministry. For instance, the Foreign
Secretary deals with Continental Europe, America, the Middle East
and the Far East; the Special Secretary deals with United Nations
affairs, and the Secretary Commonwealth Relations deals with
Commonwealth countries, South East Asia and Africa. There are
three Joint Secretaries, one deals with Continental Europe, Administration and Personnel; the second with the Americas, Africa, South
East Asia, North East Frontier and Emigration- and the third with
Protocol, the United Kingdom, the Recovery of Abducted Persons
and passports and visas. Similarly, the work is divided among the
different Deputy Secretaries and Under Secretaries.
Consular Division.-It was found necessary to bring together all
Consular work, hitherto handled in different territorial branches,
into a self-contained Consular Division. As an experimental
measure, a separate Consular Branch was First formed in August,
1951, by the transfer of some staff from territorial branches from
which consular work was taken over by the new branch. An
existing branch, mainly dealing with the recovery of the advances
<pg2>
made to evacuees from Burma, Malaya, etc., during the last war,
was later added. These two branches at present form the Consular
Division. Besides, day to day consular work relating to some territories, general matters of policy, the issue of Consular Instructions
etc., are also handled in the Division. The formation of this Division will, it is hoped, make for uniformity, efficiency and economy.
Historical Division.--The Division, consisting of the Director and:
seven Research Officers and Assistants, is housed in Baroda House.
Its library is also housed there. The research staff produced a large
number of useful papers on different topics for the Ministry, some
at the request of the Ministry and some on their own initiative.
The members of the staff also kept watch on the progress of events
in different parts of the World. In addition to their own work, they
classified and catalogued a very large number of maps belonging
to the Ministry.
Library.-The Library deals with a large number of books and
periodicals. Many thousands of useless or duplicate volumes were
sorted out and many of them were distributed to other departments or institutions. The work of accessioning, classifying and
cataloguing the books made steady progress. Nearly 9,000
volume were asked, and about half the books in the library
classified and catalogued.

The Library gets over 400 periodicals of different kinds, many of
them given free by other institutions. Some of these are regularly
circulated among the staff of the Ministry, and a large number of
books are issued to by various officers and branches of the Ministry.
Research & Intelligence Branch.-The Research & Intelligence
Branch continued to publish a monthly Summary and to deal with
the various reports received from the Heads of Indian Missions.
abroad and other connected matters.
(B) Missions Abroad
India has diplomatic representation in 31 countries. There are 17
Embassies, 8 legations and 6 High Commissioner's Offices. In addition, the Indian Representatives in Belgium, Egypt, France, Italy,
United States, United Kingdom, Sweden and Switzerland are respectively accredited as a measure of economy to Luxumburg; the Hashemite kingdom of Jordan Labonon and Syria; Norway; Yougoslavia;
Mexico; Ireland; Denmark and Finland, Austria, and the Vatican.
There are also Missions in Japan, Malaya, Tibet, Bhutan and Sikkim,
and Lhasa, and Commissions in British East Africa, British West
Indies, Fiji, Mauritius and Aden. Indian posts abroad include 13
Consular Offices and 5 Agencies. India maintained a Permanent
Delegation to, the United Nations in New York.
<pg3>
Foreign Missions in India.-Diplomatic missions of Mexico, Hungary and the Philippine Republic were set up in India during this
year. This brings the total number of countries having diplomatic
representation in India to 40.
(C) Indian Foreign Service
This year four candidates were recruited to the Indian Foreign
Service through an open competitive examination held by the
U.P.S.C. This brings up the total I.F.S. cadre of Officers to 172.
The sanction of the Cabinet is being sought for the creation of
a Foreign Service "B". The details of the scheme are also being
worked out in consultation with the Ministries of Finance and Home
Affairs.
In order to ensure that the property of the Government in
Missions is looked after by persons in the permanent employ of the
Government, it is proposed to supply guards, domestic servants, etc.,
to the Indian Missions abroad.
Accommodation for Missions.-In accordance with the policy of
the Government of India to purchase properties for housing Indian
Missions abroad, wherever it is found that such purchases are economical in the long run, properties have been acquired at the following places during the current year in addition to those mentioned
in the previous reports:-

1. Ottawa-Additional property.
2. Karachi-Additional property,
3. Tokyo.
4. Rangoon and
5. Canberra.
The construction of houses for our Missions at Singapore and
Nairobi is proceeding. This will continue at Singapore and Nairobi
and start at Karachi and Canberra during 1952-53.
(D) Economy
As a measure of economy, only one new mission has been opened
during the year. Staff at some missions has been reduced, e.g.,
Moscow, Lisbon, Prague and etc., has not been increased of others
inspite of an increase in work. A number of senior posts at headquarters, e.g. those of the Legal and Treaties Adviser, Statistician,
Joint Secretary, and one Deputy Secretary have either not been
Filled or abolished. A number of Missions, e.g. Cairo, Lisbon, Rome,
<pg4>
Prague, Argentine, Brazil, Czechoslovakia) Iraq, and Switzerland,
have been in charge of fairly junior members of the Foreign Service
acting as Charge d'Affaires during the greater part of the year by
the recall or transfer of the Ambassador or Minister. Leave to staff
serving abroad and transfer to posts abroad was given or made very
sparingly and in special circumstances only.
Expenditure on telegrams has shown a further decline of
Rs. 1,87,765 as compared to 1949-50. This saving has been possible
through a very strict scrutiny of telegrams, standardisation of Procedure, analysis of traffic, and the introduction of savingrams.
(E) Expenditure
The total expenditure in 1951-52, according to the revised estimates, is expected to amount to Rs. 657 lakhs. Included within
this amount are certain items of expenditure, which are either fixed
in nature or have little relations to the normal activities of the
Ministry. These are:1. Tribal areas including the Assam Rifles-173 lakhs.
2. Subsidies to neighbouring States and Administration of
Chandernagore-about 30 lakhs.
3. Contributions to the U.N. and delegations thereto-74 lakhs.
4. Expenditure on demarcation of boundary between India

and Pakistan, Recovery of abducted women and implementation of P.M's Agreement-18.5 lakhs.
5. Passport and Emigration establishments-7.5 lakhs.
6. Political pensions and cost of repatriation of Indians-App
2 lakhs.
If the expenditure on the special items enumerated above (totalling Rs. 305 lakhs) is excluded, the expenditure on items, strictly
pertaining to this Ministry, works out to 352.20 lakhs. This includes
an expenditure of Rs. 50.55 lakhs on the High Commissioner's Office
in London and Rs. 62 lakhs on the pay and allowances of officers and
staff and other expenses at the headquarters of the Ministry.
Excluding the expenditure at headquarters and the High Commissioner's office in London, the expenditure incurred on our Missions abroad comes to Rs. 239.45 lakhs. Spread over 55 Missions,
this gives an average of 4.35 lakhs per Mission. Out of this expenditure, an average of less than Rs. 1 lakh per Mission is spent on
pay and allowances of Heads of Missions and other junior officers,
and the expenditure on rent for office and residential accommodation alone works out at Rs. 32 lakhs.
USA
BURMA INDIA BELGIUM EGYPT FRANCE ITALY SWEDEN SWITZERLAND JORDAN NORWAY
SYRIA AUSTRIA DENMARK FINLAND IRELAND MEXICO BHUTAN JAPAN CHINA FIJI
MAURITIUS CANADA PAKISTAN AUSTRALIA REPUBLIC OF SINGAPORE KENYA RUSSIA CZECH
REPUBLIC PORTUGAL BRAZIL IRAQ SLOVAKIA UNITED KINGDOM
Jan 01, 1951

Treaties, Agreements and Miscellaneous
PART II
Treaties, Agreements and Miscellaneous
(I) Afghanistan.-The instruments of ratification of the Treaty
of Trade and Commerce with Afghanistan, signed at Kabul on the
Apr 04, 1950 were ratified at New Delhi on the 24th January,
1952. The Treaty will come into force from the 24th March, 1952.
An Air Agreement between India and Afghanistan was signed
at Kabul on the 26th January, 1952. Prior to the conclusion of the

air agreement with Afghanistan, a weekly air service between India
and Kabul was started during December, 1951 on the AhmedabadJamnagar Zahidan-Kandhar-Kabul route. The question of increasing the frequency to thrice weekly is now being negotiated.
(2) Burma.-A treaty of Peace and Friendship between India
and Burma was concluded in Rangoon on the 7th July, 1951. The
Treaty is based on the desire of the Governments of both India and
Burma to strengthen the cordial relations existing between the
two countries, and the many ties of culture and history which have
bound them through centuries. The recognition of each other's
independence and rights, the mutual desire to maintain everlasting
peace and friendship, the continuance of diplomatic 'relations, occasional consultations by representatives of both the States in matters
of common interest, the conclusion of agreements relating to trade,
customs, immigration, repatriation etc., form the main features of
the Treaty.
A Trade Agreement between India and Burma was also signed
on the 29th September, 1951. The first part of the Agreement
covered a period of 8 months only ending the 31st December, 1951,
while the second part remains valid till the end of 1955. Under
the Agreement Burma has agreed to export 350,000 tons of rice to
India annually in exchange for jute goods, textiles, oil and steel
products from India.
(3) Iran.-A revised draft of the Proposed Treaty of Commerce
and Navigation with Iran was forwarded to the Iranian Government
in April, 1951.
The instruments of ratification of the Treaty of Friendship with
Iran, signed at Tehran on the 15th March, 1950, were exchanged at
Tehran on the 1st December, 1951. The Treaty came into force from
the 16th December, 1951, i.e. 15 days after the exchange of instruments of ratifications.
Negotiations are in progress for concluding a direct wireless agreement and for finalising the Anti-Locust Convention with Iran.
<pg6>
(4) pakistan.-During the year, agreements were reached with
the Government of Pakistan on a reciprocal basis on the following
subjects:(i) For service of summonses issued by courts in one country
on defendants in the other, under section 29 of the
Civil Procedure Code;
(ii) Procurement of certified copies of documents required by
displaced persons in one country from the authorities
concerned in the other in so far as the two Punjabs are
concerned.

(5) Portugal.-An Indo-Portugal Sterling Agreement has been
reached under which India will make available (pound)1,200,000 to the
Portuguese India Government during the current (July to June)
1951-52 currency year.
(6) Thailand.-A Treaty of Friendship, Commerce and Navigation with the Government of Thailand is still under consideration.
The Treaty is intended to replace the Anglo-Siamese Treaty of
Friendship, Commerce and Navigation of 1937 which at present
governs Indo-Thai relations.
(7) United Kingdom.-An Air Services Agreement between India
and the U.K. was signed at New Delhi on the 1st December, 1951.
(8) U.S.A.-An Agreement was signed between the Government
of India and the Export-Import Bank of Washington, an Agency of
the United States of America, on the 15th June, 1951, providing a
loan of $190.000,000 to the Government of India for the purchase of
food-grains from the U.S.A.
An Agreement was signed between the Government of India and
the Government of the United States of America on the 9th July,
1951, for the duty-free entry and defrayment of inland transportation charges of relief supplies and packages sent from the United
States of America.
A Technical Co-operation Programme Agreement between India
and the United States of America was signed on the 5th January,
1952.
An Agreement between the Government of India and the Ford
Foundation was signed on 22nd January, 1952, to regulate financial
assistance offered by the latter towards the intensive rural development programmes envisaged in the Five-Years Plan.
(9) Kashmir.-The United Nations Security Council continued
their efforts to settle the Kashmir dispute. A new representative,
Dr. Frank P. Graham was appointed as mediator. An interim report
<pg7>
on his efforts was submitted to the Security Council in October and
a final report on December, 18, 1951. The latter was discussed by
the Council in January, 1952.
(10) Abducted Persons.-The Abducted Persons (Recovery and
Restoration) Act of 1949, which provided Statutory authority for
the activities relating to the recovery of persons abducted during
the disturbances of 1947, expired on the 31st October, 1951. As the
number of such persons still to be recovered was fairly large, the
validity of the Act was further extended for a year more i.e. till the
31st October, 1952.
1947 abducted persons were recovered in India and restored to

Pakistan during the year 1951. The corresponding figure in Pakistan is 743. These figures show that the results during the year
under report are more encouraging than those in the previous year.
(11) Cultural Scholarships Scheme for Africans and Asians.-To
foster cultural relations between India and the neighbouring countries of Asia and Africa, the Government of India offered, as in
previous years, 70 scholarships to students both of India and
non-Indian origin from these countries for higher studies in India.
A. United Kingdom
In accordance with the wishes of the United Kingdom Government, it has been decided that the liability for pensions of all
members of the former Indian Civil and fighting services residing in
the United Kingdom, Commonwealth countries and Colonies should
be transferred to the U.K. Government. who will pay the pensions
out of the annuity.
B. Europe
1. Austria.-In view of the imperative need for economy in
expenditure, the appointment of a separate Minister of India at
Vienna, remained in abeyance. The Indian Minister to Switzerland
is concurrently accredited as Minister to Austria.
2. France (French Possessions in India).-Chandernagore continues to be administered de facto as the Treaty of Cession of
Chandernagore signed on the 2nd February, 1950 has not yet been
ratified by the French Parliament.
There is no change regarding the other four French India Settlements as no date has as yet been fixed for the referendum, nor has
complete agreement been reached regarding its modalities.
8
3. Germany.-The Government of India and the Government of
the Federal-Republic of Germany have agreed to raise their diplomatic representation to the Embassy level; the actual date when
the Ambassadors will be appointed is to be settled later.
4. Gibralter.-There is no change in the position with regard to
the grievances of the Indian traders there and the discussions.
between the High Commissioner for India in London and the U.K.
Ministry of Colonies are still continuing.
5. Italy.-At the request of the Italian Government, the Government of India have agreed that Italy's status as an active and equal
member of the family of nations should be recognised. The Government of India have also agreed in principle to the revision of
the Italian Peace Treaty of 1947 subject to the conditions that such
steps as may be taken in this direction should be with a view to
promoting international peace and goodwill and to lessen the ten-

sion unfortunately existing in the world today.
6. Italy (Vatican).-In view of the imperative need for economy
in expenditure, the opening of an office at the Vatican was held in
abeyance. The Indian Minister to Switzerland has been concurrently accredited to the Holy See.
7. The Netherlands.-A Dutch Society called the NetherlandsIndia-Pakistan-Ceylon Society sent consignments of food and medicine gifts for distribution to the needy in India.
It has been decided to send a bust of Mahatma Gandhi to be
placed in the Peace Palace: at the Hague.
8. Portugal (Portuguese Possession in India).-The Government
of India initiated negotiations to settle the future of the Portuguese Possessions in India by presenting an Aide Memoire, dated
the 27th February, 1950, but the Portuguese Government declined
to discuss the question of their sovereignty over their Indian possessions with the Government of India.
9. Spain.-It has been decided to open a Consulate of India at
Barcelona. The Spanish Government's approval is awaited.
10. Sweden.-Mr. M. J. Desai was appointed Minister of India
to Sweden and concurrently accredited to Finland and Denmark
in place of Mr. R. K. Nehru.
11. Switzerland.-Mr. N. Raghavan, formerly India's Ambassador
to Belgium, was appointed as Minister of India in Switzerland in
succession to the late Mr. Dhirubhai Desai. He was concurrently
accredited as India's Minister to the Holy See and Austria.
<pg9>
12. Yugoslavia.-As a measure of economy, the opening of an
Embassy at Belgrade, has been postponed. The Indian Ambassador
to Italy is, however, concurrently accredited as Ambassador to
Yugoslavia.
C. Africa
1. Central Africa.-The jurisdiction of the Commissioner for the
Government of India in British East Africa has been extended to
include British Central African territories of Nyasaland, Northern
and Southern Rhodesia, and also the Belgian Congo and RuandaUrundi.
2. East Africa (Kenya).-A Bill, which, inter alia, provided for
Separate electoral rolls, and separate seats in the Kenya Legislative
Council, for Indian Muslims and non-Muslims has been passed by
the Government of Kenya in the face of strong opposition on the
part of the East African Indian National Congress and the nonMuslim Indian Members of the Kenya Legislative Council. The

other non-European Members of the Council, viz., Arabs and Africans,
also voted against the Legislation.
3. Eritrea.-A request from the Indians in Eritrea for opening a
Mission in that territory could not be acceded to mainly for financial reasons. The territory has, however, been placed under the
sphere of activities of the Commissioner for the Government of
India in Aden, in so far as Commercial matters are concerned.
4. Ethiopia.-The Indian Legation in Ethiopia laid the foundation stone of a Maternity Home in Addis Ababa for which the
local Indian community has raised about Rs. 3 1/2 lakhs. A token
non-recurring grant of Rs. 10,000 was made by the Government of
India.
A gift of 500 tons of wheat from the Emperor of Ethiopia as a
token of friendly assistance was gratefully accepted.
5. French Morocco.-As a result of representations made by the
Government of India, the French Government has agreed to permit
Indian residents in French Morocco to make remittances to their
dependants in India.
6. Madagascar.-Although the proposal to open an Indian Consulate in Madagascar had been agreed to by the Standing Committee of Parliament for this Ministry last year, the proposal had to
be postponed due to financial stringency.
<pg10>
7. Portuguese East Africa.-The Secretary to the Indian High
Commissioner in South Africa paid a visit to Portuguese East Africa
to study at first hand the difficulties of Indians living in the
territory.
8. Union of South Africa.-The position of persons of Indian
origin in South Africa has further deteriorated with the promulgation last year of various notifications and regulations for
the implementation of the Group Areas Act. The Indian
community is now faced not only with residential segregation and
uprooting from their home but also with economic ruin.
The Union Government refused to accept the U.N. General
Assembly Resolution of December, 1950 as the basis for holding
negotiations for the settlement of the question of Indians in the
Union of South Africa and Correspondence initiated by the Government of India for implementing the Resolution proved infructuous.
The Secretary to the High Commissioner for India in the Union
of South Africa, who was holding the charge of the office in the
absence of the High Commissioner, has left South Africa on transfer.
The Mission is now in charge of the Assistant Secretary.
D. Middle East

India has now diplomatic representation in all the countries in
the Middle East except Yemen, Israel, Saudi Arabia and the Arab
Sheikhdome in the Persian Gulf. Owing mainly to the existing,
financial stringency, it has not been found possible to establish
missions in these countries so far.
1. Afghanistan.-In response to the invitation of the Afghan Government an Indian hockey and a football team visited Kabul during,
August, 1951 to participate in the Afghan Jashan Celebrations.
An Indian feature film and some shots for exhibition at a new
cinema at Kabul were also sent.
At the request of the Afghan Government, the Government, of
India have selected four Indian teachers for employment in schools
in Afghanistan. The teachers will be leaving for Kabul shortly.
H.R.H. Marshall Shah Mahmud Khan Ghazi, Prime Minister of
Afghanistan, paid a short visit to Delhi on his way back to Afghanistan from U.S.A. in September, 1951. H.R.H. Marshall Shah Wali
Khan, Afghan Ambassador in London, also paid a short visit to Delhi
in July, 1951 on his way from London to Kabul.
2. Egypt.-The draft of a Treaty of Establishment between the
Government of India and Egypt has been finalised.
<pg11>
Negotiations for concluding a bilateral Air Agreement with,
Egypt have been completed.
The Trade Agreement with Egypt has been renewed till the 29th
February, 1952.
3. Haj.-Arrangements were made for about 11,000 Indian pilgrims to visit the Hedjaz on pilgrimage during the year.
4. Iraq.-A Trade Agreement between the Government of India
and Iraq was concluded during the year. It remained in force till
the end of December, 1951. Its renewal is being considered.
An Honorary Indian Consul has been appointed at Basra to look
after Indian interests.
5. Iran.-Dr. Tara Chand former, Secretary, Ministry of Education, has been appointed India's Ambassador to Iran. He presented
his credentials to H.I.M. the Shahinshah of Iran on the 22nd December, 1951.
Pending the conclusion of a bilateral air agreement between India
and Iran, the temporary air agreement between India and Iran has
been extended for a further period of six months from the 27th
December, 1951.

As a result of the nationalisation of the A.I.O.C. Abadan, all the
Indian employees were evacuated by the A.I.O.C. to India, The
Government of India have instructed various employment exchanges
in India to give these ex-employees of the A.I.O.C. priority for
employment in suitable posts. Some of them are being recruited
by an Oil Company in Sarawak, called the Sarawak Oil Fields
Limited.
6. Libya.-The Government of India recognised the new independent and sovereign State of Libya, which came into existence
on the 24th December, 1951.
7. Muscat and Oman.-The draft of a Treaty of Friendship, Commerce and Navigation between the Government of India and the
Sultan of Muscat has been sent to the India; Ambassador at Tehran
and he has been asked to proceed to Muscat to discuss the matter
with the Sultan.
8. Pakistan.-The important matters dealt with during the year
under report were the demarcation of the Indo-Pakistan boundary,
the canal water dispute, the evacuee property question, Pakistan's
war propaganda against India and the Permit System Rules.
(East Bengal).-The Agreement reached between the Prime
Ministers of India and Pakistan in April, 1950 regarding the rights
and protection of minorities in the two countries continues to be in
<pg12>
force, and the various Organisations and Agencies set up thereunder,
are functioning. The West Bengal, Assam, Tripura and East Bengal
Governments have already enacted necessary legislation for the
administration and restoration of migrants' property, as contemplated in the Agreement.
In pursuance of the decision to given permanent return permits
to all Muslims, who migrated from the Uttar Pradesh to West
Pakistan between the 1st February, and 31st May, 1950, about 22,600
muslims have so far been repatriated to India.
9. Persian Gulf.-The proposal to appoint a Trade Agent at
Bahrein and a Consul at Muscat was kept in abeyance as a measure
of economy. The Indian Charge d'Affaires at Baghdad paid periodical visits to Bahrein and' Kuwait and maintained contact with
Indian National there.
10. Syria.-The new regime in Syria established by Colonel
Shishakli has been recognised.
A Treaty of Friendship and Commerce is likely to be concluded
shortly.
11. Turkey.-A Cultural Agreement and a Treaty of Friendship

were signed during the year.
A draft of a Trade Agreement is under examination.
12. Yemen.-No further progress has been made in the negotiations for concluding a Treaty of Friendship and Commerce with
Yemen.
(E) North East Frontier
1. Assam Tribal Areas (North-East Frontier Agency).-In the
year tinder review progress has been made in the matter of strengthening the administration of tribal areas. Two new administrative
centres at Tuensang and Mon (a village in Konyok Naga area) were
opened. Several new roads were constructed and the existing roads
extended. The portions of the roads damaged by earthquake and
floods were repaired. Some of the important roads are:Lohit Valley road, Nizamghat-Dambuk road, Meka road,
Pasighat-Tuting road, Pasighat-Along bridle path,
Namdang-Chandlang road, Mokokchung-Tuensang
road.
Several buildings were put up for the Administrative, Education,
Agriculture, Forest, Medical and Veterinary Departments. Four
Hospital buildings in the interior of the tribal areas were also built.
<pg13>
School buildings A Sadiya and Pasighat were completed, and about
20 new primary schools were opened in the interior tribal areas.
One Agricultural Demonstration Farm was established at Pasighat.
In order to check head-hunting and to maintain peace in the
Naga Tribal Areas, a punitive expedition of the Assam Rifles was
sent in February March, 1951, to punish the offending villages of
the Konyok Naga area. The expedition was successful.
Relief goods consisting of about 4,000 maunds rice, 1,500 maunds
salt, 200 maunds tea, and medicine, yarn, cloth, tools and implements, costing about Rs. 3,62,000 were provided to the victims of
the floods in the tribal areas. Supplies of relief articles were airdropped in certain areas to save the lives of the afflicted people.
Rescue work was also organised.
Rice at subsidised rate, which cost Government about Rs. 7,38,000
was also supplied to the people of the tribal areas of the N.E.F.
Agency.
In accordance with the instructions of the Planning Commission,
a Development Plan for the North East Frontier Agency Tribal
Areas has been prepared, and furnished to the Planning Commission for incorporation in the "Five Years Development Plan". This
Plan contains various schemes relating to Roads and Buildings,

Forest, Agriculture, Education, Medical and Public Health Development.
The North-East Frontier Agency Engineering Department Cadre.
as far as Assistance Engineers and above are concerned, has been
amalgamated with that of the C.P.W.D. This has been done to
ensure the posting of suitable officers in that area.
A Third Engineering Division in the N.E.F. Agency has been
created.
The rank of the Inspector General of Assam Rifles has been up
graded from that of Colonel to Brigadier in recognition of the increasing importance of the force.
An additional post of a political officer has been created for the
Tuensang Area. The three posts of Political Officers previously
borne on the Assam State Cadre have been brought on to the
N.E.F. Agency Cadre.
2. Bhutan.-Our relations with Bhutan continue to be friendly.
3. Nepal.-The year has been marked by far reaching political
changes in Nepal which put a heavy burden on the Indian Embassy
at Kathmandu and the Government of India. Both were constantly
approached for advice and assistance.
<pg14>
The First interim Cabinet with Maharaja Mohun Shamsher Jang
Bahadur Rana as Prime Minister and Shri B. P. Koirala as Home
Minister could not function smoothly due to differences of opinion
between the Rana and the Nepali Congress groups of Ministers,
Following the resignation of Shri B. P. Koirala, the Home Minister,
in November, 1951. the Prime Minister was also obliged to resign
his office. At this juncture the King called upon Shri M. P. Koirala,
President of the Nepali Congress, the largest political party in
Nepal, to Form a Cabinet. Shri Koirala's Cabinet includes thirteen
Ministers besides himself. His assumption of office as Prime Minister of Nepal put an end to the hereditary system of Prime Ministership exclusively held by the Ranas for over a century. Shri
Koirala is thus the first commoner Prime Minister of Nepal.
Arrangements for a general election in Nepal are in progress.
It is expected that a Constituent Assembly will be convened by the
end of 1952 to prepare a Constitution for the country.
Early in January 1952 the Nepalese Prime Minister and four of
his Cabinet colleagues came to New Delhi to discuss with the Government of India matters of mutual interest to the two countries.
4. Sikkim.-An I.C.S. officer lent by the Government of India
continued to administer the State. The process of associating the
public with the affairs of the state is making headway. Elected

Panchayts are now functioning all over the State and the 'question
of the constitution of an Executive Council is under consideration.
5. Sinkiang (China).-The Consulate-General at Kashgar is still
in charge of a subordinate officer of the Government of India. Most
of the Indian traders in Sinkiang have returned to India with the
result that trade between India and Sinkiang is now negligible.
6. Tibet.-In 1951, Tibet saw political changes of great historical
interest. The Sino-Tibetan Treaty, which provides for the assumption by China of control over Tibet's external affairs, for the establishment of Chinese Military Headquarters in Tibet, and the in
corporation of the Tibetan forces into the Chinese Army, and for
the defence of Tibet's borders by China was concluded during this
year.
The Indian traders carried on their normal trade in Western.
Tibet during the summer of 1951. The Trade Agent, Gartok, completed his usual annual tour of that area.
F. South East Asia
1. Burma.-The Prime Minister of Burma, visited India in
October 1951, and had discussions with the Prime Minister of India
on various matters of common interest.
<pg15>
About 200 persons who had been rendered destitute by the
activities of the insurgents in Burma were repatriated at Government expense till the end of December 1951.
Indian nationals continued to be discharged from services under
the Government of Burma on grounds of nationality. The Employment Exchanges provided employment for nearly 1400 such persons
a under the Government of India.
On the recommendations of the Indian Embassy, Rangoon, the
Government of Burma have agreed that those who have lived in
Burma for 8 years out of the ten years, preceding 1st January 1942,
will he allowed to return to Burma and reside there permanently.
2. Ceylon.-Indians who wished to acquire Ceylon citizenship
rights sent their applications for registration to the Government of
Ceylon before the expiry of the last date i.e., 5th August 1951, fixed
for submission of such applications, When approached by the
Indian organisations, the Government of Ceylon refused to extend
the time-limit for filling up the applications. Till the 5th August
1951 nearly two lakhs Indians applied for Ceylon citizenship. Out
of this the number of Indians actually registered as Ceylonese was
7728 at the end of December 1951. The Government of Ceylon are
reported to have increased their staff for the expeditious disposal of
these applications.

As a result of the liberalisation of Exchange Control regulations
by the Government of Ceylon, the difficulties of Indians in making
remittances to India, have considerably eased. Negotiations with
the Government of Ceylon about the administration of the Ceylon
Immigrants and Emigrants Act still continue. As stated in the last
year's report, the High Commissioner has been taking up individual
cases of hardship ad hoc with the authorities in Ceylon.
The Government of Ceylon continued to follow a Ceylonisation
policy in trade and employment throughout the year. Whenever
any hardship was caused to Indian interests, redress was sought
from the Government of Ceylon by the High Commissioner for
India in Ceylon.
3. Indonesia.-A Treaty. of Friendship between India and Indonesia was signed at Djakarta on 3rd March 1951.
An Indonesia Air Force Mission visited India in July 1951.
4. Indo China.-Indians in Indo-China are now permitted to send
remittances for limited amounts to India for the following
purpose:(a) Maintenance of their families.
(b) Education of their children.
140 E.A.
<pg16>
(c) Payment of Insurance premia.
(d) Expenses for travel to India on short visits.
(e) Savings in case of retirements.
In pursuance of the Debt Settlement Agreement with France,
the Government of India have released the assets in India of the
Bank of Indo-China.
5. Malaya.-The British India Steam Navigation Company has
handed over a sum of about Rs. 3 1/2 lakhs lying with them A unclaimed balance of quarantine charges to our Representative in
Malaya to be utilised for scholarships for Indian students in
Malaya.
The Government of Singapore have paid in full 7 million rupees
being our claim for the maintenance and repatriation of Japanese
internees in India during the last war.
6. Thailand.-The Indian Legation in Thailand has been raised
to an Embassy.

India has received as her share a sum of (pound)101,326 for the settlement of war damage claims of certain Indians against Thailand.
Payments are being arranged.
In June 1951, an Indian Air Goodwill Mission visited Thailand at
the invitation of the Government of Thailand. A Thai Air Goodwill Mission headed by the Deputy Commander-in-Chief of the
Thair Air Force visited India in November 1951.
The Government of Thailand have agreed to grant re-entry visas
to Indians in Thailand coming to India on short visits.
G. Far East
1. China.-The relations between the People's Republic of China
and India continued to be cordial. A Chinese Cultural Delegation
visited India during the last quarter of 1951. The Delegation stayed
for over six weeks in India and visited places of historical, scientific
and cultural importance. An Indian Cultural Delegation is expected to visit China during the first half of 1952.
The Government of India have continued their endeavours to
secure the representation of the People's Republic of China on the
United Nations, and its subsidiary organisations.
2. Hong Kong.-The problem of constitutional reforms in Hong
Kong is at present under review by His Majesty's Government.
They have assured the Government of India that India's interest in
this matter will not be overlooked.
<pg17>
3. Japan.-The Government of India declined to be a signatory
to the multilateral treaty of peace concluded at San Francisco, and
are negotiating a separate bilateral treaty with Japan.
Full diplomatic relations with Japan will be established as soon
as the state of war between India and Japan is formally terminated.
The Japanese Government Overseas Agencies In India have been
allowed to perform certain consular functions, in addition to their
normal duties.
4. Philippines.-From the 1st December 1951, diplomatic relations between India and the Philippines have been established at
Legation level.
H. Australia and New Zealand
An Indian Information Officer has been appointed in Australia
with headquarters at Sydney.
New Zealand.-The jurisdiction of the High Commissioner for
India in Australia has been extended to New Zealand.

Fiji-Mr. A. K. Sen has succeeded Mr. Waiz as Commissioner
for the Government of India in Fiji.
I. North America
1. Canada.-Mr. R. R. Saksena assumed charge as High Commissioner.
2. Mexico.-Mr. B. R. Sen, Ambassador in the United States of
America, has been concurrently accredited as Ambassador to
Mexico.
3. United States of America.-Negotiations for a Treaty of
Friendship, Commerce and Navigation between India and the
United States of America are progressing.
Mrs. Vijaya Lakshmi relinquished her appointment as Ambassador in the United States of America and returned to India.
Mr. B. R. Sen has been appointed as Ambassador in the United States
of America.
J. South America
1. Argentina.-The appointment of Nawab Ali Yavar Jang
Bahadur, Vice-Chancellor, Osmania University, as India's Ambas
sador to Argentina, has been announced. He is expected to take up
his duties towards the end of March 1952.
<pg18>
2. Brazil.-H. H. Raja Joginder Sen Bahadur of Mandi has been
appointed Indian Ambassador to Brazil. He will take up his post
shortly.
3. Chile.-Nawab Ali Yavar Jang Bahadur will be concurrently
accredited as Indian Minister to Chile.
USA
AFGHANISTAN INDIA BURMA IRAN PAKISTAN PORTUGAL THAILAND UNITED KINGDOM
AUSTRIA SWITZERLAND FRANCE GERMANY ITALY THE NETHERLANDS SPAIN SWEDEN
DENMARK FINLAND BELGIUM YUGOSLAVIA CONGO KENYA ERITREA ETHIOPIA MOROCCO
CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC MADAGASCAR SOUTH AFRICA ISRAEL SAUDI ARABIA YEMEN
EGYPT IRAQ LIBYA OMAN KUWAIT SYRIA TURKEY LATVIA BHUTAN NEPAL CHINA
INDONESIA REPUBLIC OF SINGAPORE JAPAN HONG KONG PHILIPPINES AUSTRALIA NEW
ZEALAND FIJI CANADA MEXICO ARGENTINA BRAZIL CHILE
Apr 04, 1950

International Conferences

PART III
International Conferences
During the period under review, India took an active part in the
United Nations Organisations and its functional commissions and
Specialised Agencies and continued to be a member of the numerous
other Internal Organisations and participated in the following
International Conferences:1. Fifth Session of the General Assembly of the United
Nations.
2. Sixth Session of the General Assembly of the United
Nations.
3. Security Council.
4. Special Committee on Non-Self-Governing Territories
appointed by the General Assembly.
5. International Law Commission.
6. 12th and 13th Session of the ECOSOC.
7. Fiscal Commission.
8. Economic and Employment Commission.
9. Transport and Communications Commission.
10. Statistical Commission.
11. Social Commission.
12. Commission on Human Rights.
13. Commission on the Status of Women.
14. Commission on Narcotic Drugs.
15. Economic Commission for Asia and the Far East.
Apart from these, India took part in a number of other conferences of International Organisations and Specialised Agencies, such as
FAO, UNESCO, ILO, ICAO, WHO, ITU, UPU, ITO, WMO, etc
<pg19>
At the Fifth Session of the General Assembly, the situation in

Korea was discussed. India in co-operation with the eleven ArabAsian countries made strenuous efforts to bring about a cession of
hostilities in this area.
At the Sixth Session of the General Assembly at Paris, the
following items were discussed:1. Treatment of Indians in South Africa.
2. Disarmament.
3. International Control of Atomic Energy.
4. Collective Security Measures.
Regarding the question of the Treatment of Indians in South
Africa, the General Assembly adopted a resolution creating a threemember Commission to Assist the Governments of India, Pakistan
and the Union of South Africa in carrying out appropriate negotiations.
The Indian Delegation under the Leadership of Shri B. N. Rau
took an active part in the deliberations on the above items. He also
served as Chairman of the Special Committee on the Representation
of China appointed by the Assembly during its Fifth Session. He
has been elected a Judge of the International Court of Justice by
the Security Council and the General Assembly with effect from the
Feb 06, 1952. The appointment is for a period of nine years.
He has also, in his individual capacity, been elected a member of
the International Law Commission in 1948, for a period of three
years which was subsequently increased to 5 years.
H. H. the Jam Saheb of Nawanagar, who was elected a member
of the United Nations Administrative Tribunal in 1949, continued to
serve as Chairman of the Tribunal.
India was elected a member of the 14 members Peace Observations Commission appointed by the Assembly during its Fifth
Session.
By virtue of her membership of the Security Council, India also
served on the Committee of Twelve appointed by the Assembly at
its Fifth Session to consider ways and means for merging the functions of the Atomic Energy Commission and the Commission for
Conventional Armaments.
India's term of membership of the Security Council terminated
on the 31st December, 1951. She was represented on this Council
by Shri B. N. Rau, India's Permanent Representative on the United
Nations.
<pg20>

India continues to serve on the Special Committee on-Non-SelfGoverning Territories.
India has ceased to be a member of the Economic and Social
Council with effect from 1st January, 1952.
During the 13th Session, the ECOSOC re-elected India as a member
of the Social and Transport and Communications Commissions for a
period of three years commencing from 1st January, 1952. It also
decided to abolish the Economic, Employment and Development
Commission of which India was a member. India ceased to be a
member on the Commission on the Status of Women. India is thus
now a member of six out of eight functional Commissions. The SubCommission on Statistical Sampling, the Sub-Commissions on
Freedom of Information and of the Press, have been discontinued.
By virtue of India's re-election to the Social Commission, she becomes a member of the Executive Board of the UNICEF.
India is a member of the Economic Commission for Asia and the
Far East. The Commission held one Session at Lahore during
February, 1951 at which India was represented. Another Session is
being held along with three of its other Committees at Rangoon
(Burma) at which also India is represented.
During 1951, the United Nations offered some fellowships and
scholarships to India Nationals in the field of Economic Development
and Public Administration, Nominations were received and forwarded to the United Nations by the Government of India.
India has been able to secure greater representation of Indians
in the higher grades of the U.N. Secretariat. Mr. S. Lal continues
to hold on of the eight posts of Assistant Secretaries-General.
India has participated in a number of International Conferences
in India as well as abroad. Meetings of the International Commission on Irrigation and Canals, the International Commission on large
Dams, World Power Conferences and the International Associated
for Hydraulic Structures Research were held in Delhi in January,
1951, in which prominent scientists from all parts of the globe
participated. The 27th Session of the International Institute of
Statistics was also held in India (New Delhi and Calcutta) during
December 1951-January, 1952.
INDIA
USA KOREA FRANCE SOUTH AFRICA PAKISTAN CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC CHINA BURMA
LATVIA
Feb 06, 1952

Emigration
Jan 01, 1951
PART IV
Emigration
The Indian Emigration Act, 1922, continued to be administered
through the Controller-General of Emigration and his subordinate
<pg21>
Offices. The offices of the Protectors at Calcutta, Madras Mandapam, Negapattinam and Tuticorin were inspected during the year
by the C.G.E.
2. Measures to prevent illicit emigration to Ceylon by country
craft were further tightened and a conference of the officers of the
Central and Madras Governments was convened at Madras in May,
1951, to suggest ways and means to deal with this problem.
A request from the Government of British North Borneo to permit emigration of about 10,000 Indian families for permanent settlement in that country has been received and is being examined by
Government. Demands for skilled and unskilled workers have also
been made by Sarawak Shell Co., Sarawak and the Government of
the Federation of Malaya.
INDIA

Jan 01, 1951

Information Services
Jan 01, 1951
PART V
Information Services

The year witnessed a considerable expansion of external publicity, and late in the year the establishment of new publicity posts
at the following centres was sanctioned:Geneva
Damascus
Colombo
Kathmandu.
Officers and men for these offices are still to be recruited.
A beginning in better publicity organisation was also made by
providing Missions in Manila, Wellington, Rome, The Hague and
Trinidad with skeleton publicity staff.
The publicity arrangements in the United States was reviewed
and a new office opened in New York, the centre of the American
Press. The total complement of the publicity staff in the U.S.A. was
slightly increased and the assistance of an experienced, professional
publicity expert was also made available.
Similarly, at headquarters some reorganisation was effected and
the staff strengthened to work the scheme of regionalisation decided
upon after a comprehensive survey of the requirements of South
East Asia and of the Middle East.
Twenty regular publicity posts continued to function during the
year: these were at Ankara, Baghdad, Brussels, Buenos Aires,
Cairo, Dacca, Djakarta, Kabul, Karachi, Lahore, London, Nairobi,
<pg22>
Ottawa, Paris, Rangoon, Singapore, Sydney, Tehran, Tokyo, and
Washington. As a measure of economy, the full complement of staff
was not employed at the publicity posts at Buenos Aires, Paris,
Peking, Rio-de-Janeiro and Tokyo. This resulted in a saving of about
Rs. 1,60,000 in the budget of the Information Services.
Additional funds were provided for supplying adequate and
suitable publicity material to different regions. Until now it has
not been possible to cater to regional requirements, and only an
omnibus service was available to all posts, with additional funds,
it should be possible to increase the transmission of news and views
from 2 to 5 bulletins a day, with special releases for Missions in
South-East Asia and the Middle East.
A larger number of pamphlets, brochures etc., was brought out,
with the help of additional funds provided late in the year. The
Service of ebonoid blocks was initiated for use by foreign newspapers
and periodicals, particularly in the Middle and South East. The
distribution of Indian newspapers and periodicals through our

publicity posts overseas was considerably enlarged. Greater use
was made of outside talent for the production of features and special
articles for use in the foreign Press. Photographic publicity was
also strengthened and an effort made to by feature photographs
from outside sources.
On account of its importance, special attention was given to the
improvement of our publicity in the Middle East Invitations were
issued to delegations of journalists from Turkey and Iran to visit
India. A delegation of five eminent journalists from Turkey toured
India for six weeks.
To establish closer cultural bonds between India and the Middle
East, exhibitions of a representatives collection of Indian paintings,
sketches, and photographs were held in Cairo Istanbul, Ankara and
Baghdad.
Action was initiated to set up an Arabia Unit in Cairo for the
production of special material to cater to the needs of the Middle
East.
Funds have been set apart for providing missions with an adequate
stock of reference books on various subjects. More films were also
supplied.
An exhibition of Indian Art was held at Rangoon, while collections of photographs by Raymond Burnier and Madann Jeet Singh
were exhibited in the United States, France and, Britain. The
Republic day celebrations received special attention at all Information posts, and special bulletins were issued.

SWITZERLAND
SYRIA USA SRI LANKA NEPAL ITALY NEW ZEALAND PHILIPPINES ARGENTINA BELGIUM
IRAQ TURKEY AFGHANISTAN EGYPT INDONESIA KENYA PAKISTAN UNITED KINGDOM
AUSTRALIA CANADA FRANCE IRAN JAPAN REPUBLIC OF SINGAPORE INDIA
Jan 01, 1951


