1959-60

Content
Jan 01, 1959
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PART-I
Administration(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
(vi)

PAGES

Headquarters
Indian Foreign Service
Missions abroad
Inspectorate
Expenditure
Tribal areas

1
2
3
3
4
5

PART-II
A. States in special treaty relations with India:(i) Bhutan
(ii) Sikkim
B. Foreign possessions in India

9
9
9

C. India's neighbours(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
(vi)

Afghanistan
Burma
Ceylon
China (see under East Asia)
Nepal
Pakistan

11
12
13
14
14
15

D. South-East Asia, Australia and New Zealand

18

E. East Asia

20

F. West Asia

22

G. Africa

23

H.

26

Europe

I.

The Americas.

J.

External Publicity -

30

(i) Information Activities

31

(ii) Cultural Activities

34
(i)
(ii)

K. Miscellaneous-

PAGES

(i) Emigration
(ii) Haj
(iii) Distinguished visitors from abroad
(iv) Consular Division
(v) Central Passport Organization
(vi) Diplomatic and Consular Missions in
India

35
36
36
37
39
39

PART-III
A. United Nations

40

B. International Conferences.

42
APPENDICES

(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)

Indian Missions Abroad
Indian Information Units Abroad
Foreign Missions in India
Treaties, Conventions and Agreements
concluded or renewed by India with
other countries during 1957-58
International Organisations of which
India is a member

43
47
49
54
56

INDIA
BHUTAN AFGHANISTAN BURMA CHINA NEPAL PAKISTAN AUSTRALIA NEW ZEALAND USA
Jan 01, 1959

ADMINISTRATION

PART I
ADMINISTRATION
Organisation of the Ministry
(i) Headquarters.-The Ministry of External Affairs is responsible for the conduct of India's relations with foreign countries. The
Ministry is also responsible for the country's representation in the
United Nations and advises other Ministries and State Governments
when the latter have dealings with foreign governments or institutions. In the domestic sphere it is responsible for the Administration of the North East Frontier Agency and the Naga Hills and
Tuensang Area and for matters of policy relating to former French
possessions in India. The administration of the Indian Emigration
Act of 1932, the Reciprocity Act of 1943, the Port Haj Committee
Act of 1932, the Indian Merchant Shipping Act in so far as it relates
to pilgrim ships, the Indian Pilgrim Shipping Rules of 1933, the
Protection of Pilgrims Act of 1887 (Bombay) and the Protection of
the Mohammadan Pilgrims Act of 1896 (Bengal) is also the special
responsibility of the Ministry of External Affairs.
The Ministry is in charge of a Minister of Cabinet rank. At
present the Prime Minister is also the Minister of Foreign Affairs.
A Deputy Minister assists the Foreign Minister in his work~.
The Secretary General is the principal official adviser to the
Foreign Minister on matters relating to foreign policy and is responsible for the supervision and co-ordination of the Ministry as a
whole. The Foreign Secretary deals with the American, Western
and Eastern Divisions and the West Asian and North African countries of the Southern Division, the Protocol Division, the External
Publicity Division and the Historical Division. The Commonwealth
Secretary deals with all Commonwealth Countries excluding Canada
(included in the American Division), the South Asian countries of
the Southern Division and the African Division. The Special
Secretary is in general charge of the Administration of the Ministry
and of Indian Missions and Posts abroad. In matters involving
policy the Special Secretary works in close collaboration with the
Foreign and Commonwealth Secretaries.
For administrative purposes the Ministry is divided into 11
divisions in charge of Directors. Six of the Directors are Joint
Secretaries. two are of the rank of Counsellors in the Foreign
Service, while the others are Deputy Secretaries or officers of
<pg1>
<pg2>
equivalent status. Six of the Divisions deal exclusively with India's
relations with foreign countries, each Division dealing with a num-

ber of countries grouped on a geographical or "territorial" basis.
There are two technical divisions in the Ministry dealing with Protocol and External Publicity and there is also a Historical Division. The
Administration Division is in the charge of two Joint Secretaries
and deals with the administration of personnel, establishment and
services and supplies relating to the Ministry as a whole and to the
arge number of Indian Missions and Posts abroad.
During the year under review' it was decided to abolish the
Branch Secretariat of the Ministry functioning at Calcutta and to
transfer its functions to the Branch Secretariat of the Ministry of
Rehabilitation and Minority Affairs, located at Calcutta.
During the year under review there was a marked increase in
the Organisation and Methods activities in the Ministry. O & M and
various Sections came closer to each other as a result of frequent
meetings. Quarterly Inspection of 69 Sections was conducted by the
Under Secretaries in charge of the Sections and annual inspection
of 38 Sections was conducted by Deputy Secretaries.
The Deputy Secretary in charge of O & M is also in charge of
the Vigilance Unit set up in 1955. This Unit deals with disciplinary
cases and measures connected with prevention of corruption and
works in collaboration with the Administrative Vigilance Division
of the Ministry of Home Affairs.
(ii) The Indian Foreign Service.-The permanent strength of
the Indian Foreign Service was revised during the year and refixed
at 212. In addition there are 10 supernumerary posts and 38 temporary posts in various grades.
Considerable progress was made with the Initial Constitution of
the Indian Foreign Service Branch 'B' in accordance with the Rules
issued in July 1956. From the first field of selection, Le. officers
already working in the Ministry of External. Affairs, the Ministry
of Commerce and Industry and in Diplomatic, Commercial and
Consular Missions abroad, 3244 applications for various grades were
received, and 2893 of these applications have been disposed of.
Excluding the Cypher Sub-Cadre, from this field of selection 1138
appointments in various grades have been made against 1600 permanent and 287 temporary posts.
In view of the large number of residual vacancies still remaining
in Grades I; II and IV of the General Cadre, and Grade II of the
Stenographers Sub-Cadre, applications for these grades were invited
<pg3>
from the second field. A total of 4014 applications were received
from officers serving under State Governments and in Ministries
and Central Government offices other than those of External
Affairs and Commerce and Industry. Of these, 3202 applications

have been disposed of resulting in the appointment, from the second
field, of 12 officers in Grade I, 20 in Grade II, 79 in Grade IV and
28 in Grade II of the Stenographers Sub-Cadre. The remaining
applications together with 6 applications for these grades from the
first field are still under consideration. 300 applications from the
first field for the clerical grades, submitted by officers whose
seniority does not entitle them to permanent posts in Grade VI of
the Indian Foreign Service Branch 'B', are also under consideration.
A total of 1647 officers were actually interviewed in connection with
these appointments. Partial progress has also been made with the
initial constitution of the Cypher Sub-Cadre. The question of formation of a Sub-Cadre of Interpreters and Translators is still under
consideration.
(iii) Missions Abroad.-A number of proposals from Missions
abroad for the purchase or construction of buildings which were
otherwise attractive, had to be abandoned during the year due to
the difficult foreign exchange position. The execution of work
against some of the proposals already sanctioned had also to be
deferred in some cases.
Construction of the Chancery building at Tokyo on the scale
originally contemplated could not be started. An alternative proposal to construct a smaller Chancery building at that place is, however, under examination. The construction of the Chancery building on the land leased from the Government of Ghana at Accra has
not yet started but is likely to be taken up shortly. The construction of Government buildings at Gartok and Gyantse has also not
yet started. The reconstruction of the Embassy building at the
Hague, which was partly damaged by fire, is in progress.
Work has started in connection with the construction of the
Chancery building at Karachi. A building for the residence of the
Deputy High Commissioner and some other Officers was purchased
at Karachi at a cost of Rs. 4.70 lakhs. It is also proposed to construct some additional accommodation for our Chancery at Nepal
and work in this connection is likely to start shortly.
(iv) Inspectorate.-During the year, several stations in West
Asia and Africa were visited by an Inspecting Team. Sikkim was
visited by a separate team, and Tibetan stations were inspected by
the Political Officer in Sikkim. Allowances for the stations visited
<pg4>
were revised and other administrative problems were settled in the
light of the reports of the Inspecting Teams. In addition, a general
review of the principles adopted for determining allowances was
undertaken and, as a result, allowances for all stations abroad have
been refixed on a new pattern with effect from Dec 01, 1957.
(v) Expenditure.-The expenditure of this Ministry falls under

five Demands viz. (i) Tribal Areas, (ii) Naga Hills-Tuensang Area,
(iii) External Affairs, (iv) State of Pondicherry and (v) Miscellaneous.
According to the Revised Estimates, expenditure in 1957-58 is
expected to be Rs. 1772.67 lakhs. Some of the items included therein
are either fixed or do not relate to External Affairs proper. These
are: Rs.
(in lakhs)
(i) Tribal Areas including Assam Rifles and provision for development (Rs. 85.49 lakhs) and Community Projects (Rs.
7.61 lakhs).
574.17
(ii) Naga Hills-Tuensang Area constituted with effect from
1-12-1957
107.21
(iii) Payments to neighbouring states and expenditure on Pondicherry
332.94
(iv) Contribution to U. N. O., Delegation thereto and Delegations
to the International Armistice Supervisory Commission
in Indo-China
106.79
(v) Expenditure on demarcation of boundaries between India
and Pakistan, recovery of abducted women and children
and implementation of Prime Minister's agreement
(vi) Passport and Emigration Establishment

14.33

26.49

(vii) Miscellaneous expenditure, e. g., on pilgrimage, refugees
and evacuees, repatriation of Indians, loss by exchange, etc. 5.72
The expenditure on External Relations proper amounts to
Rs. 605.02 lakhs. This includes Rs. 60.13 lakhs on High Commissioner's Office in London, Rs. 109.55 lakhs on pay and allowances of
officers and staff and other expenses at Headquarters and Rs. 25
lakhs on account of the Hospitality Grant of the Government of
India. Expenditure on 84 Missions and Posts abroad totals Rs. 410.34
lakhs. This gives an average of Rs. 4.89 lakhs per Mission. Of this
an average of Rs. 1.39 lakhs per Mission is spent on pay and
allowances of officers, Rs. 1 49 lakhs on pay and allowances of staff,
and Rs. 0.73 lakh on office and residential accommodation. The
balance consists of contingent and other expenditure.
<pg5>
In pursuance of the Prime Minister's instructions to exercise the
utmost economy in expenditure especially that involving foreign.
exchange, an Economy Committee was set up in the Ministry in
June 1957. On the recommendations of this Committee, it was

decided to keep in abeyance or abolish the posts of 2 Deputy
Secretaries, 4 Under Secretaries, 7 Section Officers, 49 Assistants, 2
Assistant Librarians, 8 U.D.Cs., 28 L.D.Cs., 8 Daftries and 38 Peons
at Headquarters for the current financial year. On the recommendations of the Heads of Missions, it was also decided to keep in
abeyance or abolish or downgrade the posts of 1 First Secretary, 1
Press Attache, 6 Registrars/Migration Officers, 22 Assistants, 43
Stenographers/clerks including some locally recruited, 17 Class IV
servants including some locally recruited, 2 Interpreters and 1 Visa
Officer.
In addition, the Missions have been asked to effect economies of
at least 10% in respect of items like (i) Building and rents-purchase of furniture, (ii) Transport, (iii) Contingent grant, (iv)
Diplomatic Bags, (v) Travelling Allowance, (vi) Trunk Calls and
(vii) Telegrams.
(vi) Tribal Areas-North East Frontier Agency.-The jurisdiction of the NEFA has been reduced during the course of the year.
It now consists of 5 Divisions and the sixth one, viz. the Tuensang
Frontier Division, along with the erstwhile Naga Hills District of
the Assam State, now comprises the separate Naga Hills-Tuensang
Area under the Naga Hills-Tuensang Area Act of 1957, which came
into force on 1 December 1957.
The Agency has continued to make progress during the year in
extending effective administration into the interior and in providing
the basic amenities to the tribal people living in the Agency, without disturbing the normal tenor of their life. The law and order
situation has also improved considerably.
The Indian Frontier Administrative Service, now consists of 40
officers, 19 in Grade I and 21 in Grade II. There are also 15 Class I
officers in technical posts in NEFA. With the extension of the administration and the formation of the new Unit of the Naga HillsTuensang Area, which is also administered by the Governor of
Assam as the Agent of the President under the general supervision
and control of this Ministry, the Service may have to be further
expanded.
There have been encouraging signs of increased self-help and
people's participation in developmental activities aimed at their
<pg6>
own betterment. A broad picture of the progress made and expected
during the course of this year is given below:1.
2.

Construction of Roads, Paths and Tracks including
improvement threreof
405 miles
Construction of Air Strips

5

3.
4.

Installation of Power-generating machines
Agriculture:
(a) Irrigation
(b) Land Development
(c) Supply of tools
(d) Supply of seeds
Sugar cane set
Fruit Seedlings
(e) Plant Protection
(f) Divisional Farms
(g) Horticultural Development

5.

425 channels dug1892 acres
23731
2093 Mds.
56000
5200
6 units
2
6

Forest Division :
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)

6.

4

Research (Survey of medical plant)
13
Afforestation
110
Demarcation
8 miles
Working Plan
160 miles
Plantation
235 Acres
Silviculture
800 Acres
Forest Roads construction
29 miles

Community Development and National Extension
Service Blocks:
(a) Continuance of Blocks already opened
(b) Opening of new Blocks

6
7

7. Health :
(a) Base Hospital
1
(b) Central Laboratory
3
(c) Research, Special problems and statistics
3 teams
(d) Addition to and expansion of existing
units
15
(e) New Health units
3
(f) H.D. (Leprosy) Sanatorium
2
(g) Water supply
15 hand-pumps installed, 6 wells dug
.
<pg7>
8. Education :
(a) Primary Education:
Establishment of new L. P. Schools
Organisation of Inter-village L. P. Schools
Conversion of schools into Basic pattern

4
7
7

(b) Secondary Education:
Inter Village High Schools
3
Conversion of existing M. E. Schools into
Inter-village M.E. Schools
13
Opening of Hostel at Shillong for NEFA
students
1
Opening of new Inter-village M. E. Schools
(c) Training :
Junior Basic
Hindi Training

3

28 students.
73 "

(d) Preparation of Text Books

In 10 dialects Of 5
Divisions in cyclostyled form printing
of Nagri charts.

9. Cottage Industries
Introduction of new crafts

2

10. Research:
(a) Philological

Verification of text
books, Preparation
of one Dictionery
in Digaru language,
Collection of Linguistic data, One
Abor song book and
two charts in Abor
and Idu languages.

(b) Museums
7
(c) Central Pictorial and Photographic Section
(d) Libraries
6

1

11. Publicity:
(a) Mobile units
(b) Films
(c) Community Sets

2
6

12. Co-operation:
Establishment of Co-operative Societies

<pg8>

50
11

The Assam Rifles are being strengthened by the addition of 29
Platoons to the existing battalions and by the raising of 3 more
battalions, bringing the total to 14 battalions. The question of setting up a training centre for recruits is also under active consideration of the Government.
(b) Naga Hills-Tuensang Area.-A Naga People's Convention
held at Kohima in August 1957 demanded a separate administrative
unit consisting of the Tuensang Frontier Division of the North East
Frontier Agency and Naga Hills District of Assam State both of
which are areas inhabited by different Naga tribes. The convention
desired that this separate unit should be administered by the Governor of Assam at his discretion as the Agent of the President.
This demand was accepted by Government and the Naga HillsTuensang Area bill, constituting the Naga Hills District of Assam
and the Tuensang Frontier Division of North East Frontier Agency
into a single administrative unit, was passed unanimously by Parliament in November 1957. The Act came into force with effect from
1 December 1957, when the Governor of Assam took over the administration of the area as Agent of the President with the assistance
of a Commissioner and three Deputy Commissioners. The unit
comprises an area of 6,236 square miles and has a population of
about 3,69,000 living in 718 villages. It has been divided into 3 districts with headquarters at Kohima, Mokokchung and Tuensang.
For covering the requirements of the area for the 4 months from
December 1957 to March 1958, a provision of Rs. 1,07,21,000 has been
made in the Supplementary budget for 1957-58. The estimate was
drawn up on the basis that apart from the Commissioner of that
area and his establishment, the existing administrative set-up in
the Naga Hill Districts and the Tuensang Frontier Division would
continue and that changes would only be brought about gradually
in the light of actual experience. In the Budget Estimate for the
year 1958-59, a sum of Rs. 3,63,58,500 has been provided for this
area.
Within the short period of its existence the new Administration
made considerable progress in pacifying this disturbed area and in
tackling problems of rehabilitation. An amnesty was granted for
offences committed against the State in the past-and a medical
team, the first of several, was sent to the area.
INDIA
CANADA USA JAPAN GHANA PAKISTAN NEPAL CHINA UNITED KINGDOM LATVIA
Dec 01, 1957

A. STATES IN SPECIAL TREATY RELATIONS WITH INDIA.

PART II
A. STATES IN SPECIAL TREATY RELATIONS WITH INDIA.
(i) Bhutan.--Measures to strengthen the relationship between
Bhutan and India through friendship and mutual co-operation have
been continued during the year. Preliminary investigations are
being completed regarding the development of a flood control
scheme in Bhutan. Arrangements are being finalized for the visit
of a student-cum-teacher delegation form Bhutan to India. The
Government of India have agreed to make a gift of 200 tons of
cement and 40 tons of steel for the Bhutan Government's projects.
Similarly, 30 complete battery radio sets with aerials were presented to the Bhutan Government to help the schemes for community
listening and mass education in Bhutan.
(ii) Sikkim.--The Seven Year Development Plan for Sikkim,
formulated and financed by the Government of india, is now in its
fourth year. The development projects have gathered momentum
and a Planning Commission team, after consultation with the
Sikkim Government have favourably reviewed the progress. It is
proposed to increase the allocation of funds for Sikkim Development Plan to complete the physical targets envisaged under the
Plan. The Plan endeavours to open up communications and to build
up the productive potential of sikkim. In this connection, the
scheme for the exploitation of copper deposits is of particular importance. Preliminary survey is being undertaken to ascertain
the potential and the requirements to exploit the deposits.
In order to make the BCG vaccination campaign a regular feature, Sikkim candidates are being trained in India in BCG vaccination techniques.
B. FOREIGN POSSESSIONS IN INDIA
The Treaty of Cession of the French Establishments of pondicherry, Karikal, Mahe and Yanam entered into in 1956, is expected
to be ratified by French Parliament at an early date.
In 1957-58, nearly Rs. 86 lakhs were allotted for various social
and development schemes in Pondicherry. In addition, a sum of
nearly Rs. 22.5 lakhs was sanctioned for the State, under the central
Loans Budget. Thus, although these French Settlements have
<pg9>

<pg10>
not yet been transferred to India de jure, development schemes
there are proceeding at the same pace as elsewhere in India.
There have been no important developments since the last report
regarding the liberation of the Portuguese possessions in India. The
Government of India have repeatedly abjured the use of force for
this purpose and the Goan political parties are continuing, in peaceful and non-violent ways, their struggle to remove the last vestiges
of colonialism from the soil of India.
There were 7 Indian nationals in jail or in detention in Goa on
1-4-57. Out of them one was released on 9-12-57 and there are still
six Indian satyagrahis, including Shrimati Sudha Joshi, in Goa jails.
A representative of the Embassy of the United States of Brazil
in New Delhi visited Bombay in August 1957 in order to look after
the interests of Portuguese nationals. The First Secretary of the
Egyptian Embassy in New Delhi last visited Goa in January 1957
for a period of about 3 weeks.
In the 'Right of Passage' case before the International Court of
Justice, the Government of India decided to contest the jurisdiction
of the Court to entertain Portugal's application and consequently
filed six preliminary Objections. However, the Court overruled, by
a majority decision, four of the Objections and joined the remaining two on merits. Feb 25, 1958 has been fixed for the submission of our Counter-Memorial.
Portuguese air-craft have frequently violated Indian air space,
during the period. We have protested but the Portuguese authorities have denied all responsibility. The Government of India are
considering what other steps can be taken in this connection.
Portuguese Police violated Indian territory on more than 42
occasions, during the year. On at least 29 occasions there was firing
across the border and into our territory. We have protested to the
Portuguese Government through the Egyptian. Embassy in New
Delhi but these have not produced any results.
During the period the Government of India eased the restrictions in respect of Indian currency to be carried by persons visiting
Goa. Travellers to Portuguese possessions in India are now permitted to take out with them Indian currency upto Rs. 100 a head for
each visit. Previously, such travellers were permitted to take out
with them currency upto a maximum of Rs. 10 for an adult and
Rs. 5 for a child during each visit.
Postal communications with Daman and Diu have been restored.

<pg11>
There has been considerable relaxation in the grant of permits
to persons wishing to go to Goa or come to India from Goa.
The Government of India Pension Office in Goa has not yet begun
disbursement of pensions. After protracted correspondence, the
Portuguese Government have now suggested the procedure of
physical carriage of funds for disbursement, from India to Goa.
The Government of India are considering this suggestion.
There have been a number of cases of desertion of Portuguese
soldiers/Goan recruits to India.
C. INDIA'S NEIGHBOURS
(i) Afghanistan.-During the year under report the relations
between India and Afghanistan continued to be friendly and cordial.
The Government of Afghanistan had approached the Government of
India to formulate a definite procedure to facilitate the transit of
goods between Afghanistan and foreign countries through India. This
has been done. On an invitation from the Government of India, His.
Majesty the King of Afghanistan, accompanied by his Deputy Prime
Minister, paid a short visit to India for about 10 days in February
1958. He received a Royal welcome and the joint communique by the
Shah and our Prime Minister called for a speedy Summit meeting,
welcomed the formation of the United Arabic Republic, expressed
deep concern in regard to the present situation in Algeria and hoped
for its early independence.
A group of five Members of Parliament. led by Shri Radha Raman,
visited Afghanistan in September 1957. On its return the delegation
made some useful suggestions for strengthening the age-old ties
between the two countries.
Afghanistan, which was a bilateral account country, was included
in the transferable account area, during 1956. As a result of this
change and also having regard to the need to conserve foreign
exchange resources of the country, the Import Control regulations
were extended to imports from Afghanistan. The Afghan Government felt that these restrictions would adversely affect the import of
Afghan goods especially dry fruits and asafoetida into India. An
Afghan Trade Delegation led by Mr. M. R. Younossi, Director General
of Foreign Trade, Ministry of Commerce of the Royal Afghan Government, visited India in May-June 1957 and had discussions in the
matter with the representatives of the Ministries of External Affairs
and Commerce and Industry. The result of this visit was an agreement to facilitate and promote trade between the two countries and.
letters were exchanged to that effect.
<pg12>

To explore the possibility of increasing the export of green tea, a
Tea Delegation from India, led by Chairman of the Indian Tea Board,
visited Iran and Afghanistan in November-December 1957.
The aeronautical and meteorological facilities provided by us last
year at the Kabul and Kandahar airports were continued during the,
year. The original two-year term of our aeronautical staff expired in
July 1957, but it was decided to extend their term of deputation for
one year more on the request of the Government of Afghanistan.
The training of Afghan Air Force personnel in the Indian Air
Force establishments, continued during the year under review. A
fresh batch of 20 Afghans arrived in India for technical training with
the Indian Air Force.
Two officials of the Afghan Bank are undergoing training in the
Reserve Bank of India.
India participated in the Afghan Jashan celebrations in August
1957. The Madras University hockey team visited Afghanistan on
this occasion. An Indian cultural troupe also participated in these
celebrations.
An Afghan Hockey Team visited India in February 1958 for about
10 days on an invitation from the Government of India.
In the cultural field, four Afghan musicians were granted scholarships for higher studies in Indian music and they are now undergoing
training in India.
An Indo-Afghan Friendship Association has recently been set up
in India with the Minister for Education and Scientific Research as its
Chairman. A similar Association has been formed in Kabul.
(ii) Burma.-Our relations with Burma continued to be close
and friendly.
On a personal invitation from the Burmese Prime Minister, the
Prime Minister stopped in Rangoon for a brief visit on his way back
from Japan. Later Prime Minister U NU paid a visit to India on a,
pilgrimage and delivered lectures on Buddhism at the University of
Calcutta. The Burmese Prime Minister met our Prime Minister at
Calcutta and the two Prime Ministers visited Rourkela and Bhilai to
see the steel plants under construction there.
Shri Manubhai Shah, Union Minister of Heavy Industries, visited
Burma at the invitation of the Burmese Government. He visited
various industrial units owned by the Government of Burma and held
<pg13>
discussions with the representatives of that Government on the problems of industrial development in that country.

The Government of Burma drew ten crores of rupees in pound
sterling out of the Loan of twenty crores of rupees agreed to by the
two Governments in March 1957.
Two teams of Indian officers went to Burma to negotiate the purchase of Burma teak for coaches and timber for sleepers for the
Indian Railways on a Government-to-Government basis.
The Government of Burma invited applications for payment of
compensation for lands nationalised by that Government during
1955-56 and 1956-57. At the request of our nationals in Burma, the
last date for submission of applications originally fixed for 30
September 1957 was extended to 31 December 1957. The Government of Burma have also started paying compensation in respect
of lands nationalised in 1953-54 and 1954-55.
The Burmese Parliament passed the Burmese Immigration (Emergency Provisions) (Amendment) Act, 1957 and the Registration of
Foreigners (Amendment) Act, 1957. The Government of Burma have
given an assurance that care will be taken in the implementation of
the new rules to see that they do not operate harshly or unjustly
against Indians and other foreigners.
Indian nationals living in Burma have experienced difficulties in
making remittances to their dependents in India. A large number of
cases involving the claims of Indian ex-employees of the Burma Government for pension, gratuity, arrears of pay, leave salary, etc., still
remain to be settled, although as a result of our Embassy's efforts
some relief was secured. While the Government of Burma are responsive to our request in matters concerning Indian nationals, the
extent of actual amelioration has been rather limited because of
Burma's own serious economic and other internal problems.
(iii) Ceylon.-Relations between India. and Ceylon continued to
be cordial and friendly.
On an invitation from the Prime Minister of Ceylon, our Prime
Minister visited Ceylon to participate in the Buddha Jayanti Celebrations in May 1957. During the three days that the two Prime Ministers were together, they exchanged views on international issues and
Indo-Ceylon relations. At Colombo the Prime Minister laid the
foundation stone of the International Buddhist centre.
Prime Minister Mr. Bandaranaike visited India at the invitation
of the Speaker of the Lok Sabha to play co-host with India and
<pg14>
Pakistan to the Commonwealth Parliamentary Conference held here
early in December 1957. During his stay in Delhi, the Prime Minister of Ceylon met the President, the Ministers for Planning, Transport and Communications and Information and Broadcasting, and

also the members of the Planning Commission and the Prime Ministers of India and Ceylon had informal and friendly talks about various
matters of mutual interest including the question of people of Indian
origin in Ceylon.
A flotilla of the Indian Navy paid a goodwill visit to Ceylon in,
August 1957.
Towards the end of December 1957, Ceylon was stricken by a.
grave calamity. The floods which inundated a considerable portion
of the island caused widespread damage and privation. Over 300,000
persons were reported to have been rendered homeless and destitute.
In response to a request from the Prime Minister of Ceylon "for
immediate assistance", Government of India sent a number of Dakotas
and helicopters manned by IAF personnel and with food and medical
supplies and supply-dropping equipment to assist in the relief of the
victims of the flood. Large quantities of textiles were despatched for
immediate relief and despatch of further gifts of Rs. 10 lakhs worth
of textiles, cement, sugar, and other items required by Ceylon is being
arranged in consultation with the Ceylon authorities as announced,
by the Vice-President, who represented India at the tenth anniversary
celebrations of Ceylon's independence in February 1958.
(iv) China.-(See under East Asia).
(v) Nepal.-The ties of friendship with Nepal were further
strengthened during the year by a number of exchanges of delegations
between the two countries. A party of Nepalese political leaders and
another of Nepalese students visited various development projects
and places of historical and cultural interest in India. Similarly
troupes of Indian artists, viz., musicians, dancers, poets, etc., visited
Nepal for the celebration of Gandhi Jayanti and the Republic Day.
The Tribhuvan Rajpath, a 79-mile mountainous highway costing
over Rs. 3 crores, was completed and formally handed over to the
Government of Nepal on 30 June 1957, as a part of India's. aid to
Nepal. India also entered into a Tripartite Road Agreement with the
Government of Nepal and the United States of America for construction of about 900 miles of roads in Nepal. India's contribution, in the
first instance, will be of the order or Rs. 83,33,000 which will be found
from our Ten Crore Aid Programme to Nepal. Under this Tripartite
Agreement, Nepal will have a skeleton net work of roads which will
help to develop the economy of the country.
<pg15>

To alleviate the food scarcity in Nepal the Government of India
gave a gift of 10,000 maunds of rice to Nepal. In addition, 2,500 tons
of rice were made available on payment and 3,100 tons on a replacement basis.
(vi) Pakistan.-Efforts to settle outstanding disputes by negotia-

tions continued throughout the year but there was no progress
towards settlement of the major issues and little improvement in
Indo-Pakistan relations as a whole.
(a) Kashmir.-Dr. Gunnar Jarring's report, submitted to the
Security Council in April 1957, was discussed in the Council from
September to December 1957. The Government of India were represented in these discussions by the Defence Minister, Shri Krishna
Menon.
On 2 December 1957, the Security Council adopted a Five-Power
resolution incorporating the amendments suggested by the Swedish
Delegation. The resolution requested the Governments of India and
Pakistan to refrain from making any statements and from doing or
causing to be done or permitting any acts which might aggravate the
situation and to appeal to their respective peoples to assist in creating
and maintaining an atmosphere favourable to the promotion of
further negotiations and requested Dr. Graham to make recommendations to the parties for further appropriate action with a view to
making progress towards the implementation of the UNCIP resolutions and towards a peaceful settlement. The Government of India
did not accept this resolution and stressed the facts of the situation
and the continued aggression by Pakistan but offered to Dr. Graham
the traditional hospitality of our country.
Dr. Graham reached the sub-continent in January 1958.
(b) Canal Waters.-Co-operative work, with the good offices of
the World Bank, continued throughout the year. In June 1957, after
a review of the situation, a Bank Team headed by Mr. W. A. B. Iliff,
Vice-President, visited India and Pakistan and held consultations
with the Prime Ministers and Ministers concerned in both countries.
As a result, Mr. Iliff suggested to both Governments certain "General
Heads of Agreement" which could form the basis of an approach
towards an international water treaty and asked the two Governments
for their comments. The views of the two Governments were communicated to the Bank but by the end of the year there was no prospect of an early settlement. Mr. Iliff visited India and Pakistan again
towards the end of January 1958 and had discussions with representatives of both Governments but no concrete progress has yet been
<pg16>
made. The Bank authorities are continuing their efforts towards a
settlement of this question.
During the course, of negotiations under the aegis of the Bank
three agreements had been concluded between the Governments of
India and Pakistan for ad hoc transitional arrangements. The last.
agreement expired on 31 March 1957. An attempt was made to negotiate an agreement for the period commencing 1 April 1958, but this
ended in failure because of certain new conditions introduced by

Pakistan. The Government of India, however, are continuing to,
distribute river supplies between the two countries on the basis of
the Delhi Agreement of 4 May 1948 and the principles proposed by
the Bank for the transition period.
(c) Evacuee Property.-There has been no response from Pakistan
Government to the offer of the Government of India made in 1952,
to have immovable Evacuee Property on both sides evaluated by
arbitration or by an impartial Tribunal or by an International Court
or by an ad hoc body consisting of nominees of the two Governments.
Various matters relating to the implementation of the Movable,
Property Agreement between the Governments of India and Pakistan.
were discussed at a meeting held in New Delhi on 28 November 1957,
between the Minister for Rehabilitation and Minority Affairs (India)
and the Minister of State for Rehabilitation (Pakistan) wherein it
was agreed that every possible step should be taken to remove the
difficulties that have come in the way of implementation of the Agreements. With a view to expediting implementation, another meeting
at Ministerial level, preceded by a meeting at Secretariat level, was
held on 25 and 26 January 1958. Matters relating to verification of
claims for urban immovable property, exchange of revenue records,
etc., were also discussed with the Pakistan Minister for Rehabilitation
who agreed to examine the question of supply of copies of revenue,
records from Pakistan.
(d) Financial Matters.-Correspondence is going on between the
Finance Ministers of India and Pakistan with a view to a meeting
being convened to discuss the outstanding financial issues between
the two countries. The date and venue for this meeting have not yet
been fixed.
(e) Trade.-As provided for in Article IX of the Trade Agreement,
a meeting between the Indian and Pakistani representatives took,
place in Karachi in December 1957. The Indian delegation pointed
out to the Pakistan representatives that the border trade arrangements were not working satisfactorily and that difficulties were being
experienced in the movement of intransit goods for Tripura via East
<pg17>
Pakistan. Attention was also drawn to the fact that the agreement
arrived at in Dacca between the Delegations of the two Governments
in March 1957 in this regard was still awaiting ratification by the
Government of Pakistan. The Pakistan Delegation intimated that
the Pakistan Government had agreed to ratify the Dacca Agreement.
It was decided that the Indian and Pakistan Railway authorities
should be asked to complete preliminary surveys of the site for the
provision of riding facilities in Tripura before the end of January
1958.
(f) Communications.-Through booking of passengers between

India and Pakistan was introduced from 1 April 1957.
(g) Steering Committees.-The Indo-Pakistan Steering Committees which met last in New Delhi in March 1955, have not met again
and no date has yet been fixed for the next meeting. However, the
Ministries of the two Governments have been dealing with the various
outstanding matters in accordance with the classification decided
upon by the Committees.
(h) Minorities in East Pakistan.-There has been a reduction in
the number of Hindus migrating from East Pakistan to India.
A number of 'cases of crimes against and harassment of members
of the minority community in East Pakistan came to the notice of the
Government of India. In accordance with the Prime Ministers'
Agreement of 8 April 1950 by which the two Governments guaranteed the safety and security, etc., of their respective minorities,
these incidents were taken up with the Government of Pakistan for
redress.
(i) Shrines and Holy Places.-The Joint Committee on Shrines,
consisting of representatives of the Government of India and Pakistan
was set up in terms of the Pant-Mirza Agreement to work out details
of implementation of the 1953 Agreement on shrines. The Government of Pakistan were invited to send their representatives for a
meeting of the Joint Committee to be held at New Delhi in the fourth
week of October 1957. As no reply was received from them, the invitation was renewed for a meeting in the fourth week of November
1957. The Government of Pakistan, in their reply, put forward certain
points for acceptance by the Government of India before they could,
agree to a meeting of the Committee being held. They were again
requested to agree to a meeting of the Joint Committee where the
differences between the two Governments could be ironed out. A
meeting of the Joint Committee was held on 24 January 1958 at
Karachi.
<pg18>
During the twelve months of 1957, 2 pilgrim parties from India
visited shrines in Pakistan, and 8 pilgrim parties from Pakistan
visited shrines in India.
(j) Border Incidents.-There was one major border incident at
Metle (Punjab) on 17 October 1957 when a body of Pakistani Khaksars ambushed a party of the Punjab Armed Police patrol. In this
incident, two members of the Punjab Armed Police patrol and one
civilian on the Indian side lost their lives. A protest has been lodged
with the Government of Pakistan.
(k) Demarcation of Boundary.-The demarcation of the 318-mile
long Punjab-West Pakistan boundary, which was started on 1 October
1956, continued till 30 April 1957, when the field season for demarca-

tion operations ended. Till that date, 120 miles of the boundary had
been demarcated and some preliminary work done in the rest of the
sector. Demarcation operations during the current field season,
which were to have started on 1 November 1957, could not be
resumed owing to certain disputes raised by Pakistan. Some of these
differences have been resolved, and the work was resumed in the
third week of December 1957.
In the Eastern Zone, of the total length of 2,481 miles of boundary,
1,221 miles were demarcated by the end of 1957. Further work is in
progress.
(i) Recovery of Abducted Women and Children.-The Abducted
Persons (Recovery and Restoration) Act 1949, as amended from time
to time, expired on 30 November 1957. The Central Recovery Organisation set up under the Act was closed down from that date. The
recovery work will continue to be dealt with by the Ministry of
External Affairs with the assistance of an Advisory Board comprising
mainly of persons connected with social welfare activities.
D. SOUTH-EAST ASIA, AUSTRALIA AND NEW ZEALAND
India's relations with her neighbours in South-East Asia continued
to be cordial and friendly.
(i) Indonesia.-As part of a tour undertaken for rest on medical
advice, President Sukarno paid a brief visit to India early in
January 1958.
The Government of India granted traffic rights to the Garuda
Indonesian Airways for one weekly flight via India during 1958 on
<pg19>
the basis of reciprocity. Air India International has also started
operating a weekly flight through Djakarta.
(ii) Malaya.-The emergence of the Federation of Malaya as a
sovereign and independent nation was a great historic event during
1957. Shri S. K. Patil, Minister for Irrigation and Rower, accompanied by Shri Sadath Ali Khan, Parliamentary Secretary to the
Prime Minister, represented India at the Merdeka (independence)
celebrations at Kuala Lumpur.
The Government of India raised the status of their Mission at
Kuala Lumpur to that of a High Commission.
The University of Malaya sought the assistance of an expert
from India to serve on a Commission appointed to review the organisation and working of the University, and the Government of
India made the services of Dr. Tara Chand available for the purpose.
(iii) Singapore.-The Government of India welcomed the attain-

ment of internal self-Government by Singapore. Under an Agreement signed in London in April 1957 between the U.K. Government
and the Chief Minister of Singapore, Singapore is known as the
"State of Singapore" and will have a new constitution. As a preliminary to the drawing up of the new constitution, the Government
of Singapore has passed a Citizenship Ordinance. The Chief
Minister of Singapore visited Delhi to attend the International
Labour organisation Conference in November 1957, and had discussions on matters of mutual interest with our Prime Minister. It
has been decided by the two Governments to extend reciprocal
facilities for the acquisition of Indian and Singapore citizenship to
the citizens of Singapore and India respectively on the basis of a
two year period of residence.
(iv) Thailand.-The Thai Government are planning the construction of a Thai temple at Bodh Gaya. The Government of India
are providing them necessary facilities in this regard.
(v) Indo-China.-The International Commissions for Supervision
and Control in the states of Indo-China of which India is Chairman
continued to work efficiently during the year.
(vi) Cambodia.-To further strengthen the close relations
between India and Cambodia, the services of an Indian Professor
have been lent to teach Sanskrit at the Buddhist University of
Phnom Penh.
(vii) Laos.-Agreements have been reached between the Laotian
Government and the Pathet Lao on the extension of the Royal
Laotian Government's administration to the two northern provinces
<pg20>
and integration of the Pathet Lao into the Laotian community. A
coalition Government has been formed as a result of these agreements. The Laotian Government appreciated the efforts made by
India, as, Chairman of the International Commission, in bringing
about this settlement. India's Legation in Laos was raised to the
status of an Embassy.
(viii) Vietnam.-The stalemate in Vietnam continues and elections contemplated in the Geneva Agreement, for reunification
of Vietnam, have not so far taken place. India, as Chairman of the
International Commission, continued to have friendly relations on
a de facto basis with the Governments in Hanoi and Saigon and
helped in the maintenance of peace in Vietnam.
The Vice-President of India paid a State Visit to Cambodia,
Laos, Democratic Republic of Vietnam and the Republic of Vietnam
on. the invitation of the Governments concerned. He was given a
warm and enthusiastic welcome wherever he went.

The President of the Republic of Vietnam, Mr. Ngo Dinh Diem
paid a state visit to India from 4 to 9 November 1957. The
President of the D.R.V.N. visited India from 5 to 13 February 1958.
(ix) Australia and New Zealand.-Relations with Australia and
New Zealand remained cordial. Shrimati Lakshmi N. Menon,
Deputy Minister for External Affairs went on a goodwill tour of
Australia and New Zealand in January-February 1958.
(x) Philippines.-The Government of India presented 811 lbs. of
tea to the Government of the Republic of the Philippines for the
relief of victims of floods in the Philippines during July 1957. The
Governments of Philippines and India decided to raise their Diplomatic Representations to the level of Embassies.
E. EAST ASIA
(i) China.-A number of goodwill, cultural and technical missions
were exchanged' to strengthen the friendly relations with China.
The Vice-President, Dr. Radhakrishnan, visited China and
Mongolia in September 1957 at the invitation of the respective
Governments. The Chinese Statistical Bureau invited Professor
Mahalanobis and his wife, both of whom visited China. Delegations
of Indian doctors, teachers, writers, and women and dancing troupe
of Shri Uday Shankar also visited China at the invitation of corresponding Chinese Associations.
<pg21>
A Salt Study Mission, a Hydro-electric and water conservancy
Mission and a Chinese Military goodwill delegation visited India
during the year. Two Chinese engineers studied the water conservancy projects and gravity dams etc., with the Central Water Power
Commission in India. The Indian Statistical Institute at Calcutta
is also training two Chinese statisticians.
The Chinese Government presented the relics of Hiuen-Tsang
along with a gift of approximately Rs. 5,75,000 for the construction
of a memorial hall at Nalanda where the relics would be enshrined.
The hall would be dedicated to promote Sino-Indian studies. Steps
for the construction of the hall are in hand.
The Government of India continued their effort to secure for the
People's Republic of China her rightful place in the United Nations.
(ii) Mongolia.-The visit of our Vice-President strengthened
friendship between the two countries. As a gesture of sympathy,
the Government of India sent tea and medical supplies for the relief
of earthquake victims in Mongolia. The Government of India have
agreed to a Mongolian Photographic Exhibition in India.

(iii) Japan.-The year under report was a notable one for IndoJapanese relations. The Prime Minister of Japan, Mr. N. Kishi, visited
India in May and the Prime Minister of India returned the visit in
October 1957. During these two visits, the two Prime Ministers exchanged views on international problems affecting world peace, disarmament and discontinuance of nuclear weapons tests and discussed
the possibilities of economic co-operation between Japan and India.
They agreed that further discussions should be held at an expert
level between the two Governments.
A Trade Agreement was signed at Tokyo on 4 February 1958,
between the two countries under which each contracting party
agreed to accord to the other a "most-favoured-nation treatment" on
a wide range of subjects in the matter of trade.
By a separate agreement signed on the same date Japan
agreed to make available to India a credit of 18 million Yen (about
Rs. 240 Million) for purchase of capital goods from Japan.
The two Governments are also negotiating for the satisfactory
settlement of claims arising from the loss of properties of the
nationals of the two countries during the war.
A group of members of the Japanese Parliament accompanied by
some industrialists visited India with a view to studying the economic, political and social conditions in India. Similarly the Governor,
of Hokkaido (Japan) accompanied by a party of ten experts also
<pg22>
visited India to explore the possibilities of increasing trade between
the two countries. Another Japanese Delegation visited India to
survey in collaboration with Indian experts the iron ore resources
of India and their stabilised supply on a long term basis to Japan.
This scheme would result in increased exports of iron ore from
India.
The Cultural Agreement between India and Japan which was
signed at Tokyo in 1956 was ratified in Delhi during the visit of the
Japanese Prime Minister.
The Government of India extended their sympathy to the victims
of floods in Japan and sent 3,000 lbs. of Indian Tea as a gesture of
their sympathy with the distressed.
(iv) Korea.-The efforts of the Government of India to promotea peaceful solution of the Korean problem continued during the
year.
The Government of India were able to send five more exprisoners of the Korean war to Argentina leaving only eleven exprisoners who are yet to be settled.

F. WEST ASIA
India's relations with the countries of West Asia continued to
be cordial. Steps were taken to further the bonds of friendship
and goodwill existing between India and these countries.
Although the programme of cultural activities had to be curtailed
due to the difficult foreign exchange position, grants-in-aid were
given to the Indo-Egyptian, Indo-Turkish and Indo-Arab Societies
and to the Indo-Iranian Cultural Association, Tehran. The Iranian
Embassy opened a cultural centre in Delhi. Under the Cultural
Scholarship scheme of the Government of India, nine scholarships
were offered to students from West Asian countries for study in
India. Arrangements were also made for securing admission to
private students from Syria in various courses in the Indian Universities. Admission of some Iranian students was arranged in the
medical, engineering and other technical institutions in India.
The Government of India continued to look after the interests
of Syria in the United Kingdom and her territories. The Iranian
interests in China continued to be looked after by the Indian
Mission there.
Negotiations for the conclusion of the Air Agreement between
the Governments of India and Iran continued during the year.
<pg23>
The Director General of the Ministry of Interior, Government of
Iraq, along with four provincial governors, visited India under the
Point Four Programme, for studying the Community Projects and
village welfare schemes. The party was given all facilities and
assistance.
On his way to the Commonwealth Prime Ministers' Conference,
the Prime Minister made a brief halt at Damascus and had talks
with Syrian leaders.
At the request of the Government of Yemen, the Government
of India deputed an Agricultural expert to tour Yemen and make a
general survey of the country.
The Medical Mission sent by the Government of India to work
among Palestine Refugees, under the auspices of the United Nations
Relief Works Agency for Palestine, did praiseworthy work. The
Government of India have decided to make a contribution in the
form of textiles for the relief of the Palestine Refugees.
As a gesture of sympathy, the Government of India sent a gift
of 1,000 pounds of tea to Iraq for the relief of earthquake victims
in that country. The Government of Iraq presented a gift of dates
worth E 10,000 to India for affording relief to victims of floods.

Early in June 1957, Iran experienced a serious earthquake resulting in a huge loss of life and destruction of property. The Indian
Red Cross Society donated Rs. 5,000 for the relief of the victims of
the earthquake. The Government of India rushed much-needed
supplies of medicines and blankets besides ready-made garments as
relief gifts.' These were airlifted free of cost by the Indian Airlines
Corporation and the Iranian airways. On an appeal issued by the
Deputy Minister for External Affairs, various firms in India donated
1,000 blankets, ready-made garments and 1,000 lbs. of tea for relief
to the victims of the earthquake in Iran. The supplies were transported to Tehran by a specially chartered I.A.C. Dakota. The Exhibition Society of Bombay also sent wearing apparel, aluminium
utensils, blankets, soap and biscuits for the relief of earthquake
victims.
G. AFRICA
(i) Egypt.-The Prime Minister visited Egypt on his way back
to India from the Commonwealth Prime Ministers' Conference. He
had talks with the Egyptian leaders on matters of mutual interest
to the two countries.
Under the Cultural Scholarship Scheme of the Government of
India, two scholarships have been given to students from Egypt.
<pg24>
The Government of Egypt have offered this year two scholarships
to Indian students for study in Egypt.
The Government of India continued to look after the interests
of Egypt in United Kingdom. (and her territories) and France.
(ii) Sudan.-The Prime Minister visited Sudan on his way home
from the Commonwealth Prime Ministers' Conference. During his
stay, he had talks with the Sudanese leaders on matters of common
interest to the two countries.
At the request of the Government of Sudan, Dr. A.N. Khosla,
Vice Chancellor of the Roorkee University, was deputed to Sudan to
advise that Government on the proper utilization of the Nile
Waters. Requests were also received from the Government of
Sudan for the services of technical personnel and all efforts were
made to comply with them.
Under the Cultural Scholarship Scheme of the Government of
India, two scholarships have been given to students from Sudan.
Arrangements were also made for securing the admission of private
students from the Sudan in the various courses at the Indian Universities. A Sudanese Trade Delegation visited India in March and
December 1957 for the purpose of promoting trade between India

and the Sudan.
(iii) Tunisia and Morocco.-The Foreign Minister of Morocco,
Mr. Ahmed Balafrej visited India from 21 to 23 August 1957.
The Government of India have opened an Embassy in charge of
a Counsellor in Morocco, which started functioning from September
1957. Under the Cultural Scholarship Scheme of the Government of
India, two scholarships have been offered to students from Tunisia
and Morocco.
(iv) British East Africa.-Though the State of Emergency in
Kenya continued during the year, there was a marked improvement
in the situation and the emergency regulations continued to be
relaxed progressively.
A clove delegation from Zanzibar visited India in January 1958
to discuss the restrictions imposed on the import of cloves.
(v) West Africa.-A new chapter was opened in our relations with
Ghana on the achievement of independence by Ghana on 6 March
1957. The friendly relations already existing between the two
countries were further strengthened during the year under review.
At the request of the Government of Ghana, the Government of
India agreed to look after the interests of that country in Egypt,
<pg25>
Syria and Saudi Arabia through the Indian representatives in those
countries.
Ghana's Ministers of Finance and Education, Messrs. K. A.
Gbedemah and C. T. Tylander, visited New Delhi from 4 to 7 September 1957. A Trade-cum-Goodwill Delegation led by Ghana's
Minister of Housing, Mr. A. E. Inkumsah, also visited India in
December 1957.
On the request of the Government of the Western Region of
Nigeria for the services of an Adviser on Industrial Development,
Shri A. V. Raghavachar was deputed to that country.
(vi) South Afriea.-The South African Government continued
their policy of apartheid and other oppressive measures.
The Cape province and Lydenburg in the Transval were proclaimed as "group areas" under the Group Areas Act of 1950. These
and other oppressive measures taken by the South African Government are causing much anxiety to the 'non-white' population of that
country. These developments have been brought to the notice of
the United Nations General Assembly.
(vii) Ethiopia.-Relations with Ethiopia contined to be friendly.
Nine Indian military officers left for Ethiopia in May 1957 to work

as Commandant and Instructors at the Haile Selassie I Military
Academy, Harar. A further batch of Civilian teachers and staff
from India is expected to join the Academy shortly.
When the official Indian Delegation led by Shri M. J. Desai,
Commonwealth Secretary, visited Ethiopia in March 1957, the
Ethiopian Government asked for the services of certain categories
of technical personnel from India. Names of suitable serving and
retired officers have been furnished to the Ethiopian Government.
The gift of two lion cubs from the Emperor of Ethiopia for the
Delhi Zoo arrived in June 1957.
Five of the six Ethiopian Police officers, who came to India for
training in October 1956, completed their training in May 1957 and
the sixth in December 1957. All of them are staying on in India
for further academic education.
Two additional Ethiopian Naval Cadets came to India to join the
July 1957 Special Entry Naval Course at the National Defence
Academy at Khadakvasla. There were thus altogether three
Ethiopian Naval Cadets receiving training in India during the year.
Two more Ethiopian Naval Cadets are expected to arrive shortly to
<pg26>
join the Academy. Two officers of the Imperial Body Guard are
also receiving training at the Defence Services Staff College at
Wellington.
With a view to exploring possibilities for the training in India
of Imperial Body Guard Cadets and officers, a four-man delegation
headed by Lt. Col. Woldeyohanes Chitta visited India in OctoberNovember 1957. Arrangements for their visit to various training
establishments in India were made by the Defence Ministry.
In response to a request from the Government of Ethiopia, two
persons were recommended for the post of Riding Instructor for the
Imperial Body Guard and Assistant Secretary of the Imperial Racing
Club in Ethiopia. The selected persons have already reached
Ethiopia.
In response to a request from the Ethiopian Government permission was granted for the export to Ethiopia of 20 tons of rice
seeds of four varieties for experimental purposes.
(viii) Madagascar.-The Pan Indian Ocean Science Congress met
in Tananarive on 24th October 1957. India was represented by a
delegation headed by Dr. P. K. Ghosh.
The Indian Naval Flotilla was on an informal visit to the Port
of Diego Saurez from 21 to 24 June 1957.

(ix) Mauritius.-The Hon'ble Mr. N. Seeneevassen, Minister of
Education, Government of Mauritius, visited Delhi from 9 to 14
November 1957, on his way back from Burma. Later, Mr. S. Boolell,
a member of the Legislative Council, represented the Colony at the
Commonwealth Parliamentary Conference in Delhi.
H.EUROPE
(i) United Kingdom.-The Prime Minister attended the Commonwealth Prime Ministers' Conference held in London from 26 June
to 5 July, 1957, where the Commonwealth Prime Ministers exchanged
views on various matters. The visit of the Prime Minister of the
United Kingdom the Rt. Honourable Harold Macmillan, to India in
January 1958, provided a further opportunity for informal exchange
of views on current international questions and other matters of
mutual interest.
The Conference of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association
was held in Delhi in December 1957. Delegates from various
Commonwealth countries, including representatives of legislative
associations from the U.K., Colonies attended the Conference.
<pg27>
Observers attended from other non-Commonwealth countries including the U.S.A. and the Conference provided valuable opportunities
for exchange of experiences and views.
(ii) U.S.S.R.-Relations with the U.S.S.R. continued to be
cordial. Official and unofficial delegations from India visited the
U.S.S.R. and a number of delegations from the U.S.S.R. also came
to India. Thus an Indian Army and Air Force delegation of six
officers, led by General Thimaya, an Indian Naval Delegation
led by Commodore Chakraverti visited the U.S.S.R.
Important visitors from the Soviet Union included the Soviet
Women's Delegation led by Madam Zueva Tatiana Mikhailovna,
Minister of Culture, R.S.F.S.R. and a Delegation from the Soviet
Radio. A Soviet Parliamentary Delegation visited India in
February 1958.
Exchange of scholars and experts continued during the year.
Co-operation in trade and commercial matters also grew substantially.
(iii) Czechoslovakia.-The friendly relations between India and
Czechoslovakia were strengthened. Czechoslovakia has taken
several steps to help India in the implementation of her Second
Five Year Plan, and has agreed to set up a foundry-forge plant in
India.
At the invitation of the Government of India, the Prime Minister
of Czechoslovakia, Mr. Viliam Siroky, accompanied by the Foreign

Minister of Czechoslovakia and other representatives, visited India
in January 1958. During his stay in India, the Prime Minister of
Czechoslovakia had several talks with the Prime Minister of India.
A joint communique signed during this visit reaffirmed the faith of
the two Governments in the Five Principles of Co-existence and
repeated the view that immediate cessation of the testing of nuclear
and thermonuclear weapons would be a first and concrete step which
could be adopted forthwith.
(iv) Hungary.-At the invitation of the Government of Hungary,
the Indian Delegation to the Inter-Parliamentary Conference in
London, led by Pandit H. N. Kunzru, visited Budapest in September 1957. Mr. Karoly Szarka, Deputy Foreign Minister of Hungary,
visited India in August, 1957.
(v) Rumania.-A Rumanian Cultural Delegation, led by the VicePresident of the Rumanian Institute for Cultural Relations with
Foreign Countries, visited India in December 1957. The troupe gave
performances in Delhi, Calcutta, Bombay and Madras.
<pg28>
The Cultural Agreement concluded between India and Rumania
was ratified on 26 September 1957.
It was decided to raise the Diplomatic Representations of India
and Rumania to the level of Embassies.
(vi) Yugoslavia.-Our friendly relations with Yogoslavia were
strengthened in a variety of ways. Mr. S. Vukmanovic, VicePresident of the Federal Executive Council of the Federal People's
Republic of Yugoslavia, accompanied by a party of four, visited
India towards the end of September 1957. During his visit, he had
talks with the Prime Minister as also with officials of the Ministry
of Commerce and Industry and the Planning Commission.
The Indian Naval Ship, "I.N.S. MYSORE" on its voyage from the
United Kingdom to India, visited the Yugoslav port of Split on a
goodwill mission and was most hospitably received. The ship and
its officers and crew created a fine impression and there was high
praise for the morale and technical skill of our personnel.
(vii) Poland, Bulgaria and Albania.-Our relations with these
countries continued to be friendly.
(viii) Austria.-As a token of the growing cordial relations
between Austria and India, the Foreign Minister of Austria has
accepted the Government of India's invitation to visit India in 1958.
The Government of Austria have made an offer of two scholarships to be awarded to Indian students for the academic year 1958-59.

(ix) Belgium.-To promote cultural relations the Government of
India have accepted the Belgium Government's offer of a scholarship for post-graduate research to an Indian student for the year
1958.
(x) Netherlands.-The Prime Minister visited the Netherlands on
8 and 9 July 1957 in response to an invitation from the Prime
Minister of the Netherlands. He was accorded. a warm friendly reception. During his stay in the Netherlands he was received by the
Queen of the Netherlands.
The Government of India have accepted the offer of one scholarship made by the Government of the Netherlands to promote cultural
relations with India.
(xi) France.-Relations with France continued to be friendly and
there was wide co-operation in several matters. A number of
scholarships were offered by the Government of France to Indian
students in various fields of scientific studies and research. The
Government of India have accepted these offers.
<pg29>
M. Maurice Faure, Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs of
France, accompanied by M. Raymond Laporte, Director of the
Secretary of State's Cabinet and M. Pierre Millet, Director of Asiatic
Affairs in the French Ministry of Foreign Affairs, paid a State visit
to India from 5 to 9 September 1957.
(xii) Federal Republic of Germany.-The Federal German Government expressed its readiness to assist India in its efforts to carry
through the Second Five Year Plan and to take appropriate and
effective steps to this end. As a result, a series of trade talks was
held both in India and in West Germany and several agreements were
reached. Our relations with the Federal Republic of Germany were
marked by understanding and friendliness.
(xiii) Greece.-In pursuance of the decision taken in 1956 to
establish diplomatic relations with Greece at Embassy level, our
Ambassador to Yugoslavia has been concurrently accredited to
Greece.
(xiv) Italy.-Our relations with Italy continued to be friendly
and sympathetic. Of the various schemes of co-operation between
the two countries, one is the decision of the Government of India to
establish a direct Radio-telegraph Service between India and Italy.
(xv) Vatican.-Our relations with the Vatican were marked by
understanding and cordiality.
(xvi) Spain.-In furtherance of the decision taken in 1956 to
establish diplomatic relations with Spain at Embassy level, our

Mission at Madrid will start functioning shortly.
(xvii) Switzerland.-We continued to have cordial and close relations with Switzerland.
Mr. Lepori, Federal Councillor for Posts, Telegraph, Railways,
Broadcasting, Television and Tourism of Switzerland visited India as
a Government guest.
The Government of India have accepted the offer made by the
Government of Switzerland of two scholarships to Indian nationals
for post-graduate study research in any branch of science, technology
or engineering in Switzerland.
(xviii) Scandinavian Countries.-The Prime Minister paid goodwill visits to Denmark, Norway, Sweden and Finland from 15 June
to 25 June 1957. In all these countries he received a warm welcome
and the visits resulted in strengthening the friendly relations existing
between these countries and India.
Denmark and India decided to raise their Diplomatic Representations to the level of Embassies.
<pg30>
I. THE AMERICAS
(i) The United States of America.-In response to the PrimeMinister's appeal for the suspension of nuclear tests to the leaders
of different countries, especially the United States of America and
the U.S.S.R., in November 1957, the President of the United States
declared in a message to the Prime Minister that the United States
Government realised how important it was for the peace of the world
that there should be an agreement on disarmament and the suspension
of nuclear tests, and that the United States of America would
continue in its efforts in this regard.
In September 1957, the Finance Minister visited the United
States of America to discuss with the American leaders the question
of Indo-American co-operation in the financial field with regard to
the Second Five Year Plan. He also visited the United Kingdom,
Canada and Germany. As a first result of these talks, the Government of the United States of America have expressed their desire to
assist India with loans upto the extent of 225 million dollars, and
a delegation to discuss the details, led by Shri B. K. Nehru, Secretary,
Ministry of Finance, visited the United States.
In 1955, India undertook to assist in the repatriation of those
Chinese nationals resident in the United States who were desirous
of returning to China. Eighty-eight Chinese nationals have so far
been repatriated to the Chinese mainland with the assistance of our
Missions in the United States.

To enable the United States Government to carry out the Ful
bright programme for the year 1958-59, the Government of India
made a further "on account" payment to them of Rs. 20 lakhs in
September 1957 under the terms of the Indo-United States Agreement of 16 May 1956, regarding the disposal of United States War
surplus stores in India.
(ii) Canada.-A modified Indo-Canadian Immigration Agreementwas signed in May 1957 raising the annual quota of Indian immigrants to Canada to 300 from 150.
(iii) Latin America.-At the invitation of the Prime Minister, the
Chilean Minister of Foreign Affairs, Sr Osvaldo Sainte Marie,
accompanied by his wife visited India in April 1957.
Sr Sainte Marie called on the President and Vice-President and
had talks with the Prime Minister and the Minister Without Portfolio. A joint statement was later issued by the Chilean Minister
<pg31>
of Foreign Affairs and the Prime Minister of India affirming belief
in the following five principles:(i) Equality of States and respect for their integrity and
territorial sovereignty.
(ii) Non intervention in the internal affairs of other States.
(iii) Aggression shall not be an instrument of national and international policy.
(iv) Necessity and the benefits of economic collaboration
between the two countries, and
(v) International problems should be solved by peaceful means.
During their stay in India the Chilean Delegation discussed
matters relating to trade and economic relations with the Ministry
of Commerce and Industry. The visit has further promoted the
friendship between the two countries and helped the development
of Indo-Chilean relations.
A separate Mission at Embassy level has been opened in Santiago
by the Government of India.
The President of India sent a message of greetings to the new President of Nicaragua, Senor Don Luis A Somoza, and India's Permanent
Representative to the United Nations attended the Presidential
Inauguration on 30 April 1957.
In August 1957, the Indian Ambassador in Rio de Janeiro was

deputed to represent India at the Inauguration of General Hector B.
Trujillo as President of the Dominican Republic.
The President and the Prime Minister sent messages of greetings
to the new President of Honduras, Doctor Villeda Morales, on the
occasion of his Inauguration on 21 December 1957.
(iv) General.-Cultural relations between India and the Americas
continue to be maintained through a series of "exchange" schemes
and programmes, chiefly of an academic nature.
J. EXTERNAL PUBLICITY
(i) Information Activities
During the period under review, the entire working of the
External Publicity Division, its organisational structure and functions
have been basically examined. The Overseas Information Units, too,
are being similarly examined. As a result of all this it is hoped that
there will be an overall improvement in India's overseas Information
Services.
<pg32>
Despite the deficiencies and defects in India's overseas publicity,
it has, within the 10 years of its existence, done a great deal to
stimulate awareness of ideals and objectives for which India stands
and towards the fulfilment of which our people are constantly
striving.
The total budgetary provision for the External Publicity Division
as well as India's overseas Information Units for the year 1957-58 was
about Rs. 91 Lakhs. The actual expenditure is, however, estimated to be Rs. 85 lakhs. Out of this amount Rs. 20 lakhs represents expenditure at headquarters and Rs. 65 lakhs on the Information Posts
abroad. The total expenditure includes salaries of officers and staff,
India-based and local, cost of their passages, foreign allowance,
health benefits, rents and taxes for premises, cost of furniture and
other equipments, postage, telegrams and telephone charges etc.
The actual amount available for information and publicity work is,
naturally, a very small proportion of the total financial outlay. The
External Publicity Division runs 49 separate Information Units and
provides information service to approximately 60 of India's foreign
posts.
The staff employed, both at headquarters and in the Information
Units abroad, consists of 7 Public Relations Officers, 36 Information
Officers, 24 Assistant Information Officers, 23 Information Assistants
and 575 subordinate officials-India-based as well as local recruits.
During the year, the various information and publicity media were
continued to be employed on a somewhat larger scale. Morse transmissions from headquarters are at present received by 34 Information

Posts abroad and the reception of morse transmissions has been
extended to Ottawa, Washington and New York. Formerly, these
Information Units were fed by means of cables which was unsatisfactory.
The World Press Review service has been greatly expanded and
improved during the year. The review contains summaries of reports and comments on India appearing in the foreign press, along
with other comments and news of interest to this country. Nearly
450 copies of the Review are daily distributed to Ministries and
Departments of the Government of India, Indian and foreign press
and to others.
Approximately 100 new titles of books were added to Indian Information Service reading rooms and libraries abroad. In addition,
copies of the following publications were supplied to all the posts
during the year:(i) 'March of India'
(ii) 'Kashmir'

4,000 copies
2,000 "

<pg33>
(iii) 'Kurukshetra' (English edition)
500 copies
'Kurukshetra' (Hindi edition)
100
"
(iv) 'AIR Selections'
900
"
(v) 'Bhagirath'
400
"
(vi) 'Yojna' (English edition)
600
"
'Yojna' (Hindi edition)
200
"
(vii) 'Ajkal' (Urdu)
650
"
'Ajkal' (Hindi)
850
"
(viii) 'Prasarika' (Hindi)
500
"
(ix) 'Bal Bharti' (Hindi)
900
"
(x) 'Gram Sevak' (English)
150
"
'Grain Sevak' (Hindi)
100
"
(xi) 'Samaj Kalyan' (Hindi).
200
"
(xii) 'Social Welfare'
700
"
The Division also continued to supply a selection of Indian newspapers and periodicals, produced commercially, as well as pamphlets
published by the Publications Division on various aspects of India's
development-economic, industrial, cultural, social, etc.
Most of the overseas Information Units published weekly or
fortnightly "INDIA NEWS" in various foreign languages. The
number of copies printed is naturally small, varying between 1,500
to 6,000.
The External Publicity Division produced a large number of
pamphlets, mostly on Goa and Kashmir. The Division also produced
and distributed a monthly journal, the 'Foreign Affairs Record'.

On the Republic Day most of the Information Units published
Annual Reviews of the progress made by India as well as a number
of pamphlets, particularly on the Kashmir question and Goa.
Approximately 50 feature articles were issued.
One thousand and seven hundred prints of 25 new documentaries
were supplied to the Information Units overseas, apart from overseas editions of Indian News Reviews. Eight new 16 m.m. projectors
were sanctioned. Arrangements for adding to our mobile cinema
vans abroad have been made. Phnom Penh and Kathmandu will
soon be having a van.
The External Publicity Division rendered assistance in India's
participation in international Film Festivals at London, Melbourne,
Cannes, Venice, Rome, Milan, Palermo, Berlin, New York, Tokyo,
Helsinki, Peking, Sydney, San Francisco, Karlovy Vary, Stockholm,
Edinburgh, Moscow, Paris, Pula and Buenos Aires.
<pg34>
Nearly 70,000 prints of photographs on various subjects were distributed for display as well as to meet, the requests made by local
institutions and organisations. In addition, a good number of
ebonoids and blocks were also distributed.
The libraries of gramophone records in India's Information Units
overseas were augmented during the year by about 3,000 records of
Indian light music, classical and folk music.
Steps are being taken to provide radio sets and pick-ups to a
number of our publicity posts.
(ii) Cultural Activities
The External Publicity Division rendered assistance in India's
participation in the following exhibitions by supplying photographs,
publications, costumes and other dresses, paintings and art books etc.:1. Exhibition held in connection with the Buddha Jayanti
celebrations in our Missions at Tokyo, Phnom Penh and
Gangtok;
2. III International Festival of Children at Palermo (Italy);
3. XXVI Poznan International Fair, Poznan (Poland);
4. World Mission Exhibition-depicting costumes worn by the
people of different countries, held in the Hague;
5. Canadian National Exhibition at Ottawa;
6. The United Nations Day celebrations organised by the
Argentine Association for the United Nations in Buenos
Aires;
7. The United Nations Week celebrations organised by the

Pakistan U. N. Association in Karachi;
8. Photographic and Art and Craft Exhibition at Suva;
9. Wholly Indian Exhibition-Peking;
10. Labour Exhibition-Tokyo;
11. World Doll Exhibition-Tokyo;
12. Indian Exhibition of photographs-depicting progress of
India in various fields-in Hanoi;
13. Indian Exhibition "Reproduction of Ajanta Paintings" at
New York;
14. Pakistan Publishers and Book Sellers Book Exhibition in
Lahore;
15. Islamic Cultural Exhibition sponsored by Zahira College,
Colombo;
<pg35>
16. Fourth International Fair at Damascus;
17. Indian Handicrafts Exhibition at Beirut.
The External Publicity Division was also called upon to render
assistance in a variety of ways to a large number or press, radio,
television and film representatives from abroad. In addition, the
Division was responsible for organising visit to India of several
groups of foreign editorial writers and journalists. The largest of
these consisted of 35 very distinguished editors who had participated
in the conference of the International Press Institute at Kandy. A
Press Delegation of 5 has also been invited from Burma. A large
number of American pressmen visited India under the auspices of
the U.S. Society of Editors and Commentators, New York.
K. MISCELLANEOUS
(i) Emigration.-There was no change during the year in the
administration of the provisions of the Indian Emigration Act (VII of
1922). Emigration of unskilled workers continued to be prohibited.
As in the previous year, Indian labourers already settled in Malaya,
Burma and Ceylon were, however, permitted to return to those
countries after short visits to India. Permission was also granted on
the merits of each case to the dependants of labourers already settled,
in Malaya, Burma and Ceylon, to proceed to those countries.
Emigration for the purpose of 'skilled work' as defined in the Act,
continued to be permitted by the Protectors of Emigrants at the ports
of embarkation in compliance with the formalities prescribed under
the Act which inter alia includes execution of an agreement between
the employer and the employee stipulating the terms and conditions
of employment. The agreements were executed in standard forms
approved by the Government and revised from time to time in the
light of experience gained in the disposal of complaints dealt with
by Emigration authorities. Emigration took place notably to the
Persian Gulf areas for employment in the Oil Companies and to

Burma for employment under various Government and Quasi-Government bodies. Standard forms of agreement for recruitment by
the University of Rangoon and certain other bodies in Burma have
been finalised.
The decline in passenger traffic to Malaya which was noticed
during the years 1954, 1955 and 1956 consequent on the promulgation
of the Immigration Regulations by that Government, continued during
the year under review. No difficulties were experienced in obtaining
sea passages and the malpractices of passage brokers and touts were
kept under check.
<pg36>
Efforts to prevent illicit emigration to Ceylon were continued
during the year. With a view to co-relating the measures taken by
the, Emigration and Police Departments to check illicit emigration
to Ceylon, periodical meetings of the officers of the Emigration
Department in the Madras State and the District Departments of
Police, Tanjore, Ramanathapuram and Tirunelveli were held from
time to time since October 1955. It has also been proposed in
consultation with the Government of Ceylon to hold periodical
meetings between the Ceylon and Indian Police Officers at District
level along with the Emigration Officers for proper coordination and
effective enforcement of measures to prevent illicit emigration.
Care was also taken by the Protectors of Emigrants concerned to
ensure that Indian labourers coming from Ceylon on valid travel
documents were not subjected to any hardships while returning to
Ceylon. The closure and disposal of the Ceylon Government Immigration Office at Tiruchirappalli and the Quarantine Camp at Tattaparai
were being finalised during the latter part of the year.
The question of amending the Indian Emigration Act to bring it
in line with present day requirements (e.g., extension of the provisions of the Act to cover departures by air and making the penal
provisions deterrent) is under consideration.
The procedure introduced during 1955 in the case of West Africa
and Hongkong, whereby prospective employers in those countries
wishing to take out skilled workers from India for employment were
required to obtain 'No Objection Certificate' from the Indian Commissioners in those territories after signing the standard form of
agreement prescribed for the purpose, was also made applicable to
Fiji as an experimental measure.
(ii) Haj.-During the Haj season 1957, nearly 14,000 pilgrims went
to Saudi Arabia. But in view of the large number of pilgrims, the
Shipping Company was not in a position to provide passages for all
in the available ships. Consequently, special exemption was given
to carry passengers in excess of the authorised capacity of the ships.
Medical assistance was, as usual, provided at Mecca, Medina and

Jeddah. Further, the Government of India sent a special Medical
Mission consisting of 3 doctors and 2 compounders, equipped with
medicines, for rendering medical aid to the Haj pilgrims.
(iii) Distinguished Visitors from abroad.-Among the distinguished visitors to India during the year were His Majesty King Zahir
Shah of Afghanistan; H.E. Dr. Sukarno, President of the Republic
of Indonesia; H.E. Ngo Dinh Diem, President of the Republic of Vietnam; H.E. Dr. Ho-chi Minh, President of the Democratic Republic
<pg37>
of Viet-nam; H.E. Mr. S. Vukmanovic, Vice-President of the Federal
Executive Council of the Federal People's Republic of Yugoslavia;
the R. Hon'ble Harold Macmillan, Prime Minister of the United
Kingdom and Lady Dorothy Macmillan; the Hon'ble Mr. S. W. R. D.
Bandaranaike, Prime Minister of Ceylon; the Hon'ble U Nu, Prime
Minister of Burma and Mrs. Nu; H.E. Mr. Viliam Siroky, Prime Minister of the Czechoslovak Republic; H.E. Mr. Nobusuke Kishi, Prime
Minister of Japan; H.E. Mr. Osvaldo Sainte Marie, Foreign Minister
of Chile; H. E. Mr. Ahmed Balafrej, the Foreign Minister of Morocco:
H.E. M. Maurice Faire, Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs,
France; Dr. Frank Graham, United Nations Representative; Mr. Cabot
Lodge, United States Permanent Representative at the United
Nations; Senor Luis De Mora, President, Foreign Affairs Committee,
and Members of Parliament, Republic of Peru; the Hon'ble Mr. J. M.
Macdonnell, Minister without Portfolio, Canada; H.E. Mr. K. A.
Gbedemah, Minister for Finance, accompanied by His Excellency
Mr. C. T. Nylander, Minister for Education, Ghana; the Hon'ble
William J. Browne, Q.C., Minister without Portfolio of Canada;
Mr. Ezra-Taft Benson, Secretary of Agriculture of U.S.A.; the Hon'ble
Mr. Sawa Duma Sinwa Mawng, Minister for Relief and Resettlement
of Burma; the Hon'ble Mr. Nils Lyso, Minister of Fisheries of Norway;
the Hon'ble Mr. Maula Bax Sumroo, Minister of Rehabilitation of
Pakistan; Mr. C. J. M. Alport, Parliamentary Under Secretary of State
for Commonwealth Relations, U.K.; General Maxwell D. Taylor, Chief
of Army Staff of the United States; Lord and Lady Pethick Lawrence
of the United Kingdom; Dr. Evatt, leader of Australian Labour
Party, and Mrs. Evatt; Mr. Anthony Nutting, a former Minister of the
United Kingdom; Mr. and Mrs. Ngo Dinh Nhu of South Vietnam; Delegates from Burma, Ceylon, Indonesia and Japan to the
Asian Legal Consultative Committee; Mr. Lok Darshan, Principal
Private Secretary to the King of Nepal and Mrs. Lok Darshan.
(iv) Consular Division.-There was no change in the type of work
during the year under review. Some of the important items handled
during the year are mentioned below.
The preparation of two more chapters of the Foreign Service
Instructions of 'Uniforms' and 'Cultural Relations' was started, in
consultation with the Ministries of Home Affairs land Information
and Broadcasting respectively, but they have not yet been finalised
for issue. In addition, the general question of the revision of consular

fees and the accounting procedure thereof is under consideration and,
as soon as the matter is finalised, necessary amendments in the Table
of Consular fees prescribed under Schedule I of the Diplomatic and
Consular Offices (Oaths and Fees) Act, 1948, which forms Annexure
I of the chapter of 'Fees' of the Foreign Service Instructions, will be
undertaken.
<pg38>
The question of the transmission of judicial documents was
examined and it was decided that, with the exception of Letters of
Request, these documents should be addressed, wherever possible,
by the issuing authorities on a reciprocal basis with their counterparts in the other countries.. To this end, all our Missions and Posts
abroad and the State Governments have been approached. In the
case of Singapore and the Federation of Malaya, it was decided that
such documents should be sent through the High Courts.
Eighty-six documents consisting of letters of request, commissions,
and other processes etc., as against the sixty-eight dealt with last
year, received through the various State Governments for service in
Africa, the Arab world, Europe, South-East Asia and the United States
of America, were, after proper scrutiny, either forwarded to the
authorities concerned through our Missions abroad or returned to the
State Governments for the completion of certain formalities. Sixty
two letters of request, commissions and other processes, etc., as
against the fifty-one dealt with last year were received from abroad
for service in India and were transmitted to the appropriate State
Governments, for further necessary action.
One hundred and fourteen judicial documents, such as powers of
attorney, affidavits, certificates, etc., intended for use in foreign countries were attested during the year.
Eighty-five requests for remittance facilities from Indians abroad
were received during the year, some for sending money to India and
some from India; facilities have so far been provided to seventeen
parties while the requests of the remaining sixty-eight parties are
still under consideration of the respective foreign Governments.
During the year there were eighty-two cases of relief and repatriation of destitute Indian citizens from countries such as Afghanistan,
Lebanon, Burma, Iraq, China, Malaya, the United Kingdom, the
United States of America, etc., at a cost of Rs. 1.3,083 as against the
one hundred and thirty-two cases at a cost of Rs. 30,953 last year.
Since the policy of the Government of India is not to subject the
repatriates to undue hardship, the recoveries effected from the repatriates after their arrival in India have as usual been negligible.
The position regarding the maintenance of evacuee orphans by the
State Governments has been encouraging. This number is gradually
decreasing due to such factors as their attainment of majority,
marriage, employment, etc. The expenditure incurred in this respect

is shared equally by the State Governments concerned and the
Government of India.
<pg39>
The recoveries of advances made to the evacuees from war zones,
have, on the other hand, not been encouraging. The work is entrusted abroad to our Missions in Burma, Malaya and Singapore and in
India to the State Governments who, in agreement with the Government of India, receive half the amount collected. The State of
Madras, however, receives 80 per cent. of the, amount recovered, in
order to pay for the cost of maintenance of the staff required for this
work. As the West Bengal Government is unable to handle this
work, the Branch Secretariat in Calcutta has been entrusted with it
and the Government retains whatever is recovered. Now that the
Branch Secretariat has been abolished, the work pertaining to the
Burma Recovery Organisation together with the staff has since been
taken over by the Regional Passport Office, Calcutta. The three
major difficulties in the way of effective recovery are:(i) Some individuals who received advances died and their
heirs are not in a position to pay;
(ii) some individuals are too poor to make any payment and it
is not the Government's policy to put them to undue hardship; and
(iii) some individuals cannot be traced despite the best efforts
of the State Governments and the police.
(v) Central Passport Organisation.-The number and jurisdiction
of our Regional Passport Offices remain unaltered. The Chief Commissioner at Pondicherry continues to be the passport issuing
authority for the area under his jurisdiction.
At a conference of ail Regional Passport Officers, held on 15
October 1957, ways and means of reducing the present delays and
liberalising our policy as regards the issue of passports were discussed and necessary instructions have since been issued.
(vi) Diplomatic and Consular Missions in India.-At the end of
the year 1957-58, there were 40 Embassies, 7 High Commissions and
8 Legations in addition to the Apostolic Internunciature. During
the year, diplomatic relations were established at the Embassy level
with Greece and at the Legation level With Cuba, Albania and
Lebanon. The status of the Rumanian, Laotian, Danish and the
Philippine Legations was raised to Embassy level. Ghana and the
Federation of Malaya opened their High Commissions at New Delhi.
The total number of foreign consular posts in India at the end of
the year was 96. Two new foreign Consular posts, one at Calcutta
and the other at Bombay were established.

INDIA
BHUTAN USA BRAZIL EGYPT PORTUGAL CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC AFGHANISTAN
ALGERIA IRAN BURMA JAPAN SRI LANKA PAKISTAN CHINA NEPAL AUSTRALIA NEW
ZEALAND INDONESIA UNITED KINGDOM LATVIA MALAYSIA REPUBLIC OF SINGAPORE
THAILAND CAMBODIA LAOS VIETNAM SWITZERLAND PHILIPPINES MONGOLIA KOREA
ARGENTINA SYRIA IRAQ YEMEN FRANCE SUDAN MOROCCO TUNISIA KENYA GHANA SAUDI
ARABIA NIGER NIGERIA SOUTH AFRICA ETHIOPIA MADAGASCAR MAURITIUS NORWAY
SLOVAKIA HUNGARY YUGOSLAVIA ALBANIA BULGARIA POLAND AUSTRIA BELGIUM THE
NETHERLANDS GERMANY GREECE ITALY SPAIN DENMARK FINLAND SWEDEN CANADA
CHILE NICARAGUA DOMINICA HONDURAS RUSSIA FIJI LEBANON MALI PERU CUBA
Feb 25, 1958

A. UNITED NATIONS
Jan 01, 1959
PART III
A. UNITED NATIONS
Though the United Nations has so far failed to resolve the disarmament deadlock, there is increasing realisation that resort to
force will solve no problem. At one stage anxiety grew over the
Syrian-Turkish border but it was discussed in the General Assembly
and after some time calm was restored in that area.
There was more support this year for proper representation of
China in the United Nations.
The decision taken by the Assembly on a few selected topics is
briefly given below:(i) Disarmament.-Disarmament was one of the main tangible
issues with which the, United Nations General Assembly was confronted at its 12th Session. India sought to introduce her own concrete proposals on Disarmament and nuclear tests and also for the
enlargement of Disarmament Commission, by finding out a modus
vivendi aimed at reconciling the opposing views of the Soviet Union
and the Western Powers.
The Russian proposal called upon States possessing nuclear
weapons to renounce the use of atomic and hydrogen weapons for
five years after which period if no comprehensive international agree-

ment on the disarmament problem is reached the question of renunciation would be considered again. This resolution was not adopted.
U.S.S.R. also submitted a draft resolution for a temporary suspension
of nuclear tests but did not press it to a vote.
The 24-power, Western-sponsored resolution on Disarmament asked
for priority for a disarmament agreement which, upon its entry into
force, would provide for the immediate suspension of testing of nuclear
weapons with prompt installation of effective international control,
the cessation of production of fissionable material for weapons purposes, the reduction of stocks of nuclear weapons through a programme of transfer of stocks, of fissionable material from weapons
to non-weapon uses, the reduction of armed forces and armaments,
the progressive establishment of open inspection and the joint study
of an inspection system designed to ensure that the sending of objects
to outer space should be exclusively for peaceful end scientific purposes. This resolution was passed by the Assembly by 57 votes in
favour, 9 against and 15 abstentions.
<pg40>
<pg41>
(ii) Admission of New Members.-The Federation of Malaya was
admitted as the 82nd member of the United Nations, which event was
described by our representative as "a happy augury" for the General
Assembly.
(iii) West Irian.-The proposal submitted by 19 Afro-Asian
Powers inviting both parties-Indonesia and the Netherlands-to
pursue their endeavours to find a solution of the dispute in conformity
with the principles of the United Nations Charter, failed adoption as
it did not receive the required two-thirds majority in the General
Assembly.
(iv) Question of Algeria.-The Assembly unanimously adopted a.
resolution under which it expressed concern over the situation in
Algeria, took note of the offer of good offices made by His Majesty
the King of Morocco and His Excellency the President of the Republic
of Tunisia; it expressed the wish that in a spirit of effective cooperation, pourparlers would be entered into, and other appropriate means
utilized with a view to a solution, in conformity with the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
(v) Question of Cyprus.-The General Assembly failed to adopt
the Greek resolution on Cyprus, earlier recommended. by its Political
Committee. The Political Committee's resolution had expressed
concern that "the situation in Cyprus is still fraught with danger
and that a solution at the earliest possible time is required to preserve the peace and stability in that area" and further expressed the
hope that negotiations would be undertaken to have the right of self-

determination applied in the case of the people of Cyprus.
(vi) Treatment of People of Indian origin in the Union of South,
Africa and Policies of Apartheid.-On the first question the Special
Political Committee adopted a joint resolution sponsored by Iran,
Mexico, the Philippines and Yugoslavia, which appeals to the Government of South Africa to participate in negotiations with the
Governments of India and Pakistan with a view to solving the problem. in accordance with the Purpose and Principles of the Charter
and the Universal Declaration of, Human Rights and invites the
parties concerned to report as appropriate, jointly or separately, to
the General Assembly regarding the progress of the negotiations.
On the question of race conflict in South Africa resulting from
the policies of apartheid of that Government, the Assembly deplored
that the South African Government had not yet responded to the
call and invitation of last year's resolution; it again drew the attention of that Government to that resolution and appealed to it to revise its policy in the light of the principles and purposes of the
Charter and of world opinion.
<pg42>
(vii) Co-existence.-India, along with Sweden and Yugoslavia
sponsored a resolution on Co-existence, with a sub-heading "Peaceful
and Neighbourly Relations among States," which in its operative
section, "call upon all states to make every effort to strengthen international peace, and to develop friendly, and co-operative relations
and Settle disputes by peaceful means as enjoined in the Charter and
as set forth in this resolution". This resolution was adopted by a
vote of 77 in favour, none against with 1 abstention (Formosa).
(viii) Special United Nations Fund for Economic Development,
In spite of initial strong opposition from a number of countries to the
establishment of such a Fund, the General Assembly finally adopted
a unanimous resolution on the financing of economic development,
which decided that subject to certain conditions there should be
established "as an expansion of the technical assistance and development activities of the United Nations and the specialised agencies a
separate Special Fund which would provide systematic and sustained
assistance in fields essential to the integrated technical, economic and
social development of the less developed countries".
B. INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCES
India also participated in a large number of conferences organized
by the specialised agencies and important international organizations
like the Red Cross. A new inter-governmental organization was
established in Vienna for the peaceful use of atomic energy: International Agency for Atomic Energy. India is a member of the
Board of Governors of this Agency. Brief reports on Indian participation in some of the important conferences arranged by the

specialised agencies and others will be found in the reports of the
appropriate Ministries.
SYRIA
USA CHINA INDIA RUSSIA INDONESIA THE NETHERLANDS ALGERIA MOROCCO TUNISIA
CYPRUS IRAN MEXICO PHILIPPINES YUGOSLAVIA SOUTH AFRICA PAKISTAN SWEDEN
AUSTRIA
Jan 01, 1959

APPENDIX I INDIAN MISSIONS ABROAD
Jan 01, 1959
APPENDIX I
Embassies
1 Afghanistan
2 Argentina
3 Belgium
4 Brazil
5 Burma
6 Cambodia
7 Chile
8 China
9 Czechoslovakia
10 Denmark
11 Egypt
12 Ethiopia
13 France
14 Germany
15 Greece
16 Indonesia
17 Iran
18 Iraq
19 Ireland
20 Italy
21 Japan
22 Laos
23 Mexico
24 Mongolia
25 Morocco
26 Nepal
27 Netherlands
28 Norway
29 Philippines
30 Poland

INDIAN MISSIONS ABROAD

Ambassador resident in Stockholm

Ambassador resident in Belgrade

Ambassador resident in London

Ambassador resident in Washington
Ambassador resident in Peking

Ambassador resident

in Moscow

<pg43>
<pg44>
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41

Rumania
Ambassador resident in Prague
Saudi Arabia
Sudan
Sweden
Switzerland
Syria
Thailand
Turkey
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
United States of America
Yugoslavia

High

Commissions

1
2
3
4
5
6

Australia
Canada
Ceylon
Ghana
Malaya
New Zealand

7

Pakistan

8 United Kingdom

High Commissioner resident in
Canberra
Deputy High Commissioners at
Dacca and Lahore and Assistant
High Commissioners at Hyderabad (West Pakistan) and
Rajshahi (East Pakistan)

Legations
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11

Albania
Austria
Bulgaria
Cuba
Finland
Hungary
Jordan
Lebanon
Libya
Luxemburg
Vatican

Minister
Minister
Minister
Minister
Minister
Minister
Minister
Minister
Minister
Minister
Minister

Special Missions
1 Bhutan
2 Sikkim
3 United Nations
<pg45>
Commissions
1

Aden

resident in Rome
resident in Berne
resident in Belgrade
resident in Washington
resident in Stockholm
resident in Moscow
resident in Baghdad
resident in Cairo
resident in Cairo
resident in Brussels
resident in Berne

2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

British East Africa
British West Indies
(including British
Guiana)
Central African Federation
Fiji
Hongkong
Mauritius
Nigeria
Singapore
Uganda

Commissioner resident in Nairobi

Commissioner resident in Accra
Commissioner resident in Kuala
Lumpur
Commissioner resident in Nairobi

Consulates-General
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14

Belgian-Congo
Copenhagen
Geneva
Hamburg
Hanoi
Helsinki
Lhasa
New York
Ruanda-Urundi
Saigon
San Francisco
Shanghai
Surinam

Consul General resident in Nairobi

Consul General resident in Nairobi

Tananarive

Consul General resident in Port of
Spain

Consulates
1
2
3
4
5

Basra
Berlin
Khorramshahr
Kobe
Medan
<pg46>

6
7

Muscat
Sourabaya

Vice-Consulates
1
2
3
4
5

Antwerp
Jalalabad (Afghanistan)
Kandahar (Afghanistan)
Mandalay (Burma)
Zahidan

Agencies
1
2
3

Gartok
Gyantse
Yatung

INDIA
AFGHANISTAN ARGENTINA BELGIUM BRAZIL BURMA CAMBODIA CHILE CHINA
NORWAY SLOVAKIA DENMARK SWEDEN EGYPT ETHIOPIA FRANCE GERMANY GREECE
YUGOSLAVIA INDONESIA IRAN IRAQ IRELAND UNITED KINGDOM ITALY JAPAN LAOS
MEXICO MONGOLIA MOROCCO NEPAL PHILIPPINES RUSSIA POLAND CZECH REPUBLIC
SAUDI ARABIA SUDAN SWITZERLAND SYRIA THAILAND TURKEY USA AUSTRALIA
CANADA GHANA NEW ZEALAND PAKISTAN BANGLADESH ALBANIA AUSTRIA BULGARIA
CUBA FINLAND HUNGARY JORDAN LEBANON LIBYA BHUTAN KENYA FIJI MAURITIUS
NIGER NIGERIA REPUBLIC OF SINGAPORE UGANDA CONGO VIETNAM SPAIN OMAN
Jan 01, 1959

APPENDIX II INDIAN INFORMATION UNITS ABROAD

Jan 01, 1959
APPENDIX II
INDIAN INFORMATION UNITS ABROAD
1 Accra
2 Addis Ababa
3 Ankara
4 Baghdad
5 Bangkok
6 Beirut
7 Belgrade
8 Berne
9 Bonn
10 Brussels
11 Buenos Aires
12 Cairo
13 Colombo
14 Dacca
15 Damascus
16 Djakarta
17 Fiji
18 Gangtok
19 The Hague
20 Hongkong
21 Jeddah
22 Kabul
23 Karachi
24 Kathmandu
25 Lahore
26 London
27 Manila
28 Moscow
29 Nairobi
30 New York (U.N.)

<pg47>
<pg48>
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49

New York (C.G.)
Ottawa
Paris
Peking
Phnom Penh
Port Louis
Prague
Rangoon
Rio de Janeiro
Rome
San Francisco
Salisbury
Kuala Lumpur
Stockholm
Sydney
Tehran
Tokyo
Trinidad
Washington

INDIA
GHANA ETHIOPIA TURKEY IRAQ LEBANON YUGOSLAVIA SWITZERLAND GERMANY
BELGIUM USA ARGENTINA EGYPT SRI LANKA SYRIA INDONESIA FIJI SAUDI
ARABIA AFGHANISTAN PAKISTAN NEPAL UNITED KINGDOM PHILIPPINES RUSSIA
KENYA CANADA FRANCE CAMBODIA MAURITIUS CZECH REPUBLIC ITALY MALAYSIA
SWEDEN AUSTRALIA IRAN JAPAN
Jan 01, 1959

APPENDIX III FOREIGN MISSIONS IN INDIA

Jan 01, 1959
APPENDIX III
FOREIGN MISSIONS IN INDIA
(i) Embassies
1
2
3
4
5
6

Afghanistan
Argentina
Belgium
Brazil
Burma
Cambodia

7 Chile
8 China
9 Czechoslovakia
10 Denmark
11 Egypt
12 Ethiopia
13 France
14 Federal Republic of Germany
15 Greece
16 Indonesia
17 Iran
18 Iraq
19 Italy
20 Japan
21 Laos
22 Mexico
23 Mangolia
24 Nepal
25 Netherlands
26 Norway
27 The Philippines
28 Poland
29 Rumania
30 Saudi Arabia
<pg49>
<pg50>
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40

Spain
The Sudan
Sweden
Switzerland
Syria
Thailand
Turkey
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
United States of America
Yugoslavia

(ii)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7

High Commissions

Australia
Canada
Ceylon
Ghana
Federation of Malaya
Pakistan
United Kingdom

(iii)

Legations

1 Albania
2 Apostolic Internunciature
3 Austria
4 Bulgaria
5 Cuba
6 Finland

7
8
9

Hungary
Jordan
Lebanon

(iv)

Foreign Consular Offices in India

----------------------------------------------------------------Country
Location
Status
----------------------------------------------------------------1 Afghanistan
Bombay
Consulate General
2 Austria
Bombay
Consulate
3 Austria
Calcutta
Consulate
4 Austria
Madras
Consulate
----------------------------------------------------------------<pg51>
----------------------------------------------------------------Country
Location
Status
----------------------------------------------------------------5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42

Belgium
Belgium
Belgium
Bolivia
Brazil
Brazil
Burma
Burma
China
China
Colombia
Colombia
Costa Rica
Costa Rica
Cuba
Czechoslovakia
Denmark
Denmark
Denmark
Denmark
Dominican Republic
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
Egypt
Egypt
El Salvador
Ethiopia
Finland
Finland
France
France
France
France
Germany
Germany
Germany
Greece
Greece

Bombay
Calcutta
Madras
Calcutta
Bombay
Calcutta
Calcutta
Madras
Bombay
Calcutta
Calcutta
Madras
Bombay
Madras
Calcutta
Bombay
Bombay
Calcutta
Cochin
Madras
Bombay
Calcutta
Calcutta
Bombay
Calcutta
Calcutta
Bombay
Bombay
Calcutta
Bombay
Calcutta
Cochin
Madras
Bombay
Calcutta
Madras
Bombay
Calcutta

Consulate General
Consulate General
Consulate
Consulate General
Consulate (Vacant)
Consulate
Consulate General
Vice Consulate
Consulate General
Consulate General
Consulate (Vacant)
Consulate
Consulate General
Consulate General
Consular Agency
Consulate General
Consulate General
Consulate
Consulate
Consulate
Consulate General
Consulate
Consulate
Consulate General
Consulate General
Consulate
Consulate
Consulate
Consulate
Consulate General
Consulate General
Consular Agency
Consulate
Consulate General
Consulate General
Consulate
Cosulate General
Consulate General

43 Haiti
Bombay
Consulate
44 Haiti
Calcutta
Consulate
45 Indonesia
Bombay
Consulate
----------------------------------------------------------------<pg52>
----------------------------------------------------------------Country
Location
Status
----------------------------------------------------------------46 Indonesia
Calcutta
Consulate
47 Iran
Bombay
Consulate General
48 Iran
Calcutta
Consulate General
49 Iraq
Bombay
Consulate General
50 Israel
Bombay
Consulate
51 Italy
Bombay
Consulate
52 Italy
Calcutta
Consulate General
53 Japan
Bombay
Consulate General
54 Japan
Calcutta
Consulate General
55 Liberia
Calcutta
Consulate
56 Luxemberg
Bombay
Vice Consulate
57 Monaco
New Delhi
Consulate General
58 Monaco
Bombay
Consulate (Vacant)
59 Nepal
Calcutta
Consulate General
60 Netherlands
Bombay
Consulate General
61 Netherlands
Calcutta
Consulate
62 Netherlands
Cochin
Consulate
63 Netherlands
Madras
Consulate
64 Nicaragua
Bombay
Consulate
65 Nicaragua
Calcutta
Consulate
66 Norway
Bombay
Consulate General
67 Norway
Calcutta
Consulate General
68 Norway
Cochin
Vice Consulate
69 Norway
Madras
Consulate
70 Panama
Bombay
Consulate General
71 Peru
Calcutta
Consulate General
72 Philippines
Bombay
Consulate
73 Spain
Bombay
Consulate
74 Spain
Calcutta
Vice Consulate
75 Spain
Madras
Vice Consulate
76 Sweden
Bombay
Consulate General
77 Sweden
Calcutta
Consulate
78 Sweden
Madras
Consulate
79 Switzerland
Bombay
Consulate General
80 Switzerland
Calcutta
Consulate
81 Switzerland
Cochin
Consular Agency
82 Switzerland
Madras
Consular Agency
83 Syria
Bombay
Consulate General
84 Thailand
Calcutta
Consulate General
85 Turkey
Bombay
Consulate General
----------------------------------------------------------------<pg53>
----------------------------------------------------------------Country
Location
Status
----------------------------------------------------------------86

Turkey

Calcutta

Consulate

87
88
89
90
91
92
93
94
95

U.S.A.
U.S.A.
U.S.A.
U.S.S.R.
U.S.S.R.
Uruguay
Venezuela
Yugoslavia
Democratic Republic
of Vietnam

Bombay.
Calcutta
Madras
Bombay
Calcutta
New Delhi
Calcutta
Bombay

Consulate
Consulate
Consulate
Consulate
Consulate
Consulate
Consulate
Consulate

General
General
General
General
General
General
General
General

Consulate General
(de facto)
96 Republic of Vietnam
New Delhi
Consulate General
(de facto)
----------------------------------------------------------------(iv)

New Delhi

New Foreign Consular Missions opened
Year 1957-58

in India During the

1. Consulate for Philippines at Bombay
2. Consulate General for U.S.S.R. at Calcutta
(vi) Foreign Consular Missions Re-opened in India During the
Year 1957-58
Consulate General for Uruguay at New Delhi
(vii) Foreign Consular Missions whose Status was Changed During
the Year 1957-58
The status of the Consulate for Denmark at Bombay was
raised to that of a Consulate General.

INDIA
AFGHANISTAN ARGENTINA BELGIUM BRAZIL BURMA CAMBODIA CHILE CHINA
NORWAY SLOVAKIA DENMARK EGYPT ETHIOPIA FRANCE GERMANY GREECE INDONESIA
IRAN IRAQ ITALY JAPAN LAOS MEXICO NEPAL PHILIPPINES POLAND SAUDI
ARABIA SPAIN SUDAN SWEDEN SWITZERLAND SYRIA THAILAND TURKEY USA
YUGOSLAVIA AUSTRALIA CANADA GHANA PAKISTAN ALBANIA AUSTRIA BULGARIA
CUBA FINLAND HUNGARY JORDAN LEBANON BOLIVIA COLOMBIA COSTA!!DOMINICA
ECUADOR EL SALVADOR HAITI ISRAEL LIBERIA MONACO CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC
NICARAGUA PANAMA PERU URUGUAY VENEZUELA VIETNAM
Jan 01, 1959

APPENDIX IV TREATIES, CONVENTIONS AND AGREEMENTS CONCLUDED

APPENDIX IV
TREATIES, CONVENTIONS AND AGREEMENTS CONCLUDED

OR RENEWED BY INDIA WITH OTHER COUNTRIES DURING
1957-58.
1. Trade Agreement with Afghanistan signed on Jun 14, 1957
at New Delhi.
2. Trade Agreement with Austria signed on 26 August 1957 at
Vienna.
3. Trade Agreement with Bulgaria signed on 20 June 1957 at
New Delhi.
4. Trade Agreement with Ceylon signed on
New Delhi.
5. Trade Agreement with China signed on
New Delhi.

13 January 1958 at
25 May 1957 at

6. Trade Agreement with Czechoslovakia signed on 3 June 1957
and 30 September 1957 at New Delhi.
7. Trade Agreement with Federal Republic of Germany signed
on 16 April 1957 at New Delhi.
8. Trade Agreement with Hungary signed on 11 April 1957 and
15 January 1958 at New Delhi.
9. Trade Agreement with Indonesia signed on 28 June 1957 at
New Delhi.
10. Trade Agreement with Italy signed on 2 January 1958 at
New Delhi.
11. Trade Agreement
Tokyo.

with Japan signed on 4 February 1958 at

12. Trade Agreement
at New Delhi.

with Norway signed on

13. Trade Agreement
New Delhi.

with Sweden signed on 1 June 1957 at

17 December 1957

14. Trade Agreement with the U.S.S.R. signed on 5 April 1957
and 3 January 1958 at New Delhi.
15. Trade Agreement with Yugoslavia signed on 19 June 1957 at
New Delhi.
16. Instruments of Ratification of the Cultural Agreement between Indonesia and India signed on 29 December 1955,
exchanged on 8 February 1958 at New Delhi.
<pg54>
<pg55>
17. Instruments of Ratification of the Treaty of Commerce and
Navigation between Iran and India signed on 15 December 1954,
exchanged on 10 May 1957 at New Delhi.

18.

Instruments of Ratification of the Air Agreement between
Iraq and India signed on 27 July 1955, exchanged on 3 September 1957 at Baghdad.

19. Instruments of Ratification of the Cultural Agreement between Japan and India signed on 29 October 1956, exchanged on
24 May 1957 at New Delhi.
20. Agreement with Japan for Yen credit signed on 4 February
1958 at Tokyo.
21. Instruments of Ratification of the Cultural Agreement between Rumania and India signed on 30 April 1957, exchanged on
26 September 1957 at Bucharest.

INDIA
AFGHANISTAN AUSTRIA USA BULGARIA CHINA NORWAY SLOVAKIA GERMANY
HUNGARY INDONESIA ITALY JAPAN SWEDEN YUGOSLAVIA IRAN IRAQ ROMANIA
Jun 14, 1957

APPENDIX V INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATIONS OF WHICH INDIA IS A MEMBER

Jan 01, 1959
APPENDIX V
INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATIONS OF WHICH INDIA IS A
MEMBER
1 United Nations General Assembly.
2 Interim Committee of the General Assembly.
3 Trusteeship Council.
4 United Nations Commissions and Committees:(a) Advisory Committee on Peaceful uses of Atomic Energy.
(b) Committee to consider the question of convening a
General Conference to review the United Nations
Charter.
(c) Committee on Information from Non-Self Governing
Territories.
(d) Peace Observation Commission.
(e) Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation.
(f) Disarmament Commission.

(g) Preparatory Commission on Special Projects Fund.
5 Functional Commissions of the Economic and Social Council:(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)

Human Rights Commission.
Commission on International Commodity Trade.
Narcotic Drugs Commission.
Statistical Commission.

6 United Nations Economic Commission for Asia and the
Far East (ECAFE).
7 Specialised Agencies of the United Nations.
(a) Food and Agriculture Organisation (F.A.O.)
(b) General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (G.A.T.T.)
(c) International Bank for Re-construction and Development
(I.B.R.D.)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)

International
International
International
International

Civil Aviation Organisation (I.C.A.O.)
Labour Organisation (I.L.O.)
Monetary Fund (I.M.F.)
Tele-Communication Union (I.T.U.)
<pg56>
<pg57>

(h) United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organisation (U.N.E.S.C.O.)
(i) Universal Postal Union (U.P.U.)
(j) World Health Organisation (W.H.O.)
(k) World Meteorological Organisation (W.M.O.)
8 United Nations Children's Fund Executive Board.
9 Technical Assistance Committe.
10 Asian Legal Consultative Committee.
11 International Association for Bridges and Structural
Engineering, Zurich.
12 International Commission on Irrigation and Drainage, Paris.
13 International Commission on Large Dams, Paris.
14 International Committee of the Red Cross, Geneva.
15 International Conference of Social Works, Paris.
16 International Cotton Advisory Committee, Washington.
17 International Council of Archives, Paris.
18 International Council of Building Research Studies and,
Documentation, Paris.
19 International Council of Scientific Unions, London.
20 International Criminal Police Commission, Paris.
21 International Custom Tariffs Bureau, Brussels.
22 International Electro-Technical Commission, Geneva.
23 International Federation for Documentation, The Hague.
24 International Federation for Housing and Town Planning,
The Hague.
25 International Federation of University Women, London.
26 International Hydrographic Bureau, Monte Carlo.
27 International Hospital Federation, London.
28 International Institute of Administrative Sciences, Brussels.

29
30
31
32
33
34
35

International Institute of Scientific Travel Research of the
International Union of Official Travel Organisations, Geneva.
International Institute for the Unification of Private Law,
Rome.
International Materials Conference, Washington.
International Organisation of Legal Meteorology, Paris.
International Organisation for Standardisation, Geneva.
International Railway Congress Association, Brussels.
International Scientific Radio Union, Brussels.
<pg58>

36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52

International Tea Committee, London.
International Tin Study Group, The Hague.
International Union of Aviation Insurers, London.
International, Union of Biological Sciences, Paris.
International Union of Crystallography, Cambridge.
International Union of Geodesy and Geophysics, Paris.
International Union of Geography, New York.
International Union of History of Sciences, Paris.
International Union of Official Travel Organisations, Geneva.
International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry, Paris.
International Union of Pure and Applied Physics, Paris.
International Union of Theoretical and Applied Mechanics,
Delft.
Permanent International Association of Navigation Congress,
Brussels.
Permanent International Association of Road Congress,
Paris.
Union International Contre le Cancer, Paris.
World Veterans Federation.
World Poultry Science Association.

INDIA
USA SWITZERLAND
REPUBLIC ITALY
Jan 01, 1959

FRANCE

LATVIA

UNITED KINGDOM

BELGIUM

CENTRAL AFRICAN


