1950-51

Contents
Jan 01, 1950
Report
1950-1951
THE MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS

Report
of the
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS
REPORT OF THE MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS
The report falls into five parts:
Part I describes the administrative structure and problems of
organization at headquarters and representatives abroad.
Part II deals with points of special interest in those countries
where India is represented.
Part III deals with international conferences.
Part IV deals with emigration, and
Part V with External Publicity.
INDIA

Jan 01, 1950

Administration
Jan 01, 1950

PART I
Administration
Economy Measures.-No new Missions were opened in any foreign
country during the year under review. As a measure of economy,
the Heads of Missions in certain countries were concurrently accredited as Representatives in certain other countries as shown below:
(i) Ambassador in France was concurrently accredited as
Minister of Norway;
(ii) Ambassador in Italy was accredited as Ambassador to
Yugoslavia;
(iii) Ambassador in Egypt who was previously accredited to
Lebanon and Transjordan was concurrently accredited
as Minister to Syria;
(iv) Ambassador in the U.S.A. was concurrently accredited our
Ambassador in Mexico;
(v) Minister in Sweden was concurrently accredited to
Finland and Denmark;
(vi) Minister in Berne who was previously accredited to the
Vatican was concurrently accredited to Austria.
As a measure of economy the minimum period of stay in a
foreign station prescribed for our staff to enable them to be eligible
for home leave or transfer was extended from two years in the
cases of ordinary stations and one and a half year in the cases of
`special' localities, to three years and two years respectively, as a
temporary measure.
A number of senior posts at headquarters, e.g. Legal & Treaties
Adviser, Statistician. Head of Economic Affairs Section, Deputy
Secretary have been kept unfilled or abolished.
<pg1>
<pg2>
All leave of the staff serving abroad, and the consequential postings and transfers were stopped during autumn 1950. Transfers to
posts abroad are now made sparingly and in special circumstances
only.
Expenditure on transmission of telegrams has shown a decline of
20% compared to expenditure in 1949-50 and a decline of 50% as
compared to 1948-49. This saving has been possible through very
strict scrutiny of telegrams. standardisation of procedure, analysis
of traffic, and introduction of savingrams.

Posts of heads of Missions in the following counties have been
lying vacantArgentine.
Brazil.
Czechoslovakia
Turkey.
Iran.
Canada.
Fiji.
Foreign Missions.-Diplomatic Missions of China, Argentine
Yugoslavia, Jordan, and Syria were established in Delhi during the
year, bringing the total number of Missions at Delhi to 37.
The Indian Foreign Service.-During the year under review. three
candidates were recruited to the Indian Foreign Service through the
open competitive examination held by the Union Public Service
Commission in 1949.
At present the posts at the Headquarters and at Missions abroad
other than those borne on the cadre of the IFS are manned largely
by staff drawn from the Central Secretariat. This arrangement has
been found to have some practical disadvantages, and it is proposed
to constitute a separate Branch B Foreign Service which will include
all ministerial and executive posts in the Ministry and Missions
abroad not included in the cadre of the Indian Foreign Service. The
details of the scheme are now being worked out in consultation with
the Ministries of Finance and Home Affairs.
Accommodation for Missions.-It is now the established policy of
Government to purchase properties for housing India's Missions
abroad wherever it is found that such purchases are economical in
the long run. In pursuance of this policy properties have been
acquired at the following places in addition to the places mentioned
in the last report:1. Ottawa.
<pg3>
2. Karachi.
3. Paris (additional property).
while construction work is in hand at Singapore. Negotiations are
also in progress for the acquisition of a property in Rangoon.
It is proposed to purchase some more properties during 1951-52
and continue building operations at, Singapore, Gangtok, Paris,
Rangoon and Nairobi.

It may not be out of place to give here a brief review of the
expenditure of the Ministry of External Affairs. The total expenditure in 1950-51, according to the revised estimates, is expected to
amount to Rs. 597 lakhs. Included within this amount are certain
items of expenditure which are fixed in nature or have little relation
to the normal activities of the Ministry. These are:(1) Tribal Areas including the Assam Rifles-Rs. 150 lakhs;
(2) Subsidies to neighbouring States and administration of
Chandernagore-about Rs. 25 lakhs;
(3) Contributions to the United Nations and delegations
thereto-Rs. 74 lakhs;
(4) Expenditure on demarcation of boundary between India
and Pakistan, Recovery of abducted women and implementation of P.M.'s agreement-Rs. 21 lakhs;
(5) Passports and Emigration Establishment-Rs. 5 lakhs:
(6) Political pensions and cost of repatriation of IndiansRs. 3 lakhs.
It will thus appear that the actual expenditure on the normal
work of this Ministry is much less than what appears at first sight.
If the expenditure on the special items enumerated above (totalling
Rs. 278 lakhs) is excluded, the expenditure on items, strictly pertaining to this Ministry, works out to Rs. 319 lakhs. This includes an
expenditure of Rs. 48 lakhs on our biggest Mission, viz. the High
Commissioner's Office in London, and Rs. 54 lakhs on account of
the pay and allowances of officers and staff and other expenses at the
headquarters of the Ministry. Although the work of the Ministry
has very nearly quadrupled in volume during the last three years,
there has been practically no addition in the senior staff.
Excluding the expenditure in headquarters and the High Commissioner's Office in London, the expenditure, incurred on our
Missions abroad, comes to Rs. 217 lakhs. Spread over 55 Missions,
this gives an average of less than 4 lakhs per Mission.
Out of this expenditure an average of a little less than Rs. 1 lakh per
Mission is spent on pay and allowances of officers and staff. The
expenditure on rent for office and residential accommodation alone
works up to an average of Rs. 1/2 lakh per Mission.
FRANCE
NORWAY ITALY YUGOSLAVIA EGYPT USA JORDAN LEBANON SYRIA MEXICO SWEDEN
DENMARK FINLAND SWITZERLAND AUSTRIA BRAZIL SLOVAKIA TURKEY IRAN CANADA FIJI
CHINA INDIA PAKISTAN REPUBLIC OF SINGAPORE KENYA UNITED KINGDOM

Jan 01, 1950

A. Middle East.
PART II
A. Middle East.
With the establishment of diplomatic relations with Syria and the
appointment of a Commissioner in Aden. India has now diplomatic
representation in all the countries in the Middle East except Yemen,
Israel and the Arab Sheikhdoms in the Persian Gulf. Owing to the
existing financial stringency, the question of the establishment of
Indian Missions in Yemen. Israel and the Arab Sheikhdoms in the
Persian Gulf as well as consulates at Khorramshahr and Meshed has
had to be postponed.
1. Aden.-A Commissioner for the Government of India at Aden
was appointed during the year. He assumed charge in June 1950.
2. Afghanistan.-The instruments of ratification in respect of the
Treaty of Friendship between India and Afghanistan, were
exchanged at New Delhi on the Sep 30, 1950, and the Treaty
came into force from that date.
A Treaty of Trade and Commerce with Afghanistan was signed
at Kabul on the 4th April, 1950. It will come into force two months
after the instruments of ratification have been exchanged.
Shri Sri Prakasa, Minister for Commerce, visited Afghanistan in
August; 1950, in response to an invitation of the Afghan Government
to participate in their Jashan Celebrations. An Indian hockey and
football teams also participated in the celebrations.
H. R. H. Marshal Shah Mahmud Khan, Prime Minister of
Afghanistan, paid a short visit to Delhi from the 15th to the 19th
January 1951, on his way to the U.S.A. for medical treatment.
3. Egypt.-It is hoped that a Treaty of Establishment between the
Government of India and Egypt will be finalised shortly. Negotiations are in progress for concluding a bilateral air agreement with
Egypt. It has also been proposed that the Trade Agreement with
Egypt should be renewed.
<pg4>
4. Haj.-Arrangements were made for about 12,500 Indian

pilgrims to visit the Hejaz on pilgrimage during the year.
5. Israel.-The Government of India recognized Israel with effect
from 15th September, 1950.
6. Iraq.-Negotiations are in progress for concluding a Trade.
Agreement between the Governments of India and Iraq.
7. Iran.-A Treaty of Friendship between India and Iran was;
signed at Tehran on the 15th March, 1950. The Treaty will comeinto force fifteen days after the exchange of the instruments of ratification.
Pending the conclusion of a bilateral air agreement between India
and Iran, the temporary air agreement with Iran has been extended.
for a further period of six months from the 7th December, 1950.
An Indian Military Delegation from India consisting of representatives of the three Services, and Syed Ali Zaheer, India's Ambassadorin Iran, represented India at the ceremonial interment of the mortalremains of ex-King Reza Shah Pahlavi.
Negotiations are in progress for concluding a Treaty of Commerce,
and Navigation and a direct wireless Agreement and for finalising
the Anti-Locust Convention.
8. Muscat and Oman.-It is proposed to conclude a Treaty of'
Friendship, Commerce and Navigation between the Government of
India and the Sultan of Muscat.
9. Persian Gulf.-The proposal to appoint a Trade Agent at
Bahrein and a Consul at Muscat and a Consul at Basrah, with jurisdiction over Kuwait, has had to be kept in abeyance as a measure
of economy. The First Secretary and the Commercial Secretary to
the Legation of India, Baghdad have been instructed to pay periodical
visits to Bahrein and Kuwait for maintaining contact with Indian
nationals there.
10. Saudi Arabia.-The status of the Consulate at Jedda has been
raised to that of a Consulate General.
11. Syria.-The Indian Ambassador at Cairo has been concurrently accredited to Syria as Minister.
It is hoped that a Treaty of Friendship and Commerce between.
the Governments of India and the Syria Republic will be signedshortly.
12. Turkey.-A draft of a Trade Agreement with Turkey is under
examination.
13. Yemen.-No further progress has been made in the negotiations for concluding a Treaty of Friendship and Commerce with

Yemen
B. South East Asia and the Far East.
(1) Assam Tribal Areas (North-East. Frontier).-To improve the
administration of inaccessible tribal areas further, a new administrative centre at Nizamghat in the Mishmi Hills District was established
in the later part of 1950.
The construction work on Pasighat-Tuting Road is in progress.
Namdang-Chandlang road is also under construction. Four other
access roads in tribal areas are also under construction.
Arrangements have been made for providing amenities to the
personnel of the Assam Rifles.
A Sixth Battalion of the Assam Rifles has been raised in connection with the defence of the Tripura State border.
In order to check head-hunting and to maintain peace in the Naga
Tribal Areas, a punitive expedition of the Assam Rifles was sent in
May 1950, to punish the offending villages. The expedition was
successful.
The Prime Minister's appeal for help to the sufferers from earthquake and flood in Assam met with a most generous response, collections totalling nearly 15 1/2 lakh rupees. Relief has been given on 2
large scale to the affected persons. Food, cloth, seeds, implements
and tools for agriculture, etc., were rushed to the affected areas.
Magnificent work was done by the Assam Rifles. the Army and the
Air Force.
In the year under review, progress has been made in implementing schemes in relation to agriculture, education, medical relief.
construction of roads etc., in the tribal areas.
2. Burma.-In pursuance of the agreement reached at the
Commonwealth Prime Minister's conference held in Ceylon in January 1950, an agreement was concluded between certain Commonwealth countries and the Government of the Union of Burma on the
28th June. 1950 for the grant of a short term loan of six million
pounds to Burma. India contributed (pound)1,000,000 towards this loan,
out of the blocked Sterling Account.
An agreement for the purchase of 170 thousand tons of rice from
Burma, during the year ending the 30th June, 1951, was concluded
on the 18th August, 1950. As a result of further negotiations, the
Government of Burma have agreed to make an additional quantity of
120 thousand tons of rice available for India during this period.
An Indian delegation visited Ragoon in June 1950 to discuss
matter arising from the Burma Land Nationalisation Act, 1948, with
the Government of the Union of Burma. The delegation pressed

<pg5>
<pg6>
for the grant of equitable compensation to Indian Landowners whose
lands may be resumed by the Burma Government under the Act.
Passport restrictions on the entry of Indians from Burma into
India and vice versa were imposed by the Government of India and
the Government of Burma with effect from the 1st August and 1st
September, 1950, respectively. The Evacuee Identity Certificates
issued to Indian Evacuees from Burma during the last war ceased
to be valid with effect from the 1st January, 1951.
Repatriation of Indian nationals rendered destitute by the activities of insurgents in Burma was continued during the year under
review. As a result progressive improvement in the internal situation in Burma, however, the number of such repatriates was considerably lower than last year and hardly a thousand persons had to
be repatriated at Government expense till the end of December,
1950.
As an experimental measure for the rehabilitation of these
evacuees, a party of about 70 persons has been sent for resettlement
in the Andamans Island. They have been granted subsidies in the
shape of land and certain advances towards their passages and other
expenses.
Indian nationals continued to be discharged from service under
the Government of Burma on grounds of nationality. Assistance in
securing employment was rendered to these persons through the
Employment Exchanges, and over two thousand persons were
provided with alternative employment under the Government of
India.
3. Bhutan.--The Government of India's Political Officer in
Sikkim visited Bhutan during October 1950. His personal contacts
with the Maharaja of Bhutan have cemented the friendly relations
already existing between the two Governments.
As required by Article 3 of the Constitution, a Bill will shortly be
moved in Parliament for ceding to Bhutan, in implementation of
Article IV of the Indo-Bhutan Treaty, 1949, about 32 sq. miles of
territory in an area of the State of Assam known as Dowangiri.
4. China.--1950 witnessed the practical conclusion of the Civil
War in China. with the Communist Government in full control of the
mainland and the Kuomintang groups being confined to the island
of Formosa.
The Government of India recognised the Government of the
People's Republic of China on the 30th December, 1949. The

Ambassador of India presented his credentials at Peking on the 20th
May and the Chinese Ambassador reached India on the 15th September and presented his credentials on the 20th September, 1950.
<pg7>
The Government of India have consistently endeavoured to get
the representatives of the Government of the People's Republic of
China admitted on the U.N. and its affiliated and constituent
Agencies.
The Indian Consulate General in Shanghai was re-opened in
August 1950.
5. Ceylon.--As mentioned in the report for the year 1949-50, the
Ceylon Indian Congress had decided to boycott the Indian and
Pakistani Residents (Citizenship) Act. The Congress withdrew its
boycott resolution in May 1950 advising Indians to apply for registration. As a result of representations made to the Ceylon Government
by the Government of India and the Ceylon Indian Congress, the
Ceylon Parliament has recently passed a bill to amend the Indian
and Pakistani Residents (Citizenship) Act. This removes the
anomaly which made it more difficult for Indians born in Ceylon to
acquire Ceylon citizenship rights than for migrants from India. The
amending Act also condones the absence of an applicant from Ceylon
for over 11 months if such absence was due to service either under
the Government of Ceylon or in the Defence Forces.
Reference was made in the last year's report to the difficulties
arising out of the working of the Ceylon Immigrants and Emigrants
Act and Exchange Control regulations. While all these could not be
overcome, the High Commissioner of India has been taking up individual cases of hardship ad hoc with the authorities in Ceylon, often
with satisfactory results.
The Government of Ceylon are now pursuing a policy of employing only Ceylonese nationals in private establishments in Ceylon. It
will not, therefore, be possible for Indians, who do not acquire Ceylon
citizenship, to find new employment in Ceylon. However, the Government of Ceylon have assured the Government of India that there
would be no discrimination between citizens by descent and citizens
by registration in the matter of employment. Until the expiry of
the two years' time from 5th August 1949, allowed to Indians for
registering themselves as citizens of Ceylon, the Government of India
consider this policy as premature. The matter is however, still
under negotiation with the Government of Ceylon.
6. Honkong.--The Colonial Government of Hongkong imposed
restrictions on all foreigners in respect of entry into Hongkong. The
Government of India have for the time being abandoned their move
for restoring pre-war conditions for the entry of Indians into
Hongkong.

7. Indonesia.--At the invitation of H. E. Dr. Soekarno, President
of Indonesia the Prime Minister visited Indonesia in June, 1950.
<pg8>
In September 1950, a Trade Delegation was sent to Indonesia with
the object of exploring the possibilities of developing trade between
the two countries. The delegation which consisted of seven
members was sponsored by the Government of India. As a result of
successful negotiations concluded by the delegation during its stay
in Indonesia, a Trade Agreement was signed between India and
Indonesia on 20th January 1951. As a result of the Agreement a
three fold increase in the volume of trade between India and
Indonesia is envisaged.
The Government of India and Indonesia have agreed to sign a
treaty of Friendship between the two countries. The formal signing
of the treaty is expected to take place in Jakarta shortly.
8. Indo-China.-Indian emigrants were previously identified on
communal basis as Hindu, Muslim, Sikh etc., by Viet Nam authorities. On representation by our Consul General in Saigon, they are
now being identified as Indian nationals.
In March 1950, when the situation in the Tonking region of
Vietnam was threatened by Ho Chi Minh's forces, our Consul
General took up with the French authorities in Indo-China the question of remittance facilities for the intending Indian evacuees. In
addition to the normal facilities, he was able to secure remittance
facilities for them up to the extent of Rs. 100 for each adult and
Rs. 50 for each child per month.
The Government of Vietnam have offered to sell to the Government of India 30,000 tons of rice. Negotiations for the purchase of
this rice are in progress.
9. Japan.--During the period under review Japan established
three overseas Agencies at New Delhi, Bombay and Calcutta. These
Agencies which were established in the fall of 1950, will perform
certain commercial and quasi-consular functions.
The goodwill evoked by India's presentation of the elephant
`Indira' to Japan has resulted in the presentation of two giant
salamanders and two bears from Japan to India.
10. Malaya.-Terrorist activities in Malaya continued with
unabated vigour during the year under review despite strong
counter-measures taken by the local Governments. Indians, in
general, continued to keep away from active association with the
insurgents. A number of them however, have been arrested and
kept in detention mainly on suspicion. 129 Indians including civilians, police and alleged 'bandits' have lost their lives in Malaya
between the start of the emergency and the end of November 1950.
A number of Indian detainees were repatriated and a few banished

to India during the year under review.
<pg9>
Mr. J. A. Thivy, Bar-at-Law, relinquished the post of Representative of the Government of India in Malaya on his appointment as
Commissioner for India in Mauritius.
11. Nepal.-A Treaty of Peace and Friendship and another of
Trade and Commerce were concluded between the Government of
India and the Government, of Nepal on the 31st July 1950.
Provision has been made in these treaties for reciprocal treatment of nationals of each country in the matter of residence, movement and ownership of property, in the territory of other. The
Nepalese Government have also agreed to accord national treatment
to Indian citizens within Nepalese territory in respect of participation in trade. It has also been agreed that neither Government shall
employ foreigners whose activities might be prejudicial to the safety
of the other.
In regard to the Treaty of Trade and Commerce it has been
agreed that both Governments will supply each other with essential
commodities to the maximum extent possible.
On the 6th November 1950, His Majesty the King of Nepal, together with the members of his family took refuge in the Indian
Embassy at Kathmandu, as a result of some differences of opinion
with his Government in the matter of political reforms. The Government of India decided to give asylum to the King and he was
accordingly brought to New Delhi as a State guest. Following the
King's departure from Kathmandu the Nepali Congress, a political
party of Nepal, made an armed revolt against the Nepal Government
and captured several places. These events caused serious concern
to the Government of India.
Happily after prolonged discussions the Government of Nepal
ultimately agreed
(a) that His Majesty King Tribhuvan, whom the Nepal Government had deposed, should return to Nepal as the
constitutional King of Nepal;
(b) that a Constituent Assembly should be summoned as soon
as possible to frame a constitution for the country; and
(c) that an interim Cabinet with popular representatives
should be formed immediately.
An interim Government consisting of the representatives of different sections in Nepal have just taken office.
12. Pakistan.-The most important event affecting Indo-Pakistan

relations during the year under report was the conclusion of the
Prime Ministers' Agreement of April, 1950, following two months'
orgy of communal violence in East Bengal and their repercussions in
<pg10>
West Bengal and Assam. The disturbances resulted in the utter
demoralisation of the minority community in the affected areas and
led to large scale migration.
The Agreement made it possible for the minorities to migrate
with all their personal belongings, including jewellery and a limited
amount of cash, without being harassed on the way. Outbreaks of
mass communal violence also soon ceased. Within a few months the
return traffic of migrants showed an upward trend and gradually
exceeded the rate of exodus by about 1500 to 2000 per day. The two
Central Ministers, appointed under the terms of the Agreement, have
toured the affected areas extensively and have succeeded largely in
alleviating panic among the minority communities.
A beginning was made during the year with the demarcation of
the boundaries, both disputed and undisputed, between West Bengal
and Assam and East Bengal.
The work relating to the recovery of abducted women and
children, sponsored by the Government of India in pursuance of an
Indo-Pakistan agreement, was taken over in this Ministry from the
late Ministry Without Portfolio, in the beginning of October, 1948.
At that time actual recoveries had come practically to a stand-still,
though there were still a large number of women and children in
illegal custody on both sides. A fresh agreement was therefore,
negotiated between India and Pakistan in terms of which the responsibility for the recovery of. such persons was to be that of the
country in which they were supposed to be residing. As due implementation of this agreement required legal sanction an Ordinance
was promulgated which was later replaced by an Act passed in
December 1949. This Act is due to expire on the 31st October 1951.
1,413 women and children have been recovered in India during
1950. The corresponding figure in Pakistan is 548.
For the present, it is proposed to continue this work upto the end
of October 1951 and if results justify, its further continuance will be
considered.
13. Philippines.-A treaty of friendship between India and the
Philippines is under negotiation with the Philippine Government.
14. Sikkim.--A new Treaty was concluded between India and
Sikkim on the 5th December 1950, under which Sikkim remains a
Protectorate of India enjoying internal autonomy but India continues
to be responsible for its defence and external relations.

The officer lent by the Government of India to Sikkim State has
made substantial improvements in all spheres of Governmental
activities there. One of his earliest acts has been to abolish the
system of lessees, who corresponded to the zamindars of India, As a
<pg11>
result of talks held in Delhi in early 1950, agreement was reached
on a scheme of constitutional reforms for Sikkim. This envisages
the election of panchayats which in turn will elect a council. The
formation of panchayats is under way.
15. Sinkiang (China).-The Consulate-General at Kashgar have
not yet been formally re-established. The premises of the Consulate
General are now in charge of subordinate officer of the Government
of India.
16. Thailand.--Indo-Thai relations are at present governed by
the Anglo-Siamese Treaty of Friendship, Commerce and Navigation
of 1937 and this will continue until a fresh treaty, at present under
consideration, is drawn up.
There is no Bilateral Air Agreement with Thailand. By mutual
exchange of notes it has been decided to grant permission to two air
companies of either country to have scheduled air services pending
the conclusion of an air agreement. A delegation is expected to
leave for Bangkok shortly to negotiate an Agreement with them.
The question of the settlement of war claims-due from the Government of Thailand is nearing completion. The Thai Government
have agreed to pay a lump sum of (pound)5,224,220 towards the liquidation
of all property and personal prejudices claims of U.K., Australia and
India.
As a measure of economy, the Indian Military Attache at Rangoon
has been concurrently accredited to Thailand.
A new Alien Registration Act has been introduced in Thailand
which is likely to affect Indians residing there. This question has
already been taken up with the Thai authorities who have assured
that the Act will be leniently applied to those Indians who were
brought forcibly to Thailand by the Japanese during the war.
In the month of October 1950 a Trade Delegation visited Thailand.
17. Tibet.---In October 1950 Chinese troops entered Tibet from the
East. After crossing the DREEHN river which forms the border,
they captured Chamdo, the capital of the Eastern Province of Kham
and also certain other important places. Representations were made
to the Government of China through the agency of the Indian
Embassy in Peking emphasising the desirability of a solution by
peaceful means. The notes exchanged between the Governments of

India and China have since been released to the press. There has
been a lull in fighting for several weeks.
<pg12>
C. Europe.
1. Austria.--In view of the imperative need for economy in
expenditure, the appointment of a separate Minister to the Legation
of India, Vienna, has been held in abeyance. The Indian Minister
to Switzerland is concurrently accredited as Minister to Austria.
2. Denmark.-Mr. Victor B. Strand was appointed as Honorary
Consul General for India at Copenhagen.
3. France.--The de facto administration of Chandernagore was
taken over from the French India Government on the 2nd May 1950.
Mr. B. K. Banerji of the Indian Administrative Service was
appointed Administrator in place of the previous French Administrator.
The Treaty for the cession of Chandernagore as agreed to between
the Governments of India and France was signed in Paris on the 2nd
February 1951. On ratification of the Treaty by the French Parliament, Chandernagore, will become, de jure part of the Indian Union.
There is no change regarding the four Southern Settlements as no
date has yet been fixed for the referendum, nor has complete agreement been reached regarding Its modalities. The Government of India
have made a strong protest against the repression and terrorism
prevailing in these Settlements which has created an atmosphere unfavourable for holding a free and fair referendum. Negotiations
continue.
4. Germany.--India has terminated state of war with Germany
with effect from the 1st January 1951. It is proposed to have the
headquarters of the Indian Mission in Germany at Bonn, where a
Legation or Embassy will be established. The Indian Military
Mission in Berlin will continue, but as a subsidiary office.
5. Gibraltar.-Certain grievances of Indian traders in Gibraltar
over the application of the Gibraltar Alien Traders Ordinance
continue to be the subject of discussions between the High Commissioner for India in London and the U. K. Ministry- of Colonies.
6. Norway.-The Indian Ambassador to France was accredited
concurrently as Minister to Norway.
7. Portugal.- Negotiations between the Government of India the
Portuguese Government and the Holy See for the modification of the
Portuguese Government's political patronage, known as the
Padroado, over Indian Catholic Dioceses, were conducted in a most
friendly way and with the understanding co-operation of the Holy

See a satisfactory solution was reached. The Agreement was signed
by Portugal and the Holy See at the Vatican on the 18th July 1950.
and the exchange of the instruments of ratification took place at
<pg13>
Lisbon on the 10th October 1950. By the Agreement. the Portuguese
Government have renounced their privileges over appointments to
Indian Dioceses.
Negotiations to settle the future of the Portuguese Possessions in
India were formally initiated by the Indian Minister at Lisbon by
presenting an Aide Memoire, dated the 27th February 1950 on behalf
of the Government of India to the Portuguese Government. The
Portuguese Government declined to discuss the question of their
sovereignty over their Indian Possessions with the Government of
India. Efforts to breach this impasse are being made.
8. Spain.-A Spanish Trade Delegation visited India, to negotiate
a Trade Agreement. The Agreement will be signed shortly at
Madrid.
9. United Kingdom.-The High Commissioner for India in the
U. K. took over last year most of the agency functions performed on
behalf of India by the Commonwealth Relations Office. London. It
has been decided that he should take over the remaining functions
with effect from the 1st April, 1951.
10. Yugoslavia.-As a measure of economy, the opening of an
Embassy at Belgrade, Yugoslavia, has been postponed. The Indian
Ambassador to Italy is however concurrently accredited as
Ambassador to Yugoslavia.
D. North America
1. Canada.-Efforts to secure an annual immigration quota for
Indian nationals into Canada have been successful and an agreement
has been signed providing for
(i) annual admission to Canada for permanent residence of
150 citizens of India, including both sexes and all ages,
and
(ii) admission for permanent residence of such citizens of
India, in addition to those whose entry for permanent
residence is authorised in accordance with paragraph (i)
above, as are husbands, wives or unmarried children
under 21 years of age, of Canadian citizens legally
admitted and resident in Canada.
2. Mexico.--In view of the importance of Mexico in international
affairs and the possibilities of trade and commerce with that country,
it has been decided to exchange diplomatic relations with that

country at Embassy level. The Indian Ambassador at Washington
has been accredited concurrently to Mexico.
<pg14>
3. United States of America.-Negotiations for a Treaty of Friendship, Commerce and Navigation between India and the United States
of America have not yet been concluded.
A general Agreement for Technical Co-operation under Point Four
between India and the U.S.A. was signed on the 28th December, 1950.
An agreement has been signed with the Co-operative for
American Remittances to Europe, Inc. U.S.A., commonly known as
'CARE' whereby that organisation has been enabled to extend its
activities to India. Under this agreement individuals and organisations in the U.S.A. have been sending gift parcels of food and clothing
and also ploughs for free distribution to the poor and needy in India.
A supplemental agreement has also been signed providing for the
extension of the 'CARE' book programme to India under which books
of a non-controversial nature are distributed by CARE to educational institutions and libraries etc. in India.
E. South America
1. Argentine.-Shri Jamshed B. Vesugar relinquished his appointment as Ambassador in Argentine on 10th July 1950, and Shri R. G.
Rajwade, First Secretary, in the Embassy, assumed charge as Charge
d'Affaires.
The agreement between the Government of India and Argentine
for the supply of wheat in exchange for raw jute has been renewed
for a further period.
2. Brazil-Shri Aftab Rai, Charge d' Affaires in Brazil relinquished his appointment and left for India on 8th January 1951.
Shri J. A. Shah has been appointed as Charge d' Affaires ad interim
in his place.
F. Africa
1. Belgian Congo and Ruanda Urundi.-There has been a long
standing demand for the establishment of an Indian Consulate in the
Belgian Congo and Ruanda Urundi to provide for adequate Consular
facilities to the Indians settled in those territories and also to
properly safeguard their interests in other fields. For reasons of
economy, it has hot been possible to open an independent Indian
Consulate in those territories, and instead the Commissioner for the
Government of India in British East Africa has been simultaneously
accredited as Consul General for India to the Belgian Congo and
Ruanda Urundi.
<pg15>

2. British Central Africa.-The jurisdiction of the Commissioner
for the Government of India in British East Africa is being extended
to the three British Central African territories of Nyasaland,
Northern Rhodesia, and Southern Rhodesia, in order to enable the
Government of India to maintain contact with the Indian community (about 14,000) in those territories.
Mr. Godwin Lewanika, a brother of the Paramount Chief of
Barotseland in Northern Rhodesia and the President of the African
Congress of that territory paid a visit to India. The trip was
sponsored by the Indian Community of Northern Rhodesia.
3. East Africa.-During the year under report Mr. Kamalnayan
Bajaj paid a private visit to East Africa in order to advise the Indian
community in developing their industries and trade on proper lines.
The Indian Commissioner also sponsored the visit of Shri Kakasaheb
Kalelkar to East Africa in order that the latter may study the social,
economic and cultural problems of the Indians and the Africans
in those territories. At the instance of Government educationalists
visited East Africa in order to advise the Indian community about
the establishment of a second grade college.
4. Ethiopia.-An Indian Goodwill Mission was sent to Ethiopia
in 1948 to promote mutual goodwill and closer contacts between
India and Ethiopia. This was followed by the establishment of
Diplomatic relations at Legation level between India and Ethiopia
in February, 1950.
5. French Morocco.-The Government of India, through their
Embassy at Paris, have made a representation to the French Government about the difficulties which the Indians residing in French
Morocco (and Madagascar) are reported to have been experiencing
in the matter of remittances to their families and dependants in
India.
6. Madagascar.--The Secretary to the Indian High Commissioner
in South Africa, who visited Madagascar last year, recommended
that an Indian Consulate be established in that Island. The proposal was agreed to by the Standing Committee of Parliament for
the Ministry of External Affairs. but in view of the decision that
no new missions should be opened during the year 1951-52 it has
been postponed.
7. Portuguese East Africa.-The Secretary to the High Commissioner for India in the Union of South Africa paid an informal visit
to Portuguese East Africa en route to Madagascar in the beginning
of 1950.
8. South West Africa.-India was one of the five countries, which
submitted written statements on the legal issues pertaining to the
<pg16>

future of this territory, which were referred, by the United Nations
General Assembly to the International Court of Justice for advisory
opinion. The Indian Delegation at the United Nations played a
leading role in the discussions on this item in the United Nations
General Assembly Session, 1950.
9. South Africa.-The preliminary Conference of the delegations
of the Governments of India, Union of South Africa and Pakistan
held in February 1950, at Cape Town, decided on the holding of a
Round Table Conference, but before the proposed R.T.C. could be
held, the Union Government enacted a fresh measure of racial segregation, "The Group Areas Act" which provides for separate
residential and trading areas for different racial groups. This Act
if implemented, would ruin the Indian community economically and
make their position in the Union quite untenable. While protesting
against this racial bill, the Government of India represented to the
Union Government that it had further vitiated the atmosphere for
holding the proposed Round Table Conference and that it was therefore desirable to postpone the Act in order to create the right
atmosphere. The Union Government, however, completely disregarded the Government of India's representations in this behalf
and went ahead with the "Group Areas Act". The Government of
India was convinced that in view of the persistent hostile attitude
of the Union Government it was futile to hold the proposed R.T.C.
and therefore as a protest declined to participate in it, and placed
the matter before the United Nations Organisation.
The U.N. General Assembly in its Plenary Session held in 1950
recommended that a Round Table Conference be held between India,
Union of South Africa and Pakistan by April 1951, and that pending
conclusion of the Conference the Governments concerned should
refrain from taking any steps prejudicial to the holding of that
Conference, in particular, the implementation and enforcement of
the "Group Areas Act". It has further recommended that should
the R.T.C. be not held or should the Governments concerned fail
to reach an agreement in the Conference, a Commission shall be
established to assist the Parties to carry through appropriate negotiations. The Commission shall consist of three members, comprising
one nominee each of (i) South Africa and (ii) India and Pakistan;
and the third would be the nominee of the first two members. In
default of agreement between the first two members regarding the
nomination of the third member, he will be nominated by the Secretary General of the United Nations.
G. Australia & New Zealand
1. Australia.-The I.N.S. "Rajput", an Indian Warship, visited
Australia on the invitation of that Government to participate in
<pg17>
the Jubilee Anniversary of. the Foundation of the Commonwealth

of Australia.
2. Fiji.-Mr. Waiz, Commissioner for the Government of India in
Fiji, relinquished charge of his post on the termination of his term.
3. New Zealand.-An Indian Trade Commissioner was appointed
in New Zealand during the year 1950.
The I.N.S. "Rajput" extended its visit from Australia to New
Zealand on an invitation from the Government of New Zealand.
SYRIA
INDIA YEMEN ISRAEL AFGHANISTAN USA EGYPT IRAQ IRAN OMAN KUWAIT SAUDI
ARABIA TURKEY BURMA BHUTAN CHINA PAKISTAN INDONESIA VIETNAM JAPAN
MAURITIUS NEPAL PHILIPPINES THAILAND AUSTRALIA UNITED KINGDOM AUSTRIA
SWITZERLAND DENMARK FRANCE GERMANY GIBRALTAR NORWAY PORTUGAL SPAIN
YUGOSLAVIA ITALY CANADA MEXICO CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC BRAZIL CONGO
ETHIOPIA MOROCCO MADAGASCAR SOUTH AFRICA NEW ZEALAND FIJI
Sep 30, 1950

India and International Conferences
PART III
India and International Conferences
During the period under review India continued to be a member
of numerous International Organisations and was concerned with
the following International Conferences:(i) Fifth Session of the General Assembly of the United
Nations.
(ii) Security Council.
(iii) Special Committee of Non-Self Governing Territories
appointed by the General Assemly.
(iv) International Law Commission.
(v) 10th Session of the Economic and Social Council.
(vi) 11th Session of the Economic and Social Council.
(vii) Economic and Employment Commission.
(viii) Transport and Communications Commission.
(ix) Statistical Commission.
(x) Social Commission.
(xi) Commission on Human Rights.
(xii) Commission on the Status of Women.
(xiii) Commission on Narcotic Drugs.
(xiv) Economic Commission for Asia and the Far East.

(xv) Commonwealth Consultative Committee.
Apart from these, India was also concerned with a number of
other conferences of International Organisations and Specialised
Agencies such as FAO, UNESCO, ILO, ICAO, WHO, ITO, etc.
Problems of interest to India discussed in the United Nations
and its bodies
General Assembly.-The General Assembly held its Fifth Session
in New York from the Sep 19, 1950 and adjourned on the 20th
December, 1950. The items discussed included among others the
<pg18>
question of the disposal of Former Italian Colonies, Independence of
Korea and the Treatment of Indians in South Africa, the Korean
question dominating the situation. The Assembly adopted the proposal sponsored by the USA and other Powers under the title
"Uniting For Peace" enabling the Assembly to act in case of breach
of peace or aggression if the veto-bound Security Council failed to
take any action.
The India Delegation under the Leadership of Shri B. N. Rau
took an active interest and made substantial contributions to the
deliberations of the Assembly on various problems on the Agenda,
particularly on the Korean question and the representation of the
Peoples Republic of China in the United Nations.
India's representative to the Special Committee appointed to
examine information on the non-self-governing territories was
unanimously elected Chairman during its 1950 Session.
One of the India's delegates, H. H. the Jam Sahib of Nawanagar,
who was elected in his personal capacity a member of the United
Nations Administrative Tribunal in 1949, was elected President of
the Tribunal in 1950. The Jam Sahib was elected Chairman of the
Fifth Committee of the Fifth Session of General Assembly and also
Chairman of the Negotiating Committee on Contributions to United
Nations Relief for Korea and Palestine Refugees.
Security Council.-India's term of membership of the Security
Council terminates on 31st December, 1951. She is represented on
this Council by Shri B. N. Rau, India's Permanent Representative to
the United Nations.
International Law Commission.-Shri B. N. Rau in his individual
capacity is a member of the International Law Commission. The
terms of office of the present members of the Commission, which
was originally fixed for three years, has been extended to five years
from the date of their election in 1948.
Economic and Social Council.-India was elected to the Economic

and Social Council for a period of three years commencing from the
1st January, 1949. During the year 1950, the Council held two
sessions, 10th Session during February-March at New York and the
11th Session during July-August at Geneva. The 11th Session which
was adjourned at Geneva was convened at New York during OctoberDecember to consider relief measures for Korea and the venue for
the 12th Session of the Council. As decided by the Council, the 12th
Session of the Council will be held at Santiago (Chile) from the
20th February, 1950. India is sending a delegation to the 12th
Session of the Council. India evinced particular interest in
the discussions of the Council in the issues like the Economic Development of Under-Developed Countries, Technical Assistance Pro<pg19>
gramme, World Economic Situation and Technical and Social Welfare Fellowships.
Functional Commissions of the Economic and Social Council.During the 11th Session, the Economic and Social Council elected
India as a Member of the Fiscal Commission for a period of three
years commencing from the 1st January, 1951. Thus India's membership of the Commissions of the ECOSOC has been increased from 7
to 8 out of the 9 Commissions. India is also Member of all the three
Sub-Commissions of the Council viz., Sub-Commission on Freedom
of Information and of the Press; Sub-Commission on Prevention of
Discrimination and Protection of Minorities and Sub-Commission
on Statistical Sampling.
Economic Commission for Asia and the Far East.-This is one of
the Regional Commission set up by the Economic and Social Council
and deals with questions of the Economic Development of Asia and
the Far East. India is one of the Members of the Commission. The
Commission held one Session during 1950 at Bangkok at which India
was represented.
United Nations Fellowships and Scholarships.-During 1950, the
United Nations offered some fellowships and scholarships to Indian
Nationals in the field of Economic Development and Public Administration. Nominations for the 1951 programme are also being forwarded to the United Nations by the Government of India.
Recruitment to the U.N. Secretariat.-As a result of continuous
efforts, India has been able to secure greater representation of
Indians in the higher grades of the U.N. Secretariat. Shri S. Lall is
holding one of the eight posts of Assistant Secretaries-General.
Commonwealth Consultative Committee.-India sent Delegations
to the Meetings of the Commonwealth Consultative Committee held
in Sydney in May, 1950, and subsequently in London in SeptemberOctober, 1950, and also took active part in the deliberations of the
Standing Committee and the Council of Technical Co-Operation at
Colombo. Government of India have drawn up an ambitious six-

year Development Programme involving a total investment of
Rs. 18,400 millions and propose to contribute a sum of (pound)750,000 spread
over 3 years to the (pound)8 million Fund which is being set up by the
Consultative Committee. It is hoped that technical assistance to
India to carry out her development plans will be available from
other countries partaking in the Colombo Plan. It is also expected
that through participation in the Plan, India can secure the services
of foreign Technical experts and obtain training facilities abroad for
Indian technicians. Australia has already awarded 50 scholarships
for Indian students for higher studies in Australian Universities and
it is hoped that further offers of such scholarships and training
<pg20>
for Indian students for higher studies in Australian Universities and
it is hoped that further offers of such scholarships and training
awards will be forthcoming from other participants in the Colombo
Plan.
INDIA
USA KOREA SOUTH AFRICA CHINA SWITZERLAND CHILE AUSTRALIA UNITED KINGDOM SRI
LANKA CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC
Sep 19, 1950

"Emigration"
Jan 01, 1950
PART IV
"Emigration"
The Indian Emigration Act, 1922, continued to be administered
through the Controller-General of Emigration, and subordinate
offices. The offices of the Protectors at Bombay and Madras were
inspected by the Controller-General during the year. The office of
the Protector at Vishakapatnam was closed in October 1950 since
the sailings of passenger ships from that port had ceased.
The Indian Emigration Rules regarding the licensing of passage
brokers were amended to extend their scope to the States of Madras
and West Bengal, in order to bring under the effective control of
the Government the activities of passage brokers and passenger
agents. Emigration for the purpose of skilled work through the ports
of Okha, Bedi and Porbandar was declared lawful and the Port
Officers in those ports were appointed as part-time Protectors of
Emigrants in the respective ports.

Effective measures were taken with the help of the State Governments concerned to put an end to illicit emigration to Ceylon by
country-craft. Steps were also taken to ensure that in every case
of recruitment of Indian workers for service abroad, all statutory
safeguards were provided to the employees. In view of the complaints received from passengers proceeding to the East African
territories, persons old to these territories were exempted from the
obligation of obtaining 'no objection' certificates; in the case of
skilled workers emigrating to these territories, certain procedural
facilities were provided to simplify emigration.
INDIA

Jan 01, 1950

External Publicity
Jan 01, 1950
PART V
External Publicity
Progress.-The Ministry's more broadcasts to 21 Indian missions
were improved by the introduction of a greater variety of news and
views and by emphasis on regional requirements. Foreign press
comments on Indian affairs were also collected with greater efficiency
and constant contact was maintained with public opinion abroad.
A new service of feature articles, illustrated by photographs, prove
valuable during the year. Following the improvement of the photo<pg21>
graphic studio of the Press Information Bureau a larger number of
photographs were circulated abroad, either for exhibition or reproduction in foreign newspapers and magazines. In the existing
financial stringency only limited facilities were however, available
for the supply of ebonoids of photographs.
Several official and non-official journalistic and cultural delegates
visited foreign countries during the year and their experiences have
been of great assistance to Government. Within the limitation of
its resources the Ministry attended to the welfare of the visiting
foreign journalists. Publicity material for special occasions such as
Independence Day, Republic Day and Gandhi Jayanti, etc., was also
supplied to the Indian missions abroad. Several proposals for

extended activities had however, to be abandoned for want of funds.
On the administrative side, a small publicity establishment was
opened at Pondicherry and a publicity unit for China has been
approved by this Ministry's Parliamentary Standing Committee. A
morse receiver has been established in Nairobi and regular supply
of India press reactions to London has been arranged.
Policies and Proposals for the Coming Year.-Several missions,
particularly in Europe and the Middle East, have requested for
establishment of Publicity Sections in their areas. A list of priority
has been fixed among the competing demands and it is hoped that
some centres can be opened in the coming year. Improvements in
the supply of films, books and pamphlets are also under consideration. Greater activity through radio and news clipping services does
not, however, seem likely in the continuing financial difficulties. It
is hoped, however, to participate more widely in cultural activities
and exhibitions.
Economies during the year.-The posts of Information Officers at
Canberra, Paris, Rio-de-Janeiro and Washington were kept vacant
for some time resulting in a total saving of Rs. 1,28,700 in 1950-51.
Further economy was also affected in the charges on press telegrams
during the last Session of the U.N. General Assembly. In all other
matters strictest economy was exercised even to the extent of refusing several valuable suggestions from our Missions abroad.
GIPD--D.M.E.-111 M of E.A.-9-3-51-1,000

INDIA
USA CHINA KENYA UNITED KINGDOM AUSTRALIA FRANCE
Jan 01, 1950


