1971-72

CONTENTS
Ministry Of External Affarirs
Annual Report 1971-72
CONTENTS
CHAPTER

PAGES

I

General

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

1-5

II

India's Neighbours.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

6-30

III

South East Asia

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

31-34

IV

East Asia

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

35-39

V

West Asia and North Africa .

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

40-51

VI

Africa (South of the Sahara)

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

52-60

VII

Europe

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

61-72

VIII

The Americas.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

73-81

IX

United Nations and International Conferences .

.

82-100

X

Technical and Economic Co-operation .

.

.

.

.

101-109

XI

External Publicity .

.

.

. .

.

.

.

.

.

.

110-116

XII

Cultural Centres

.

.

.

. .

.

.

.

.

.

.

117-119

XIII

Protocol Matters.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

120-121

XIV

Passport, Visa and Consular Services.

.

.

.

.

122-127

XV

Administration and Organisation

.

.

.

.

128-132

.

.

.

.

<P-ii>
APPENDICES
NUMBER :
I

PAGES
International Conferenceses, Congresses, Seminars,
etc., in which India participated in 1971-72 .
.

135-163

II

International Organisations of which India is a
member .
.
.
.
.
.
.
. .
.
.

164-169

III

Governing Bodies of the Specialised Agencies and
other Agencies of the United Nations of which India
is a member
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

170-171

IV

Foreign Diplomatic Missions in India .

172-173

V

Foreign Consular Offices in India.

VI

Visits of Foreign VIPs to India handled by the
Protocol Division. .
.
.
.
.
.

VII

Treaties/Conventions/Agreements concluded or renewed
by India with other countries in 1971 .
.
.
. 185-204

VIII

Indian Missions/Posts Abroad.

IX

Expenditure on Headquarters and Missions/Posts Abroad
during 1971-72.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
. 214-215

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

174-178

.

179-184

. 205-213

<P-1>
INDIA

Date :

Jan 01, 1971

GENERAL
The year under report was a year of great trials and achievements for India. The developments in East Bengal (now
Bangladesh) caused by oppression and terror of an inhuman and brutal character resulting in the flight of ten million
refugees to India dominated the horizon for the major part of the year. The events placed great burdens and
responsibilities on the Government and people of India which they bore with fortitude and faith in human freedom
and dignity. The eventual resolution of the problems in accordance with the wishes of the people of Bangladesh has
caused all round satisfaction and received approval by the international community. The refugees have returned to
their homeland in honour and dignity and Bangladesh has emerged as a sovereign, independent country. The faith
of a free Bangladesh is a vindication of human rights and fundamental freedom and of the principle of secularism to
which India has consistently adhered from the very beginning. It has also put an end, once for all, to the festering
sore of the `two-nation theory' which has been a great source of tension and of frequent conflict and disorder in the
sub-continent. We can now look forward to a new era of friendly and cooperative relationship with the people of
Bangladesh, and to new prospects of constructive endeavours on the basis of the strength and support that her
policies and actions have derived from the world community. We sincerely hope that the people of Pakistan will
also welcome these developments and usher in an era of peaceful, friendly and cooperative co-existence with both
India and Pakistan.
<P-2>
India's friendship with the Soviet Union has stood the test of time and is growing to the benefit of both countries

and the region. The Treaty of Peace, Friendship and Cooperation provides a model of constructive cooperation to all
those who desire peace, stability and progress in this region.
The principle of non-alignment has now gained added strength. There is now promise of greater support and
adherence to the principle. Its flexibility and freedom of action it provides in an era of changing power relationships
have also been indicated.
There have been changes of great and far-reaching importance in Great Power relationship. It is becoming
increasingly necessary for the great powers to learn to recognise not only each others' but also regional interests, and
to seek stable relationships on the basis of mutual accommodation rather than suffer tension and conflict through
continued rivalry and confrontation. The signing of the Berlin Agreement, the hopeful trends in Strategic Arms
Limitations Talks, and the rightful representation of the People's Republic of China in the U.N. are, to India's view,
hopeful and welcome signs of increasing international understanding.
Pakistan has gone through a traumatic experience. It is, largely, of her own making. India wishes to live in peace
with her and has, despite all that has happened, extended her hand of friendship. She sincerely hopes that Pakistan
will reconcile herself to the new reality and settle down to endeavours devoted to the well-being of her people. We
are convinced that all problems between India and Pakistan can be settled through bilateral talks, without any
outside interference. We have, therefore, offered direct talks to Pakistan at any level, at any time and without any
pre-conditions. We hope they will make a positive and constructive response so that durable peace and lasting
cooperation can be established.
<P-3>
For quite some time there were hopes of a favourable response from China towards normalisation of relations
with India. However, China's attitude in the recent Indo-Pak conflict has given a temporary setback. We still hope
that China, which is a close neighbour of ours, will normalise her relations with us on the basis of mutual respect
and non-interference in internal affairs.
While it is possible that limited understandings on matters of common concern and interests might be reached
between China and USA, it will be increasingly difficult for them or for any Power in the present context to take up
positions contrary to the aspirations of the people of the region or to decide the fates of other countries over their
heads. They will certainly not succeed in courses designed to reverse the trends already taking shape.
There is in South and South East Asia, at the moment, a new realisation based on the common interests of the
region as a whole, both in the economic and political spheres, and a desire to tackle them on a regional basis.
Proposals have been made for the neutralisation of the area and talks have been initiated towards this end.
Simultaneously considerable progress has been made towards integrated regional development and cooperation
under the auspices of the ECAFE. India has taken particular interest in this field and it is hoped that such
cooperation will eventually pave the way towards a system of security-based on economic strength and voluntary
cooperation and respect for the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of all countries of the region.
The problem of Indo-China still eludes solution. Important discussions, both secret and public, have taken place
and fresh proposals have been made; but with the resumption of bombings there seems little prospect of an early
end to the conflict in the near future. Ultimately, however, no power on earth can subdue the indomitable will of the
people of Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia, to
<P-4>
decide their own destiny without any outside interference. India has every sympathy with the aspirations of the
peoples of Indo-China and wishes to do everything possible to ensure respect for the unity, neutrality and
independence of each of these States.

There has been no improvement in the West Asian situation. A redeeming feature had been the greater awareness
that prevails among the Great Powers involved in these cases to try and seek different avenues of settlement. But, of
late the dangers of an escalation of the situation seem to have increased. India supports the just struggle of the
Palestinian people and their inalienable right to return to their homeland.
The important problems concerning arms control, both strategic and conventional, regulation of international
trade and development and related matters as between the developed and developing nations, and the more human
problems such as racial discrimination and fundamental human rights are matters in regard to which India continues
to take keen interest in the international forums and to seek solution in accordance with the principles of her general
policies and the declarations adopted at the Conference of Non-aligned Nations at Lusaka.
The success achieved by India during the year in various fields-diplomatic, defence, economic and others-was in
no small degree, due to the close coordination between the Ministry of External Affairs and other Ministries of the
Government of India. We would like to record our appreciation of the good work done by our Missions abroad in
projecting the correct image and policies of India and in keeping the Governments of their accreditation constantly
informed of the realities of the situation on the sub-continent. The success of India in various fields was, above all,
due to the united efforts of the people of India and the leadership provided by the Government. India's
<P-5>
image abroad today is one of a strong, stable, democratic and peaceful country, which wants friendship with all on a
basis of equality and reciprocity and mutual respect. India stands firmly by her policy of non-alignment, and
peaceful cooperation and hopes to strengthen peace, stability and security in this region in cooperation with all
countries.
<P-6>
INDIA
BANGLADESH USA PAKISTAN GERMANY CHINA MALI CAMBODIA LAOS VIETNAM ZAMBIA

Date :

Jan 01, 1971

INDIA'S NEIGHBOURS
Indo-Afghan relations continued to remain cordial and friendly. Shri Moinul Haq Choudhury, Minister for
Industrial Development, visited Kabul in June, 1971 to explain our stand on the Bangladesh situation. Shri
Mohammed Yunus had visited Kabul earlier as personal emissary of the Prime Minister. The Speaker of the Lok
Sabha, Shri G. S. Dhillon, paid a three-day visit to Afghanistan in August 1971 on his way to participate in the IPU
Conference held in Paris.
A delegation from Afghanistan led by H.E. Mr. M. Aref Ghaussi, Minister of Commerce, Royal Afghan
Government, and a delegation from India led by Shri L. N. Mishra, Minister of Foreign Trade, Government of
India, held trade talks in New Delhi from 18 to 20 February 1972. As a result of talks, a Trade Arrangement was
signed in 20 February, 1972, which came into force w.e.f. 1 March 1972. It has built-in provisions for extending the
Arrangement for three years.
Water and Power Development Consultancy Services (WAPCO), India (Limited), completed their assignment at
Pul-e-Khumri in July 1971. They had also done preliminary exploration of micro-hydel projects in some areas of

Afghanistan and have moved to Bamiyan for the next phase of their operation.
<P-7>
With the emergence of an independent Bangladesh and the possibility of a new period of cooperation with
Pakistan, the prospects of a Treaty of Trade and Transit between the countries of South Asia appear somewhat
brighter than before. India and Afghanistan are both keenly interested in such an agreement.
Within ten days of India's recognition of Bangladesh on 6 December 1971, Bangladesh was liberated of the
Pakistani occupation forces by troops acting under the joint command of the Mukti Bahini and the Indian Armed
Forces. No time was lost in establishing in Dacca a Government representative on the will of the people of
Bangladesh and constituted from amongst their elected representatives.
A trained cadre of civil servants and other officials who had escaped the Pakistani military oppression took up the
challenge of putting the ravaged country back on to its feet. The return to normalcy is being achieved in a
surprisingly short time with the active cooperation of all sections of the people.
However, the father of this new nation, Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, was still in prison in Pakistan and
it was in the shadow of his continued incarceration that His Excellency Mr. Mohd. Abdus Samad Azad, Minister of
Foreign Affairs of the Government of the People's Republic of Bangladesh, paid an official visit to Delhi from 5 to
9 January 1972. This visit, to quote the Joint Communique issued at the end of it, symbolised "the emergence of the
independent Republic of Bangladesh from its long night of travail and the close ties binding the governments and
peoples of Bangladesh and India forged during the struggle against the attempted suppression of a people's will by
brute force." The Bangladesh Foreign Minister took this opportunity to thank again the Government and people of
India for their contribution to the liberation struggle and for their efforts for the release and restoration of
Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman.
<P-8>
It was with a tremendous sense of relief and joy that the news was received during this visit of the release of
Sheikh Mujibur Rahman on 8 January. In his very first public appearance Sheikh Mujibur Rahman made it
unmistakably clear that Bangladesh was an "un-changeable reality" and there was no question of its remaining a part
of Pakistan. He called for world recognition of his country and its admission to the United Nations. In a historic
speech at New Delhi on his way back to Bangladesh, the Sheikh declared that "the people of India are the best
friends of my people" and spoke of the unbreakable bonds that had been forged between India and Bangladesh.
Immediately after Bangbandhu's return to Dacca a Provisional Constitution of Bangladesh Order 1972, was
promulgated. It envisaged a parliamentary system of government in which there shall be a Cabinet of Ministers with
the Prime Minister as the Head, and the President shall exercise his functions in accordance with the advice of the
Prime Minister. A new Cabinet was constituted with Sheikh Mujibur Rahman as Prime Minister and Mr. Abu Syeed
Choudhury as the new President. The system of Basic Democracies instituted by the Ayub Khan administration was
abolished subsequently and a new system of local self-government was established.
The Government of Bangladesh reiterated the ideals of the new nation which were described by Bangabandhu
himself as democracy, secularism and a socialistic pattern of society. In the field of foreign relations, Bangladesh
authorities reiterated their resolve to follow a policy of non-alignment, based on the principles of respect for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of all States, non-interference in another country's internal affairs and equality
and mutual benefit. Even before the Provisional Constitutional Order was promulgated the Bangladesh Government
had, in pursuance of its policy of secularism, banned four communal parties in the country.
<P-9>
In spite of the active collaboration of a large number of non-Bengalis with

the Pakistani military rulers in perpetrating inhuman atrocities on the people
of Bangladesh, the Bangladesh Government took every care to safeguard their
lives and properties. Even then some interested quarters alleged starvation and
reprisals against non-Bengalis, particularly in the townships of Mohammadpur and
Mirpur. In actual fact these two townships were specially cordoned off by Indian
troops at the specific request of the Bangladesh Government in order to protect
the residents from the wrath of the aggrieved people of Bangladesh. Apart from
having indulged in the most brutal atrocities these persons had in their
possession huge quantities of ammunition and sophisticated weapons left behind
by Pakistani troops. Even some Pakistani soldiers had attempted to pass off as
civilians and lie hidden amongst these people. The falsity of the allegations
was exposed when the Head of the International Committee of the Red Cross
Mission in Bangladesh met foreign journalists and told them that his delegation
was "receiving every cooperation from the Government in giving help to Bihari
Muslims". The Special Representative of the U.N. Secretary General Mr. Mittorio
Winspeare-Guicciardi, also visited these localities without previous intimation
and reported that he was able to satisfy himself that conditions in the two
townships were tolerable. He said, "Protective measures by the very small number
of military personnel stationed at checkpoints along the road to Mohammadpur and
Mirpur were evidently designed not to control movement but to prevent troublemakers from entering the non-Bengali enclaves". Thus, far from being started and
massacred the community has been given special protection and special food. That
there have been only isolated and limited cases of reprisals from a people of
whom perhaps 3 million were done to death in atrocious circumstances, 10 million
forced to leave their country and another 20 million rendered homeless is indeed
the tribute both to the Bangladesh Government and Indian troops.
<P-10>
Some interested quarters also tried to make out that the presence of Indian
troops in Bangladesh reflected upon the independence and sovereignty of the
Bangladesh Government and saw in this a pretext to withhold recognition of
Bangladesh till such time as Indian troops had withdrawn. The highest
authorities in India and in Bangladesh have been on record ever since the joint
command liberated Bangladesh as having said that Indian troops are in Bangladesh
at the specific request of that Government and would pull out whenever their
presence is no longer felt necessary by that Government. During the visit of the
Bangladesh Prime Minister to Calcutta on 5 February, 25 March was fixed as the
final date by which all our troops would leave Bangladesh. The process of
withdrawing our armed personnel had in fact already begun; and our troops will
have left Bangladesh even before 25 March.
Besides India and Bhutan, the German Democratic Republic, Bulgaria,
Mongolia, Poland, Burma and Nepal were the first countries to recognise
Bangladesh. The Pakistan Government tried in vain to enforce its own version of
the Hallstein doctrine by threatening to, and actually breaking off relations,
with some countries which had recognised Bangladesh. However, the realities of
the situation were crystal clear and, by the end of February, 47 countries had
accorded recognition to Bangladesh. The Secretary General of the Commonwealth of
Nations has visited Bangladesh and discussed the question of that country's
application for membership of the Commonwealth. Although Bangladesh has not yet
become a member of the United Nations or its other organs, some international
organisations like the IMF and the World Bank are already cooperating with the

Bangladesh Government in purely technical fields.
Ever since the colonial rulers of Pakistan let loose a reign of terror on
the innocent people of Bangladesh, a
<P-11>
stream of refugees had been pouring into the adjacent Indian states to escape
atrocities. Just before the liberation of Bangladesh their number stood at
nearly 10 million. Immediately after liberation, refugees started trekking back
towards their homes in their new-found freedom. The Government of Bangladesh
publicly declared that they would make all efforts to encourage the refugees to
return and help them resettle in their homes. Apart from rendering other help,
the Government of India have given a grant of Rs. 18.58 crores to the Government
of Bangladesh to be spent on refugee relief in the form of cash doles to the
refugees. By the first week of March, 9,321,485 refugees had already returned to
Bangladesh. Besides the grant for cash doles, the Government of India has also
helped in innumerable other ways in the return and resettlement of the refugees,
such as in the provision of drugs, medicines and transport.
As an initial help to the war-ravaged and shattered economy of Bangladesh
the Government of India have further made a grant of Rs. 25 crores for the
purchase of urgently needed commodities by the Government of Bangladesh. These
commodities include food, petroleum and petroleum products, fertilisers, cotton
and yarn, sugar, salt, baby food, oil seeds, cement, steel and steel products,
chemicals, power generation and transmission equipment and vehicles. Another
loan of Rs. 10 crores has been made for rebuilding the railway network in
Bangladesh. In addition, the Government of India have provided a loan worth œ5
million in foreign exchange for the immediate foreign exchange needs of that
country. Similarly, other immediate requirements are being met expeditiously.
whether in clothing, shipping or aircraft.
On the invitation of the Government of India, His Excellency Bangabandhu
Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, Prime Minister of the People's Republic of Bangladesh,
paid a visit to Calcutta from 6 to 8 February 1972. The Bangabandhu expressed
gratitude on behalf of the Government
<P-12>
and people of Bangladesh to the Government and people of India for the
hospitality and assistance given to millions of Bangladesh citizens and for the
moral and material support given by the Government and people of India to the
struggle for liberation. In their detailed discussions the two Prime Ministers
"resolved to give practical shape to the legitimate and deeply felt aspirations
of the common peoples of the two countries, guided by the principles of
democracy, socialism, secularism, non-alignment and opposition to racialism and
colonialism in all its forms and manifestations. Towards these ends they
expressed their determination to promote in every possible way cooperation
between the Governments and peoples of Bangladesh and India inspired by a vision
of lasting peace, amity and good neighbourliness."
The emergence of Bangladesh symbolises the unconquerable spirit of man. It
opens up a new chapter of amity and cooperation on India's eastern frontiers. In

cooperation with other disinterested Powers it makes for stability and progress
in partnership in South Asia, based on enlightened principles in keeping with
the aspirations of the 20th century.
The close and friendly relations between India and Bhutan were further
strengthened by the visit of His Majesty the King of Bhutan to New Delhi in
April 1971. His Majesty was accompanied by H.R.H. the Crown Prince and three
Ministers, viz. H.E. Lyonpo Chokyal Dorji, Minister of Finance, H.E. Lyonpo Dawa
Tsering, Minister of Development and Foreign Affairs and H.E. Lyonpo Pema
Wangchuk, who is now Bhutan's Representative in India.
During the visit, His Majesty and the Ministers held discussions with the
Government of India on various matters of mutual concern. The visit was followed
by the establishment of the Royal Bhutan Mission in New Delhi in May, 1971,
while India also appointed Shri B.S. Das as her Representative to Bhutan in
Thimpu on 15 July, 1971.
<P-13>
Bhutan became a member of the United Nations on 21 September 1971. India
made every possible efforts to help Bhutan in acquiring this membership in
keeping the earlier understanding between the two countries. Bhutan has
established a Permanent Mission to the U.N. in New York. The Governments of
India and Bhutan both have reiterated that the relations between the two
countries would continue to be governed by the 1949 Treaty of Perpetual Peace
and Friendship between them.
The ties of friendship between India and Bhutan were further cemented during
the year by the exchange of various delegations. A 16-member Indian folk dance
troupe visited Bhutan in August 1971. The following delegations from Bhutan
visited India in January-February, 1972:(i) A ten-member Tshogdu (National Assembly) delegation;
(ii) An eight-member delegation of Royal Advisory Councillors of Bhutan;
(iii) A ten-member delegation of Bhutanese officials;
(iv) A ten-member delegation of students and teachers;
(v) A folk dance troupe to participate in the Republic Day celebrations.
The Government of India have agreed to provide Rs. 33 crores in grants and
loans to finance Bhutan's Third Five Year Plan which commenced in April 1971.
The Plan provides for several schemes in vital sectors of development such as
agriculture, industry, education, transport, communications, health, etc. The
Government of India continue to provide the services of experts in these fields
at Bhutan Government's request. Over 150 Bhutanese students continue to receive
Government of India scholarships for study in India.
Bhutan contributed a sum of approximately Rs. 7 lakhs towards the relief of
refugees from Bangladesh and was the first country to recognise Bangladesh after
India.

25 M. of E.A.-2.
<P-14>
Relations with Burma have continued to be friendly and close. General Ne
Win, Chairman of the Revolutionary Council of Burma, paid an informal visit to
India from 8th to 10th April, 1971. Various internataional and bilateral
subjects were discussed.
A 15-members Burmese delegation participated in the Joint Indo-Burma
Boundary Commission meeting held in New Delhi from 6 to 15 June, 1971. The
demarcation work on the Indo-Burma boundary is proceeding satisfactorily.
An Indian Bullet Troupe visited Rangoon in September-October 1971.
The Governments of India and Burma are holding discussions regarding the
various problems faced by the people of Indian origin in Burma.
The Government of Burma extended recognition to Bangladesh on 13th January,
1972.
Relations with Ceylon continued to remain cordial. During the insurgency in
April 1971 India, along with other friendly countries, provided speedy and
effective assistance to the Government of Ceylon at their request. Assistance
was mainly in the shape of small arms and ammunition, helicopters for logistic
support and patrolling of the coast by Indian naval ships.
The Foreign Minister paid an official visit to Ceylon from 9 to 11
September. Economic cooperation between the two countries was the main subject
of discussion. The Minister of Irrigation ad Power also visited Ceylon in
November 1971 and explored the possibility of creating a joint power grid system
between Ceylon and Southern India.
<P-15>
The implementation of the Indo-Ceylonese Agreement of 1964, has been
proceeding satisfactorily. Some new proposals to speed up the pace of granting
Ceylon citizenship and repatriation are under consideration of the two
Governments.
The policy of Ceylonisation of trade and business continued during the year,
resulting in some of our nationals having to leave the Island, winding up their
business. Our efforts with the Ceylonese Government reduced to some extent the
hardship caused by these measures.
A new Credit Agreement was signed between the two Governments in November
1971. Under this Agreement, Ceylon would be able to buy some Indian goods worth
Rs. 50 million (Indian).
The news of the sudden demise of King Mahendra of Nepal on 31 January, was
received in India with deep regret. He was a patriot with great love for his
country. In the absence of the President from Delhi, the Vice-President of India
led a delegation consisting of Shri Raj Bahadur, Minister of Parliamentary

Affairs and Shipping and Transport, Shri T.N. Kaul, Foreign Secretary and Lt.
Gen. Har Prasad, Vice Chief of the Army Staff, to Kathmandu to represent India
at the funeral the same day.
A new Trade and Transit Treaty signed with Nepal came into effect from 15
August. The new Treaty provides for Nepal's primary products to come freely into
India. Industrial goods manufactured in Nepal largely from indigenous raw
materials are given specially favourable treatment for import into India on a
non-reciprocal basis. Mutually satisfactory solutions were found for the
prevention of deflection of trade and transit routes. The new Treaty was
welcomed both in India and Nepal.
<P-16>
The Foreign Minister visited Kathmandu from 3 to 5 September. Discussions on
matters of mutual interest were held between the Foreign Minister and the
Nepalese Prime Minister. The two Ministers emphasised the traditionally close
links between the two countries and peoples in various fields and stressed the
need to further strengthen them to their mutual benefit. The Prime Minister of
Nepal and the Minister of External Affairs discussed the international situation
and reiterated their continued adherence to the policy of non-alignment as an
important factor in the maintenance of universal peace and international
security and the lessening of tensions in the world. In the Joint Communique
issued at the end of the visit, "The Prime Minister of Nepal noted the social
and economic implications to India as a result of facing the problem of millions
of refugees from East Pakistan". The two Ministers agreed on the urgent need for
the creation of conditions for the return of the refugees to their homes.
As a result of the visit of an Indian delegation to Kathmandu in October,
matters relating to the existing agreements on Kosi, Gandhak and Trisuli
projects were discussed and settled.
His Majesty the King of Nepal stopped over at New Delhi on 10 and 11 June on
his way to Afghanistan and the Soviet Union. King Mahendra had a meeting with
the Prime Minister, Union Ministers for Transport, Shipping and Parliamentary
Affairs; Irrigation and Power; and Foreign Trade called on His Majesty the King.
King Mahendra also paid an official visit to India from 11 to 13 November. The
King received some of the Union Ministers and held discussions on subjects of
mutual concern with them during his stay at New Delhi.
India continued to provide training facilities to Nepalese students in
various educational institutions in India for higher studies in engineering,
medicine and other fields, both on scholarships and on self-financing basis.
During
<P-17>
1971-72, 226 seats were reserved for Nepalese students under the Technical
Cooperation Scheme of the Colombo Plan, and 60 self-financing students were
admitted to various institutions in India.
During the year under review Indian aid to Nepal continued under the IndoNepal Economic Cooperation Programme. Upto 31 March 1971, India had provided aid

worth Rs. 81.52 crores towards the Cooperation programme in Nepal. A sum of Rs.
8.40 crores has been earmarked for expenditure during the year 1971-72.
The construction of the bridge over the river Gandaki marked the completion
of the Sonauli-Pokhra Road which was thrown open to traffic by the Prime
Minister of Nepal on 14 September 1971. This road constructed at a cost of about
Rs. 15 crores (IC) will give a boost to the economy of Pokhara valley of Nepal.
Another major Indo-Nepal project, the second stage of the Tirsuli Hydel Project
was inaugurated by the Nepalese Prime Minister on 17 November 1971.
Other major projects like the Eastern Sector of Mahendra Rajmarg (East-WestHighway) and the Chatra Canal made good progress and are nearing completion. The
survey and preparatory work on the Central Sector of the Mahendra Rajmarg has
been completed. The Engineering-cum-traffic survey for laying a broad-gauge
railway line from Raxaul on the Indian side to Hitauda in Nepal was also
completed during the year. A hospital with 25 beds was inaugurated at Rajbiraj
during the year. This hospital is the first in the chain of two hospitals with
25 beds each, three hospitals with 15 beds each, one health centre and six
health posts to be constructed with Indian cooperation.
The work on the Kathmandu-Raxaul Land line project has progressed
satisfactorily. The telephone exchanges at Kathmandu, Hitauda, Amlekganj, Simra
and Birganj have been constructed. The construction of telephone exchanges at
Bhainse and Palung is also nearing completion.
<P-18>
In order to cater to the needs of the local population along the Mahendra
Rajmarg and Sonauli-Pokhra Road three link roads and three schools buildings are
being constructed. The scheme of distribution of packets containing essential
medicines to the local population was continued during the year.
The construction of road from Hanumannagar to Fatehpur, Rajbiraj and Kanauli
in the Kosi area made satisfactory progress during the year. The black-topping
and improvement of a portion of Kathmandu-Trisuli Road from Kakani diversion to
Ranipauwa was undertaken during the year in addition to the regular maintenance
of the road.
The Government of India have approved the draft letter of exchange for the
Paropkar Shri Panch Indra Laxmi Devi Maternity and Child Welfare Centre in Nepal
and also sanctioned the grants-in-aid of Rs. 1.40 lakhs for this institution. To
meet the expenditure already incurred for the completion of the O.P.D. buildings
and Nurses' Hostel and also to provide funds for acquiring equipments for X-Ray
and dark rooms of the Maternity Home.
Government of India's assistance in deputing Readers, Professors, Teachers,
Technicians and Coaches was continued during the year to H.M.G. of Nepal towards
the implementation of their educational programmes.
In the archaelogical field, the Government of India are assisting the H.M.G
of Nepal in conducting a pre-historic survey of Nepal.
Relations between India and Sikkim continued to be warm and friendly. These

relations were further cemented by the visit of Their Highnesses the Chogyal and
the Gyalmo of Sikkim to New Delhi in April 1971, following fruitful discussions
between a team of Sikkimese officials and the Planning Commission on Sikkim's
Fourth Five Year Plan. The Government of India have decided to give a sum of Rs.
18.5 crores in grants and loans to Sikkim for the implementation of its Fourth
Five-Year Plan which
<P-19>
commenced on 1 April 1971. During the year, the Government of India continued to
provide a number of experts to Sikkim in administrative and development fields
and facilities for training and education of the Sikkimese personnel in India.
Over 225 Sikkimese scholars continued to receive scholarships for studies in
various educational institutions in India.
A delegation of members of the State Council of Sikkim visited India in
January 1972. Under the cultural activities programme, a troupe of 10 Kuchipudi
dancers visited Sikkim in connection with India's Independence Day celebrations.
A delegation of 12 Village Headmen from Sikkim undertook a Bharat Darshan tour
in December 1971. A cultural delegation of Sikkimese women is likely to visit
India in February 1972.
Sikkim contributed a sum of Rs. 3.5 lakhs towards the relief of refugees
from Bangladesh. In a message to the Prime Minister on 4 December, the Chogyal
referred to "the grave situation forced on India by the latest Pakistan
hostilities" and conveyed his "fullest support to the Government and people of
India in meeting this critical challenge".
A new situation emerged on the sub-continent during 1971-72 with the birth
of the sovereign and independent State of Bangladesh in what used to be the
Province of East Pakistan. The emergence of independent Bangladesh was
precipitated by the brutal military action launched against the unarmed civilian
population of East Bengal by the Yahya regime on 25 March. The December 1970
General Elections had resulted in a landslide victory for the Awami League under
the leadership of Sheikh Mujibur Rahman on the basis of his 6-point programme
for full provincial autonomy, with the Centre retaining only Defence and Foreign
Affairs, and possibly currency. The result of these first free General
Elections, based on adult
<P-20>
franchise, held in Pakistan obviously upset the calculations of the military
regime. The landslide victory of Sheikh Mujib's party-which won the overall
majority in Pakistan coupled with the success of Mr. Bhutto's PPP-which won a
majority in the Punjab and Sind and a majority in West Pakistan as a wholealtered the situation completely.
Following the elections, President Yahya tried to go through the motions of
talks with leaders of these two political parties to conform to the principles
of the Legal Framework Order. Mr. Bhutto, however, announced that his party
would not accept a Constitution on the basis of the Awami League's 6-point
programme of autonomy. The triangular dialogue between President Yahya, Sheikh
Mujib and Mr. Bhutto therefore ended in a deadlock. Mr. Bhutto returned from

Dacca in early February and threatened an agitation unless the date for
convening the National Assembly was postponed. Later, when the date for
convening the National Assembly was fixed for 3 March, 1971, Mr. Bhutto
announced his decision to boycott the National Assembly.
In the first week of February, President Yahya announced the indefinite
postponement of the date for convening the National Assembly and decided to take
stern measures against the Awami League and its supporters, who had won an
overwhelming majority in East Bengal and a majority in the National Assembly.
President Yahya removed the Governor of East Pakistan, Admiral Ahsan and
installed Lt. General Tikka Khan, with the aim of wiping out by military means
the political aspirations of the 75 million East Bengalis. During the first half
of March, while Gen. Tikka Khan started a rapid build up of military strength in
East Bengal, President Yahya kept up the facade of holding fresh talks with
Sheikh Mujib and the Awami League leaders. He even invited leaders of
<P-21>
other West Pakistan parties, and finally Mr. Bhutto to Dacca. As soon as the
strength of the Army had been increased from the normal division and a half to
three and a half divisions, the talks mysteriously broke down on the 24 March.
General Yahya Khan left for Karachi on the 25 March, and the same night Gen.
Tikka Khan's troops started their military repression in Dacca and other cities
of East Bengal. Awami League supporters and intellectuals including professors
and students, workers and peasants and members of the minority community were
singled out for elimination and millions of people were forced to seek refuge in
India. As this campaign continued month after month, it became increasingly
clear that this genocide of the people of East Bengal by the West Pakistan
minority Government was a deliberate act. The military suppression of the people
of East Bengal was so brutal that between 25 March and 16 December, it resulted
in the killing of 3 million people, the fleeing of nearly 10 million people to
India and another 20 million became refugees within East Bengal.
The massive influx of refugees into India from East Bengal became a major
threat to India's economic, political and social structure, as well as to the
peace and security of the region. The Yahya regime at first denied the massive
exodus but later admitted that no more than two million people had fled to
India-a figure it stuck to in spite of the obvious and growing millions of
refugees who continued to arrive in India.
The tragic events in East Bengal naturally aroused wide concern and sympathy
in India. The Lok Sabha passed a resolution on 31 March, 1971, expressing the
"wholehearted sympathy and support of the people of India" for the struggle of
the people of Bangladesh. Faced with the tremendous and growing burden of
refugees, several Ministeial delegations were sent abroad to apprise
<P-22>
foreign governments and the world community about the facts of the situation,
and bring to bear their influence on the military rulers of Pakistan for a
peaceful, political settlement. As many as 13 Ministerial delegations visited 70
countries to explain at first hand the continuing influx of refugees due to the
genocide of the people of East Bengal by the West Pakistan army. The Foreign

Minister visited Europe and America. The Prime Minister addressed letters to
Heads of Governments, on 14 May 1971 and 10 August 1971, explaining the crushing
burden which the continuing refugee influx had thrust upon India and asked them
to exercise their influence with Pakistan to seek a political solution with the
already elected representatives of East Bengal and to release Sheikh Mujibur
Rahman. Foreign Minister, similarly, wrote to the United Nations Secretary
General U Thant on 10 August 1971. Our Missions abroad kept in continuous touch
with the Governments of their accreditation to explain the issues involved. Many
distinguished foreign visitors, including Members of Parliament and other
leaders as well as prominent journalists and TV groups were invited by our
Government to visit the refugee camps and study the situation at first hand. The
Bangladesh issue was raised in the Human Rights Commission and at the nonaligned Consultative Meeting at New York. The Indian Delegations participating
in the Inter-Parliamentary Union Conference in Paris and in the Commonwealth
Parliamentary Conference at Kuala Lumpur inscribed items on East Bengal in the
agenda of these meetings. Indian delegations to non-governmental organisations
like the World Federation of United Nations Associations, the International
Commission of Jurists also persuaded these organisations to speak up for the
cause of the people of East Bengal.
While these efforts created worldwide sympathy amongst the people for the
sufferings of the refugees and the burden faced by India, Governments were slow
in realising the terrible urgency of the situation with which the
<P-23>
people of Bangladesh and India were faced. Therefore, in October-November, 1971,
the Prime Minister undertook a tour of six countries including Belgium, Austria,
UK, France, Federal Republic of Germany and the USA. She put across the idea
that India could not accept the continuing burden of looking after millions of
refugees indefinitely. The Prime Minister urged that the further influx of the
refugees could be stopped and the existing refugees in India would voluntarily
return to Bangladesh, only through a political solution involving a settlement
with the already elected leaders of the people in East Bengal. She urged the
immediate release of Sheikh Mujibur Rahman as that would help in assuaging the
feelings of the people of Bangladesh and help in creating a proper atmosphere
for a political solution. In a statement to Parliament on 15 November 1971, the
Prime Minister summed up the results of these efforts in the following terms:
"I think that these countries as well as others realise that it will not
help to deal with peripheral problems without finding political solution in
Bangladesh through negotiations with the already elected leaders of the people
of East Bengal and in accordance with their legitimate wishes. Most countries
also realise that the releas of Sheikh Mujibur Rahman is essential and intend to
impress this upon the military regime of Pakistan."
The Yahya Government, however, continued its policy of military repression
and paid little heed to mounting international pressure for ending the carnage
in East Bengal and for negotiating a political settlement with genuinely elected
Awami League representatives. Nor was President Yahya prepared to listen to the
advice of leading statesmen of the world to release Sheikh Mujibur Rahman-whom
he persisted in calling a traitor and against

<P-24>
whom he had started a farcical trial in camera. At the same time, the Yahya
Government tried to depict to the whole world that the unrest in East Bengal and
the exodus of the millions of refugees into India was due to India's instigation
and not to the brutal repression by his army. The people of West Pakistan were
kept totally in the dark about inhuman atrocities against innocent civilians in
East Bengal.
Not content with this an officially inspired `Hate India', `Crush India'
campaign was launched in the major cities of West Pakistan in September.
President Yahya tried to depict the liberation struggle in East Bengal, which
grew rapidly with military repression, as inspired by India so as to convert the
problem into another Indo-Pakistan conflict. By October, President Yahya started
describing the situation in East Bengal as an undeclared war with India and went
on almost every week to threaten total war against India. He ordered massive
troop movements to forward areas along India's western and eastern borders.
India had no option but to reinforce her defences along the borders. This was
followed by mounting border incidents, particularly, in East Bengal, with
Pakistani troops firing into Indian territory and Pakistani war planes violating
Indian air space. On 25 November, President Yahya Khan told press correspondents
that in ten days, he would be away fighting a war against India. In spite of
these grave provocations India treated them as local incidents and did not allow
them to escalate into a major conflict.
Finally, on the eve of 3 December, the Pakistan Air Force launched sudden
strikes against several Indian air-fields and its army attacked across the
western border, and declared a state of war against India on the morning of 4
December. India had no alternative but to use her armed forces to meet this
unprovoked aggression.
<P-25>
During the 14-day war in eastern theatre, the Joint Indo-Bangladesh Command
defeated the Pakistan Army which surrendered on 16 December. The same evening
the Prime Minister made unilateral offer of cease-fire in the Western theatre
which was accepted by Pakistan on 17 December. This was in line with India's
purpose of deterring aggression and not making territorial gains in Pakistan.
The Foreign Minister addressing the UN Security Council on 21 December, 1971
stated:
"We are glad that the initiative taken by the Prime Minister of India
led to a response from Pakistan and that cease-fire became effective. We are
willing to arrive at agreed arrangements with the parties concerned, to settle
not only withdrawals but also other problems which have arisen as a result of
this conflict, by mutual negotiation."
Referring to India's Western boundary with Pakistan, the Foreign Minister
said:
"The international frontier between India and Pakistan is well defined.
However, as a result of hostilities, certain areas of Pakistan are now under the

control of Indian troops and a much smaller area of India is under the control
of Pakistani troops. We accept the principle of withdrawals. This is a problem
we wish to negotiate and settle with Pakistan as early as possible, and we look
forward to cooperation from Pakistan in this regard."
"The State of Jammu & Kashmir is an integral part of India. However, in
order to avoid bloodshed and for preserving peace, we have respected the
ceasefireline supervised by UNMOGIP. In the course of this conflict, as also in
1965, it was
<P-26>
crossed by troops of Pakistan at various places. India had therefore, to cross
this line then, as now. There is thus need to avoid the repetition of such
incidents by making some adjustments in the cease-fire line in order to make it
more stable, rational and viable. This we propose to discuss and settle with
Pakistan."
India desires a durable peace and restoration of normal relations with
Pakistan. India firmly believes that it is through friendship and cooperation
between India, Bangladesh and Pakistan that the peoples of the three countries
would progress. India has offered to Pakistan to hold direct talks with her, at
any time, at any level and without any preconditions, to discuss and settle all
questions. We hope that Pakistan will grasp the hand of friendship, give up the
policy of confrontation against India which has led to four conflicts in the
past and forge new relations of amity and good neighbourliness which would
benefit both our peoples.
The emergence of a free, sovereign and independent Bangladesh has not only
exploded the myth of religion being the basis of statehood, but also provided an
opportunity for three countries of the subcontinent to work in peace, friendship
and cooperation for the welfare of their peoples and the security and stability
of the subcontinent. India has no enmity against the people of Pakistan and
wishes them well. India does not wish instability and discord on its borders and
has no designs on Pakistan's territory. India wishes to resolve all problems
with Pakistan through direct bilateral negotiations without any third party
intervention. India hopes that Pakistan will appreciate this and respond in a
positive and constructive manner.
<P-27>
Consistent with our declared desire to normalise relations with China, we took a
number of steps in that direction. In July 1971 the Prime Minister sent a
personal letter to Premier Chou En-lai about the Bangladesh problem and IndiaChina relations. We welcomed the restoration of China's rights in the U. N., and
both the Prime Minister and the Foreign Minister sent messages of
congratulations to their Chinese counterparts. Speaking at the Press Conference
in New Delhi and in Paris on 19 October and 9 November respectively, the Prime
Minister mentioned the possibilities of exchange of Ambassadors without
discussing substantive issues like the border question. On 25 November, the
Foreign Minister declared in Parliament that the likelihood of India
unilaterally sending an Ambassador to China was "not excluded". Our Ambassadors
in various capitals in the world also conveyed our desire for normalisation of

relations to their Chinese counter-parts. On 26 November, an invitation was
conveyed to the Chinese Government to take part in the Third Asian International
Trade Fair to be held in New Delhi.
We abstained from anti-Chinese propaganda, in spite of virtuperative attacks
made by China during the Bangladesh developments and Pakistan's invasion of
India in December. The police posse outside the Chinese Embassy in New Delhi was
withdrawn on 13 September. We raised the level of representation at the Chinese
Embassy National Day Reception on 1 October in New Delhi and the Foreign
Secretary attended the function.
China on her part showed some response and on our Republic Day in 1971,
Premier Chou En-lai sent his "festive congratulations" to our Prime Minister and
to "the great Indian People". On 13 November 1971, Premier Chou En-lai also sent
a message thanking the Prime Minister for her greetings on China's entry into
the U. N., and the message ended with, "May the friendship between the Indian
and Chinese people grow and develop daily".
<P-28>
Till the latter half of November, there was a significant reduction in antiIndia propaganda in the Chinese Press and there was hardly any adverse comment
on India's internal situation. During October-November 1971, an Indian Table
Tennis Team visited China on invitation to participate in the Afro-Asian Table
Tennis Tournament held in Peking and was treated well. This was the first
official Indian delegation to visit China in more than 10 years.
The initial Chinese reaction to the Indo-Soviet Treaty was one of cautious
silence and for months there was no official reaction. On 5 October, Premier
Chou En-lai was reported to have told a group of Americans in Peking that he had
noted the Indo-Soviet statement that "their agreement was not directed against
China".
However, following developments in Bangladesh, China took a consistently
hostile stand against India and supported the Pakistan Government vis-a-vis
Bangladesh. She ignored the systematic genocide committed by the Pakistani Army
in Bangladesh and the resultant massive exodus of refugees which posed a serious
danger to India's peace and stability. Both inside and outside the U.N., China
violently criticised India. Beginning from 11 April, China constantly accused
India of "gross" or "crude" interference in the internal affairs of Pakistan and
of threatening Pakistan and sending armed infiltrators". It condemned the
Bangladesh Leaders as a "secessionist" group.
Since the latter part of November 1971, China's attacks on India on behalf
of Pakistan became more vitriolic. With the outbreak of the Indo-Pak
hostilities, China regularly and consistently sought to condemn India as having
committed "aggression" on Pakistan with the help of Soviet "Social imperialism".
China held that the Indo-Soviet Treaty was actually a military alliance, aid and
that the Bangladesh Government was a "puppet Government",
<P-29>
"single-handedly engineered" by India and forcibly imposed on the people of

"East Pakistan". On 16 December 1971, China officially accused India on these
lines and held that "the pipe dream of a great Indian empire" cherised by the
"Indian expansionists" was "not only to swallow up `East Pakistan' but also to
destroy Pakistan as a whole". Moreover, she held out the threat that "India too
has its own nationalities problem" and that "henceforth there will be no
tranquility for India over the South-Asian sub-continent".
In the U.N., China worked for West Pakistan and actively supported the U.S.
moves in the Security Council and the General Assembly against India. In the
debate held on 19 November in the Third Committee of the United Nations on the
influx of refugees in India, the Chinese representative took absolutely no
notice of the genocide in Bangladesh which caused this exodus and dismissed the
whole cruel episode as "purely Pakistan's internal affair". He held that the
"so-called refugee question" was created by India in order to interfere in the
internal affairs of Pakistan and repeated the Pakistani allegation that India
was obstructing the return of the Bangladesh refugees to their homeland.
Despite this setback to the slight progress that had been made earlier, it
is to be noted that China did not actively interfere in the Bangladesh struggle
or the Indo-Pak conflict. It is also significant that the Sino-U.S. joint
communique dated 28 February 1972 makes no mention of Bangladesh. However, China
has gone out of her way to express `support to the right of the people of Jammu
& Kashmir to self determination' in the joint communique. This amounts to
interference in India's internal affairs and cannot be tolerated. We do not
still wish to provoke China unnecessarily and are willing to normalise relations
with her on a basis of equality, mutual respect and non-interference in internal
affairs. We hope that sooner, rather
<P-30>
than later, China will show a positive and constructive response. Normalisation
of relations between India and China, we believe, would strengthen peace and
security, promote progress and lessen tensions in Asia.
<P-31>
INDIA
AFGHANISTAN USA BANGLADESH FRANCE PAKISTAN UNITED KINGDOM CENTRAL AFRICAN
REPUBLIC BHUTAN BULGARIA BURMA MONGOLIA NEPAL POLAND LATVIA RUSSIA SRI
LANKA MALAYSIA AUSTRIA BELGIUM GERMANY CHINA MALI

Date :

Jun 01, 1971

SOUTH EAST ASIA
Relations between India and Australia continued to be close and friendly.
A special Mission led by Shri Sidharatha Shankar Ray, Minister of Education

and Social Welfare, visited Australia in 1 January, 1971 to explain India's
position on the question of Bangladesh.
The Fifth Consultative Meeting between Officials of the Ministry of External
Affairs and the Department of Foreign Affairs of Australia was held in New Delhi
on October 19, 20 and 21, 1971. The two sides were able to exchange views on a
wide range of international questions, particularly Asian, and also on bilateral
relations in the economic, educational, scientific, cultural and technical
fields.
A Cultural Agreement between India and Australia was signed after these
discussions to promote greater exchange and closer cooperation between the two
countries in the cultural sphere.
Australia offered assistance for the relief of the Bangladesh refugees in
India. The total amount of assistance offered by Australia was $2,240,072 out of
which $1,120,072 were offered through the U.N. Focal Point and $1,120,000 to the
Government of India directly.
The Minister of External Affairs visited Indonesia from August 12-15, 1971
at the invitation of the Indonesian Government. During his visit the annual
India-Indonesian bilateral talks at the ministerial and official levels were
<P-32>
also held. Among the subjects on which there was a mutual exchange of views were
the situation in South and South-East Asia, the Indian Ocean, cooperation among
non-aligned nations, the recent Treaty of Peace, Friendship and Cooperation
between India and the Soviet Union, regional economic cooperation, influx of
refugees into India and need for a peaceful political settlement in Indo-China.
An Indonesian Railway Team visited India from April 16-29, 1971 at the
invitation of the Government of India to explore avenues for cooperation in the
Railway and Communications fields.
Relations in the cultural sphere between India and Indonesia were further
strengthened by our participation in the Ramayana Ballet Festival in Indonesia
during August-September 1971. The Ranga-Sri Little Ballet Troupe of Gwalior and
the Kathakali Troupe from the PS Varrier Natya Sangham of Kerala successfully
participated in this Festival.
The Indonesian Chief of Naval Staff Admiral Rudy Sudomo visited India from
September 6-15, 1971 as a guest of the Indian Navy.
The Indonesian Minister of State for Economic, Financial and Industrial
Affairs, the Sultan of Jogjakarta, visited India from October 21-24, 1971. He
visited the Refugee Camp at Salt Lake in Calcutta, the TELCO and TISCO works in
Jamshedpur and also Agra.
Relations between India and Malaysia continued to be cordial. Shri
Sidharatha Shankar Ray, Minister of Education and Social Welfare, visited
Malaysia in June 1971 to explain India's stand on the situation in East Bengal.

An Indian Parliamentary Delegation led by the Hon'ble the Speaker
participated in the Commonwealth Parliamentary Conference held at Kuala Lumpur
from September 13-17, 1971.
<P-33>
H.E. Chief Hammer DeRoburt O.B.E., MP. President, Head of State, Minister
for Island Development and Industry and Minister for External Affairs of the
Republic of Nauru paid an official visit from September 8-22, 1971. During his
visit matters concerning the promotion of bilateral trade were discussed. It was
agreed that the M.M.T.C. will get in touch with the Phosphate Corporation of
Nauru for the import of rock phosphate to India.
India's relations with New Zealand continued to be friendly. There was a
great deal of sympathy and understanding among the people of New Zealand for the
people of East Bengal, particularly the refugees. Public organisations in New
Zealand generously donated relief material for the Bangladesh refugees in India.
The Government of New Zealand offered Royal New Zealand Airforce planes for
transporting these relief supplies.
The new High Commissioner for New Zealand His Excellency Mr. R. R.
Cunninghame presented his credentials to the President on 7th March, 1972.
Her Excellency Mrs. Imelda R. Marcos, wife of the President of Philippines
visited India from October 10-11, 1971. The occasion of her visit was availed of
for detailed discussions of a number of projects and schemes in which India will
provide technical assistance. These matters were further discussed later during
the visit of Hon'ble Mr. David M. Consunji, Minister of Public Works and
Communications, Government of the Philippines from November 19-23, 1971.
The close and friendly relations between the Governments of India and
Signapore were further emphasised when the Singapore Prime Minister paid an
official visit to India from November 21-25, 1971, and held talks with the
President, the Prime Minister and the Foreign Minister. The talks covered a
variety of subjects and it was found that the attitude of the two countries was
similar on a number of points.
<P-34>
The most important event of the year was the State visit by President Shri
V. V. Giri at the invitation of the Government of Singapore from September 14 to
17, 1971. Shri C. Subramaniam, Minister of Planning, visited Singapore from
September 6-8, 1971.
Relations between India and Thailand remained cordial.
Shri Sidharatha Shankar Ray, Minister of Education and Social Welfare
visited Thailand in June 1971 to explain India's stand on the situation in East
Bengal.
The State Trading Corporation has opened a Regional Office in Bangkok with a
resident representative. It is hoped that this will pave the way towards
increased economic and commercial cooperation between India and Thailand.

Thailand recognised Bangladesh on February 16, 1972. The President,
accompanied by Shrimati Giri, will be paying a State visit to Thailand from
March 27-30, 1972 at the invitation of His Majesty the King of Thailand.
Their Majesties the King and the Queen of Tonga paid a State visit to India
from October 1-11, 1971. Following this visit, the prospects of bilateral trade
are being explored. A number of proposals for technical assistance to Tonga are
under consideration. A small scale industries exhibition in Tonga is also
envisaged.
<P-35>
AUSTRALIA
INDIA USA BANGLADESH INDONESIA CHINA MALAYSIA NAURU NEW ZEALAND PHILIPPINES
REPUBLIC OF SINGAPORE THAILAND TONGA

Date :

Jun 01, 1971

EAST ASIA
Indo-Japanese relations registered a step further in the field of both
political and economic relations. A large number of Japanese delegations, both
political and economic, visited India, thus presenting prospects of closer IndoJapanese cooperation.
On the economic side, India and Japan signed the Tenth Yen Credit Agreement
for U.S. $25.39 million in 1 April, 1971. Among the many Japanese industrial and
technical delegations which visited India, the Mitsubishi Delegation's visit in
April-May 1971, deserve a special mention. It came to study the scope of
technical and financial cooperation with India and made positive
recommendations. It generally welcomed the political stability and the economic
prospects for Japanese investment in India. Mitsubishi Heavy Industry also
agreed to extend to India U. S. $19 million worth of supply credit for the
purchase of a bulk ore carrier.
The Japanese Government promised further project aid of U. S. $15.4 million
for a deep sea oil exploration project. Japan also made another commitment worth
U. S. $45 million extending over a period of 3 years for three important
projects viz., Tuticorin Fertiliser project, Kotah Fertilizer and Cochin
Shipyards.
Politically, two Parliamentary delegations from Japan visited India in July
and September. Particularly significant was the visit of the Parliamentary
Delegation led by Mr. Sakurauchi who visited India for a general exchange of
views and to study the refugee problem in particular.
<P-36>

On return to Japan, the delegation drew attention to the enormity of the refugee
problem and made a strong plea for Japanese assistance in the matter.
On the Bangladesh question, the Japanese Press came out most candidly and
powerfully to condemn the genocide in Bangladesh by Pakistani military forces.
The Japanese Government also endorsed the humanitarian action taken by India.
Prime Minister Sato, replying to our Prime Minister's letter of 14 May on the
question of Bangladesh stated (in his letter of 30 June), how deeply concerned
he was with the problem created by the heavy influx of refugees into India and
expressed his Government's "deepest sympathy". He also agreed that "conditions
should be created so that the flow of refugees into the Indian territory will
stop and those at present in India may be repatriated as soon as possible". Our
Education Minister, Shri S. S. Ray, made a special visit to Japan on 7 June to
explain to the Japanese leaders the causes and effects of the Bangladesh
developments.
On 25, November Prime Minister Sato wrote to the Indian Prime Minister to
express his deep concern over the growingly tense situation in the Indo-Pakistan
sub-continent.
With the invasion of India by Pakistan on 3 December, Japan worked in the
U.N. for an early cease-fire and tried to temper the language of certain
resolutions. Japan temporarily postponed signature on the Aid Agreement for the
next year but allowed already authorised aid to flow to India without any
restriction. With the end of war, Japan speedily signed on 31, January 1972 the
agreement for 11th Yen credit amounting to U.S. $101 million.
India-Mongolia relations reached a new high with India raising the level of
our Mission in Ulan Bator to the Embassy level in the month of November 1971 and
appointing Shri Narboo as our first resident Ambassador. India
<P-37>
also sent a special delegation under Shri Om Mehta, Minister of State for
Parliamentary Affairs and Shipping and Transport, to attend the Golden Jubilee
Celebration of the foundation of the Mongolian People's Republic on 11 July,
1971, in Ulan Bator. Particularly noteworthy was the unstinted support which the
Government and people of Mongolia gave to India in December 1971. Mongolia was
one of the few countries which stood by India at the U.N.
Friendly relations with the Republic of Korea continued to grow. The visit
of the Vice Foreign Minister of the Republic of Korea Mr. Suk Heum Yun, from 10
to 16 October, 1971, helped in furthering mutual understanding between the two
countries. He called on the Foreign Minister and the Prime Minister and had
useful exchange of views. The trade relations between the two countries also
continued to develop. The total trade in 1970-71 came to Rs. 2.82 million. A
South Korean trade team visited India in July 1971 and negotiated a long term
agreement for import of Indian iron ore to Korea.
India has all along been interested in steadily increasing its contacts with
DPRK and the visit of a DPRK `cultural troupe in the month of November greatly
contributed in promoting better understanding and goodwill between the two

countries. The troupe gave several performances in New Delhi to large audiences
and the high standard of performance was uniformly appreciated.
The trade relations between the two countries have also been on the increase
and this was reflected in the new Trade Agreement for the year 1972 which was
signed in Delhi on 9 February, 1972. Taking into account the desire of both
sides to increase the trade, the Agreement envisaged a 100 per cent increase in
the volume of trade and provided for a total trade volume of Rs. 166 million,
both-ways.
<P-38>
The situation in Indo-China continued to be a matter of concern to the
Government. In all the three states, the war continued unabated without any
prospects of early peace. On 25 January, 1972, President Nixon revealed the
secret visits of Kissinger to Paris during 1971 and his talks with the leaders
of the Vietnamese delegation. While this was a welcome development, President
Nixon's unilateral disclosure of the contents of these meetings and subsequent
intensified bombings of Vietnamese territory despite the positive response made
by the PRG in the form of two elaborations announced on 1 February, 1972,
constituted a most regrettable set-back to the prospects of peace.
The Government of India tried to keep in touch with all the parties
concerned in Indo-China in the hope that some peaceful avenues could be found to
solve the problem of war. The Government of India also believe that Geneva
Accords provide the framework for a durable peace settlement in Indo-China and
that a settlement of the war in South Vietnam is the key to a political solution
of the entire region.
The most notable development of the year was the decision of the Governments
of India and DRVN to raise the level of their representations to Embassy level
from 7 January, 1972. This, however, led to unprovoked and unjustified violent
demonstrations against India in South Vietnam. India protested to the Saigon
Government and warned them of the serious consequences. The Saigon Government
subsequently apologised for these incidents and promised that Indian life and
property would be given all due protection. However, Saigon authorities
continued their obstructive and unreasonable tactics towards the Indian
Delegation on the ICSC, although fully realising that the ICSC drew its
authority from the Geneva Conference Powers and that its composition was not
subject to the decisions of the Saigon Government.
<P-39>
On 1 July, 1971, the PRG announced its new seven point peace proposal in
Paris. The Government of India supported the proposal as representing an advance
over the previous proposals and providing a basis for a peaceful settlement of
the Vietnam problem. The Government of India urged the United States to accept
these proposals and cease all bombings of Vietnamese territory and resume steps
for peaceful negotiations.
India continued its efforts to forge closer relations with Laos. A Chair
"Asian Civilisation Studies" was set up in the "Ecole Superiure de Pedagogie" in
Vientiane and Dr. S. Sahai from India joined the institute in January 1971. A

team of Indian experts visited Laos for conductin feasibility surveys of Maknow
Irrigation and Hydroelectric Project. India also participated in the Laos Red
Cross Fair during the year and contributed the proceeds from the sale of
exhibits to the Laotian Red Cross.
As a signatory to the multilateral agreement on the Prek Thnot Project under
the aegis of the U.N., India contributed five Hydraulic gates and accessories.
<P-40>
JAPAN
INDIA USA CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC BANGLADESH PAKISTAN MONGOLIA KOREA
UNITED KINGDOM CHINA FRANCE VIETNAM SWITZERLAND LAOS LATVIA

Date :

Apr 01, 1971

WEST ASIA AND NORTH AFRICA
No substantial progress was made during the year towards the implementation of
the Security Council Resolution of 22 November, 1967, notwithstanding the
expectations raised by the resumption of the Jarring Mission and the Government
of Egypt's positive and cooperative attitude towards it.
On 8 February, 1971, Ambassador Jarring presented identical Aide Memoires to
the Governments of Israel and Egypt seeking "parallel and simultaneous
commitments" from the two Governments regarding the implementation of the
Security Council Resolution. The Egyptian response to this was positive and
constructive. Israel, on the other hand, refrained from giving the commitments
sought by Ambassador Jarring.
President Sadat announced on 4 February, 1971, that he was prepared to
conclude a partial accord with Israel which would enable the Suez Canal to be
reopened for international shipping, provided Israel made a partial withdrawal
from the East Bank of the Suez Canal as a first step towards total withdrawal
from the occupied Arab territories. This withdrawal, President Sadat added, must
be in accordance with a specified time-table. Subsequent contacts between the
two sides through the U.N. Secretary General's Special Representative as well as
through the U.S. Government revealed substantial differences between their
respective positions. As a result, no progress was achieved and this led to a
continuation of the tension in the area.
<P-41>
The Presidents of Egypt, Libya and Syria announced on 17 April, 1971, their
decision to establish the Federation of Arab Republics for the purpose of
"realising an overall Arab unity". The new Federation formally came into
existence on 2 September, 1971, after a referendum approving the decision was
held in each one of the constituent units. President Sadat of Egypt was elected

by the Presidential Council as the President of the Federation.
On 27 May, 1971, Egypt and the Soviet Union signed a Treaty of Friendship
and Cooperation reiterating their desire to strengthen and consolidate the
traditionally friendly relations between the two countries. The Treaty provided,
inter alia, for consultations between the two Governments for the purpose of
coordinating their stand "in the event of the emergence of circumstances which,
according to the views of both parties, constitute a threat to or a violation of
peace". The treaty also provided for Soviet assistance aimed at strengthening
"the defensive strength" of Egypt.
Towards the end of the year, the U.N. General Assembly again considered the
situation in West Asia and expressed deep concern over the continuation of the
grave situation arising out of the non-implementation of the Security Council
Resolution of 22 November, 1967. In a Resolution adopted on 13 December, 1971,
the General Assembly called upon Israel to respond favourably to Ambassador
Jarring's peace initiative of 8 February, noted with appreciation the positive
reply given to it by Egypt and reaffirmed the necessity of the withdrawal of the
Israeli forces from territories occupied in the 1967 conflict.
The Government of India, on several occasions during the period under
review, reiterated their policy on the West Asian crisis. Speaking in the U.N.
General Assembly on 27 September, the Foreign Minister said that "this problem
will not be solved unless Israel withdraws from the
<P-42>
Arab territories which it has kept since 5 June, 1967, and restores the
legitimate rights of the Palestinian refugees."
The bilateral relations between India and the countries of West Asia and
North Africa, continued to be conducted on the basis of respect for our mutual
interests. On the question of Bangladesh, however, the West Asian and North
African countries, in varying degrees, displayed inadequate appreciation of the
problem, magnitude and critical nature of the resultant refugee influx. Efforts
were made to explain the situation in its proper perspective, through special
emissaries sent to the countries of the region, by invitations to qualified
foreign observers and through normal diplomatic channels both in New Delhi and
in the capitals of the countries concerned.
The envoys of the countries represented in New Delhi were fully briefed on
day to day developments as well as the policies of the Government of India. Our
envoys likewise were instructed to keep the Governments concerned closely
apprised of the developing crisis and the hostilities. Though the facts were
appreciated in many countries, their public response was limited by the
inhibitions of their circumstances, including, in some cases, their special
relationships with Pakistan.
In spite of these limitations some of the countries exhibited a fair degree
of neutrality through their news media as well as in their bilateral relations.
And during the Indo-Pakistan hostilities these countries, by and large,
refrained from taking any offensive postures against us inspite of the efforts
made by Pakistan. Nevertheless, the overall response of the countries of West

Asia and North Africa has given us cause for some disappointment. The countries
of this region, except Oman and Afghanistan, voted for the General Assembly
Resolution of 7 December, 1971. We have made our reactions in this regard known
to the Governments concerned. Some countries have, through diplo<P-43>
matic channels, communicated to us the reasons for the attitude adopted by them
in the General Assembly. While we may not be satisfied with the attitude adopted
by these countries to the General Assembly Resolution of 7 December, 1971, the
compulsions of the situation in which many of these countries are placed cannot
be entirely ignored. Diplomatic and other activity is continuing not only to
make our position better understood and appreciated but also to strengthen our
relations with these countries on a broad base of common interests.
Before the Islamic Foreign Ministers Conference started on 29 February,
1972, India's point of view was explained in New Delhi to the envoys of the
countries participating in the Conference as well as by our envoys abroad to the
respective Governments. It is a matter of great sorrow for us that the Islamic
Foreign Ministers Conference, which should primarily have concerned itself with
cultural, religious, scientific and economic matters, should have taken up some
issues directly concerning India.
While, to a certain extent, the Joint Communique reflects the views of the
Government of Pakistan, there are no condemnatory references in it to India. It
is apparent that the realities of the situation in the Indian sub-continent are
being increasingly recognised by the majority of the participants. This is not
surprising since the bulk of the World Muslim population has already recognised
the existence of Bangladesh. Generally speaking, it could be said that the
Conference in dealing with the situation in the Indian Sub-continent was mainly
concerned with finding means to assist Pakistan in her present predicament.
The withdrawal of the British from the Gulf area and the emergence of the
States of Bahrain, Qatar and United Arab Emirates as independent States on 15
August, 1 September and 2 December, 1971 respectively, have been significant
events in West Asia. In view of the traditionally
<P-44>
close relations, which have always existed between India and these countries,
the Government of India have decided to strengthen their diplomatic
representation in the area. Our Trade Agency in Bahrain has been upgraded to an
Embassy. Our Ambassador in Kuwait has been concurrently accredited as Ambassador
to Bahrain and the United Arab Emirates. We propose to arrange accreditation of
an Ambassador to Qatar.
The area presents immense possibilities for development of cooperation in
all fields of endeavour to mutual advantage. The people of this region are
endowed with inestimable resources of oil and gas in many places in this area,
particularly in Abu Dhabi. The Government is keen to promote our political,
cultural and economic relations with these States and is examining various steps
for increased exchange in trade and industrial cooperation.

Our relations with Egypt, which are broad-based, remained cordial.
Cooperation in the commercial, economic and cultural matters continued to
expand. There have been continuous discussions between the two Governments on
matters of mutual interests. This dialogue is proposed to be continued by
highlevel visits.
Professor Rasheeduddin Khan, Member of Parliament visited Cairo in June,
1971.
Shri Fakhruddin Ali Ahmed, Minister of Agriculture, went to Cairo as a
"special emissary" of the Prime Minister in June-July 1971, to apprise the
Egyptian leaders of the magnitude of the refugee problem in India, developments
in Bangladesh and their repercussions on the sub-continent.
An Indo-Egyptian trade protocol for the year 1971-72 was signed in Cairo on
16 October, 1971.
<P-45>
Mr. Mohammed Ali Hafiz, a former Education Minister of Egypt, visited India
from 22 August to 24 August, 1971. He visited refugee camps near Calcutta.
Egypt gave medicines and food for the relief of refugees from Bangladesh.
Egypt also sent medicines worth about Rs. 200,000 for the relief of the cyclone
victims in Orissa.
Our Foreign Minister made a stopover in Cairo on 11 December, 1971, on his
way to New York to participate in the Security Council discussions.
Shri K. P. Unnikrishnan, M.P., and Shri M. P. Sayeed, M. P. and General
Secretary of the All India Youth Congress, visited Cairo from 29 October to 31
October, 1971.
In May 1971, Shri Shashi Bhushan, M. P. visited Algeria to participate in
the Palestine Solidarity Week, organized by the Algerian authorities. He availed
of this opportunity to explain India's view point about the developments in the
Indian sub-continent. In June 1971, Shri Barkatullah Khan, Chief Minister of
Rajasthan, visited Algeria on a special mission to apprise the Algerian leaders
of the refugee problem and developments in Bangladesh.
India, along with 33 other countries, participated in the 8th Algiers
International Trade Fair (27 August to 12 September, 1971). The Deputy Minister
of Foreign Trade, Shri A. C. George, visited Algiers on this occasion on the
invitation of the Algerian Commerce Minister.
Shri Moinul Haq Choudhury, Minister for the Industrial Development, visited
Tehran in June 1971 with a message from the Prime Minister for H.M. the
Shahanshah. In August 1971, Shri G. S. Dhillon, Speaker of the Lok Sabha,
visited Tehran enroute to Paris to attend the IPU Conference.
<P-46>
The President and Shrimati Giri visited Iran on the occasion of the 25th

Centenary celebrations held in October 1971. A children's train from India was
presented to the Crown Prince at Persepolis at a simple ceremony, which was
attended by the Empress, at the Presidential Pavilion.
The economic, commercial and cultural relations continued to grow to the
mutual benefit of both countries. Students and trainees from Iran have continued
to pursue their studies/training in India.
Relations between India and Iraq have become closer, as economic and
technical collaboration has been stepped up. It is contemplated that high-level
contracts will be maintained with the Government of Iraq to increase cooperation in all fields, particularly economic and technical.
Fakhruddin Ali Ahmed, Minister of Agriculture, visited Iraq as a "special
emissary" of our Prime Minister in July 1971. The purpose of his visit was to
apprise the leaders of the Government of Iraq of developments in Bangladesh as
well as the refugee problem in India.
Iraq sent 1/4 million doses of cholera vaccine for the Bangladesh refugees.
Also the Government of Iraq donated a sum of & pound; S. 34,825 to the Prime
Minister's National Relief Fund.
Shrimati Nandini Satpathi, Minister of State in the Ministry of Information
and Broadcasting, paid a goodwill visit to Iraq in September 1971, in response
to an invitation from the Government of Iraq.
A trade delegation from Iraq visited India under the leadership of Dr.
Fakhri Kadouri. As a result of the talks with his delegation, a new trade
agreement between India and Iraq was signed on 24 September, 1971. This trade
agreement envisages an increase in the two way trade
<P-47>
between the two countries from Rs. 12 crores (Approximately) to Rs. 41.40
crores. To diversify imports from Iraq, India will also buy crude oil and
sulphur from that country.
A five member Indian oil delegation visited Iraq from 23 to 31 December,
1971 for negotiations for the supply of crude oil from Iraq. The report of the
delegation is under consideration of the Government of India.
An Indian cultural troupe visited Iraq in October 1971.
Shri Shah Nawaz Khan, Minister of the State in the Ministry of Steel and
Heavy Engineering, visited Jordan from 23 to 26 June, 1971 and explained to the
Jordanian Government developments in Bangladesh and the refugee problem in
India.
An Indian cultural troupe visited Jordan in October, 1971.
The Kuwaiti Foreign Minister had a brief stopover in New Delhi, on his way
back from New York after attending the General Assembly session. His presence in
New Delhi was utilized to have discussions on matters of mutual interest.

A number of Indian engineers and professional personnel have been sent on
deputation to Kuwait.
Shri Shah Nawaz Khan, Minister of State for Steel and Heavy Engineering,
visited Kuwait from 21 to 23 June, 1971, to explain developments relating to
Bangladesh and the refugees.
The Kuwaiti Government announced a donation of Dollars 60,000 for Bangladesh
refugees through the UNHCR.
Our relations with Lebanon have been cordial.
Professor Rasheeduddin Khan, M.P., visited Beirut from 5 to 7 June, 1971.
<P-48>
Shri Fakhruddin Ali Ahmed, Minister of Agriculture, visited Beirut for three
days in June 1971 to apprise the Lebanese Government of the magnitude of the
refugee problem in India and developments in Bangladesh.
The Govtrnment of Lebanon donated 23,000 Kgs. of cholera vaccine to be used
among refugees from Bangladesh.
The former Prime Minister of Lebanon, Mr. Rashid Karame, paid a goodwill
visit to India between 25 November and 8 December, 1971.
Prime Minister Saeb Salam received our Prime Minister when she stopped over
in Beirut on 24 October, 1971 for a brief halt on her way to Europe and the
United States.
The first Indian Resident Ambassador presented his credentials in Tripoli in
September 1971.
India participated in the 10th Tripoli International Fair held in Tripoli
from 1 to 20 March, 1972.
Shri Barkatullah Khan, Chief Minister of Rajasthan, visited Libya from 20 to
23 June, 1971, as a "special emissary" of the Prime Minister to explain to the
Libyan leaders the refugee problem and the realities in Bangladesh.
Libya contributed a sum of Libyan Dollars 200,000 for the relief of
Bangladesh refugees in India.
Mr. Senusi Said, Libyan Ambassador to Iraq, visited India in October 1971,
as a special representative of the Libyan Government.
In June 1971, Shri Barkatullah Khan, Chief Minister of Rajasthan, paid a
visit to Morocco to brief Moroccan leaders on developments in Bangladesh and the
problem of refugees.
<P-49>
Our relations with the Sultanate of Oman have developed in various fields.

Our Consulate-General in Muscat has been upgraded to Embassy level. India is
participating in several development projects in the Sultanate, e.g. the setting
up of a cement plant, spraying of crops, construction of an Islamic Centre and
the Sultan's palace, etc. Over 60 Indian doctors/nurses have been recruited to
the Sultanate's medical services during the last year and orders for medical
equipment have been received. An Omani trade delegation visited India in August
1971 to discuss the future pattern of export of its traditional commodity-dry
dates-to India. Subsequently, an STC delegation visited the Sultanate and
concluded an agreement in October 1971. As a result of this agreement, trade
will now be channelised through the STC in India and a similar official agency
in the Sultanate of Oman, instead of through private traders. Requests for
training facilities by the Oman Government in various technical and other fields
in India are being processed.
Relations with the people's Democratic Republic of Yemen (South Yemen) have
continued on the traditionally friendly pattern. Its Charge d' Affaires in New
Delhi paid a visit to Bangladesh refugee camps to see their condition
personally. Shri Shah Nawaz Khan, Minister of State for Steel and Heavy
Engineering, visited the People's Democratic Republic of Yemen from 26 to 28
June, 1971, to explain developments relating to Bangladesh and the refugees.
Certain measures previously introduced by the Government of the People's
Democratic Republic of Yemen have affected some people of Indian origin. The
problems of such persons have been receiving the attention of the Government of
India and the matter has been taken up with the Government of the People's
Democratic Republic of Yemen at the highest level, wherever necessary.
<P-50>
An Air services agreement between India and Saudi Arabia was concluded in
May, 1971, and now awaits ratification.
Shri Shah Nawaz Khan, Minister of State for Steel and Heavy Engineering,
visited Saudi Arabia from 30 June to 2 July, 1971 to explain developments
relating to Bangladesh and the refugees.
As usual an Indian goodwill delegation visited Saudi Arabia at the time of
Haj.
An exclusively Indian Industrial Trade Fair was organized in Khartoum from
28 April to 11 May, 1971.
Shri Barkatullah Khan, Chief Minister of Rajasthan, visited the Sudan from
17 to 20 June, 1971, as a "special emissary" of the Prime Minister to apprise
Sudanese leaders about the refugee problem and developments in Bangladesh.
A trade agreement between India and the Sudan was signed on 1 July, 1971. A
decision has been taken to appoint an Honorary Consul in Port Sudan.
Relations between Syria and India continued to remain friendly.
Shri Fakhruddin Ali Ahmed, Minister of Agriculture, paid a visit to Syria
from 25 to 30 June, 1971, to explain to Syrian leaders the Bangladesh refugee

problem in India and the unprecedented Pakistani repression in Bangladesh.
Syria sent half a million doses of cholera vaccine for the Bangladesh
refugees.
An Indian Cultural troupe visited Syria in October 1971.
<P-51>
Instruments of Ratification in respect of the Cultural Agreement between
India and Tunisia were exchanged in Tunis on 30 August, 1971. The Agreement was
signed in New Delhi on 24 June, 1969, during the official visit of the then
Tunisian Foreign Minister, Mr. Habib Bourguiba Jr.
Shri Barkatullah Khan, Chief Minister of Rajasthan, visited Tunis in June
1971, on a special mission to brief Tunisian leaders on the Bangladesh
situation.
In order to strengthen further the friendly relations already existing
between India and the Yemen Arab Republic (North Yemen), an invitation has been
extended to the Prime Minister of YAR to pay a visit to India.
Shri Shah Nawaz Khan, Minister of State for Steel and Heavy Engineering,
visited the Yemen Arab Republic from 28 to 30 June, 1971 to explain developments
relating to Bangladesh and the refugees.
<P-52>
EGYPT
ISRAEL USA LIBYA SYRIA INDIA BANGLADESH PAKISTAN AFGHANISTAN OMAN BAHRAIN
QATAR UNITED ARAB EMIRATES KUWAIT ALGERIA IRAN FRANCE IRAQ JORDAN LEBANON
MOROCCO YEMEN SAUDI ARABIA SUDAN TUNISIA

Date :

Nov 01, 1967

AFRICA (SOUTH OF THE SAHARA)
India maintains 14 resident diplomatic missions in Africa, South of the
Sahara. These missions cover by concurrent accreditation 17 additional states.
It is Government's intention, as financial resources permit, to enlarge the
extent of direct diplomatic representation to cover all states in Africa. During
the year under review, India established for the first time diplomatic
representation in Botswana by concurrent accreditation of the Indian High
Commissioner in Zambia; and in Lesotho and Swaziland, by similar accreditation
of the Indian High Commissioner in Malawi.
The principal issue for Africa as a whole was the proposal for a `dialogue'
between independent African states and the racist regime in South Africa. South

Africa's vigorous diplomatic offensive to reverse its isolation in Africa and
forge economic and financial links with the African states coincided with a
proposal by some African states for a `dialogue' of African states with South
Africa. The `dialogue' issue dominated the Eighth Summit Meeting of the
Organisation of African Unity (OAU) held in Addis Ababa in June 1971. The
Conference rejected `dialogue' with South Africa by a large majority, and reaffirmed its determination to step up assistance to the Liberation Movements in
Southern Africa. It held that the `Manifesto on Southern Africa', unanimously
adopted by the OAU, endorsed by the UN, but rejected by the racist regime of
South Africa, was the only correct approach to that regime. It also urged that
no member state should initiate or engage in any type of action which undermined
or abro<P-53>
gated the solemn obligations and commitments to the Charter of the OAU. The
eighth OAU Summit set up a Committee of 10 African statesmen to examine ways and
means of furthering the implementation of the November 1967 Security Council
Resolution on West Asia. The Committee consisted of the Heads of State of
Cameroon, Ethiopia, Ivory Coast, Kenya, Liberia, Mauritania, Nigeria, Senegal,
Tanzania and Zaire. A Sub-committee comprising the Presidents of Cameroon,
Nigeria, Senegal and Zaire paid two visits to Israel and the Arab Republic of
Egypt in November 1971. The proposals subsequently made by the OAU Committee
were found unacceptable to Israel as a basis for resuming the Jarring Mission.
The President of Mauritania, Mr. Moktar Ould Daddah, in his capacity as
Chairman of the OAU, led a mission to the USA and to some member-states of NATO
in Europe to persuade those Governments to discontinue arms sales to South
Africa. At the special session of the Security Council on Namibia held in
October 1971, the President of Mauritania along with the Foreign Ministers of
Chad, Ethiopia, Liberia, Nigeria and Sudan represented the OAU's viewpoint.
In a message to the Secretary-General of the OAU on the 8th Anniversary of
the establishment of the Organisation, the Foreign Minister reiterated the deep
interest of the Government of India in the consolidation of the unity and
solidarity among African states and reaffirmed continuing sympathy and support
for those engaged in the struggle for liberation from colonial domination and
racial intolerance.
Somalia hosted the Seventh Summit Conference of the East and Central African
States in October 1971. The Declaration adopted at the Mogadishu Conference
recognised the legitimacy of armed struggle against colonial and racial
oppression in Southern Africa.
<P-54>
Apartheid continued to be rigorously enforced in South Africa in defiance of
world opinion.
The conclusion of arrangements for building in South Africa of French
aircraft Mirage-3 and F-1, and negotiations with Spain for the construction of
warships for the South African Navy have been reported, as also the British
contract for supply of 7 Wasp helicopters and 3 Hawker Siddley executive jets.

The cancellation by the Australian Cricket Board in September 1971, of a
South African Cricket Team's visit and widespread demonstrations in Australia
during the tour of the Springbok Rugby team in June-July 1971 have further
isolated South Africa from the world of sport. The racist regime has been
obliged to make adjustments in its sports policy. Racially integrated
international competitions can now be held in South Africa, but internally mixed
sports and mixed trials among teams of South Africans are not allowed. These
adjustments have enabled South Africa to gain re-admission to the Davis Cup
tennis competition from which she was barred since 1969. India had opposed South
Africa's readmission.
The World Court, in an Advisory Opinion given on 21 June, 1971, considered
South Africa's presence in Namibia illegal and demanded her immediate withdrawal
from the territory. The Court also advised the UN Member-States that they were
under obligation to consider South Africa's presence in Namibia as illegal, and
its acts on behalf of or concerning Namibia as invalid, and to refrain from any
act and, in particular, any dealings with the Government of South Africa
implying recognition of the legality or lending support or assistance to such
presence or administration. South Africa rejected the opinion as having no
binding force, and has reiterated its offer of a plebiscite in Namibia which the
International Court had earlier rejected. The Security Council in a Resolution
on 20 October, 1971,
<P-55>
endorsed the International Court's opinion and called upon South Africa to
withdraw from Namibia.
In regard to colonial policies in Guinea-Bissau, Angola and Mozambique,
Portugal continued to receive support from most Western Governments. India
continued to lend its moral and political support at international forums to the
cause of the oppressed people under colonial and racist regimes in Southern
Africa. Direct material assistance was also provided for Liberation Movements in
Africa. A contribution of Rs. 25,000/- was made to the OAU's Special Fund for
the struggle against colonialism and apartheid.
India views with disfavour the continued violation by a number of states of
the UN embargo on arms sales to South Africa. Any accretion to the military
arsenal of the racist regime would further strengthen it in its pursuit of the
policy of apartheid, and would inevitably aggravate tensions in the area, apart
from affecting the security and vital interests of neighbouring countries and
areas.
The British Government announced agreement with the illegal racist regime of
Mr. Ian Smith on proposals for a settlement of the six-year old crisis. These
proposals have the effect of postponing to an indefinite future parity of
representation in the legislature of Africans and Whites; they are a far-cry
from the `one-man one-vote' basis for a political settlement accepted
previously, and lend respectability to a Government and a Constitution in
Rhodesia held to be illegal. The "acceptability test" that is being followed in
Rhodesia-the Pearce Commission-has naturally produced strong African opposition.

Sanctions against Rhodesia have only been partially effective particularly
because the territory of South Africa and the Portuguese Colonies have permitted
transit of goods. The US Government have recently decided to resume import of
chrome and other ores from Rhodesia despite the sanctions.
<P-56>
The drive towards Africanisation in East and Central Africa continued to
bring new uncertainties for persons of Indian origin who have not adopted local
citizenship of the countries concerned. The majority of persons affected are
British passport holders. The decision of the UK Government to increase quotas
for British Asians from East Africa for entry into UK from 1,500 to 3,000 heads
of families per year from July 1971 onwards, with an additional non-recurring
quota of 1,500 for the period July to December 1971, had provided relief in some
urgent cases. However, this does not meet the principle involved which is that
all British passport holders are the responsibility of the British Government,
and Britain has an obligation to allow them unconditional entry into Britain
without discrimination. The Government of India continued to urge these
considerations upon the British Government. Special Customs and Import Trade
Control concessions continued to be available to persons of Indian origin coming
from East Africa to India for permanent settlement. During the year 1971, 260
such families availed of these concessions.
At the invitation of the Prime Minister, Sir Seewoosagur Ramgoolam visited
India from 20 April to 2 May, 1971 and from 20 January to 2 February, 1972. On
the latter occasion, he visted Bombay, Bangalore and Madras, and was the
principal guest of the Government of India at the Republic Day celebrations at
New Delhi.
Following upon the discussions between Economic Delegations of the two
countries, the Government of India have agreed to assist specified projects in
the Mauritian Development Plan, by way of grants amounting to a little over
Indian Rs. 1 crore, and of loans up to a little over Indian Rs. 3 crores. This
includes a grant of Rs. 44 lakhs for the Mahatma Gandhi Institute in Port Louis,
the foundation stone of which was laid by Prime Minister during her visit to
Mauritius in June 1970.
<P-57>
The Zambian Defence Minister, Mr. A. G. Zulu, paid a 6-day visit to India in
April 1971 and has discussions with the Indian authorities.
A three member delegation, led by the Chairman of the Hindustan Copper Ltd.,
visited Zambia from 25 April to 17 May, 1971 to study the working of copper
mines in Zambia, and to investigate the possibilities for practical training in
Zambian copper mines for Indian mining engineers and metallurgists. The Minerals
and Metals Trading Corporation of India entered into a 3-year contract with the
Government of Zambia for the purchase of 54 thousand tonnes of Zambian copper at
the rate of 1,500 tonnes per month.
The Government of India provided training facilities to the Zambian
Government nominees in technical and defence institutions in India. Facilities
were also provided to the Government of Zambia for recruiting a large number of

technical personnel from India for assignment in Zambia.
A three-member Parliamentary Delegation from Tanzania visited New Delhi and
Calcutta in September, 1971.
A team of scientists from the Indian Central Public Health Engineering
Research Institute Nagpur, visited Tanzania in October 1971, at the invitation
of the Government of Tanzania to study the possibility of establishment of a
deflouridation plant in Tanzania.
Training facilities were provided to the Government of Tanzania for their
nominees in technical institutions and defence establishments in India.
Kenya's Minister of Health, Mr. Omolo Okero, visited India in August 1971
and had discussions with the Indian Minister for Health on the possibility of
recruiting Indian doctors to serve in Kenyan medical institutions.
<P-58>
The Minister for Forest and Housing of Maharashtra visited Kenya in May 1971
for discussions with Kenyan authorities on various aspects of game preservation.
Training facilities were provided to the Government of Kenya in Indian
technical institutions and defence establishments by the Government of India.
An Indo-Ugandan joint venture.-The Kinyala Sugar Project-was inaugurated by
President Amin of Uganda on 7 May, 1971. This is a turn-key project carried out
by Messrs, Walchandnagar Industries of India.
At the invitation of the Ethiopian Minister of Agriculture, the Minister for
Irrigation and Power, Dr. K. L. Rao, visited Ethiopia from 29 October to 4
November, 1971. Dr. K. L. Rao saw various power and irrigation projects in
Ethiopia, and had discussions with his Ethiopian counterparts on the
possibilities of cooperation between India and Ethiopia in the fields of
Irrigation and Power.
The scope for India's assistance to Nigeria in building a shipping industry
and in training pilots and marine engineers as well as wider training facilities
for the personnel of Nigeria Airlines were discussed during a visit to India of
the Nigerian Federal Minister of Transport, Mr. J. S. Tarka, in May 1971.
A four-member delegation from Nigeria, led by the Chairman of the Nigerian
Oil Corporation, visited India in February 1972 at the invitation of the
Government of India to explore the possibilities of cooperation between India
and Nigeria in the field of oil.
In a bloodless coup on 13 January, 1972, in Ghana, the Government of Dr.
Busia was overthrown. The new Government is headded by a 12-member National
Redemption Council with Col. Icheampong as the Chairman. In contrast with the
previous regime, the new Government
<P-59>

has declared its opposition to the proposal for a dialogue between South Africa
and Black African States.
Cooperation in the field of agricultural development between India and Ghana
was explored during a visit of the Minister of State for Agriculture, Shri
Annasahib Shinde, to Accra in October 1971, as leader of the Indian delegation
to the Fourth Session of the Afro-Asian Rural Reconstruction Conference.
The Chairman of Ghana's Capital Investment Boards held discussions with the
Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry and some leading
industrial houses on the possibilities for establishing joint ventures.
The National Mineral Development Corporation of India has been appointed as
a regular licensed buying agent of Ghana's Diamond Marketing Corporation.
The Government of India provided training facilities for the Ghana
Government nominees in technical and defence institutions in India.
The special envoy of President Mobuto of Zaire, Mr. Marcel Lengema, paid a
visit to New Delhi and Calcutta from 24 to 28 September, 1971 to acquaint
himself with the course of events of the Bangladesh crisis.
In many French-speaking States of Africa, interest in cultural and economic
collaboration with India, is developing. Subject to the availability of
financial resources, every effort is being made to deepen and strengthen the
areas of mutual interest.
The Minister for Law and Justice, Shri H. R. Gokhale, visited Zambia,
Ethiopia, Burundi, Uganda, Kenya, Somalia and Tanzania from 6 to 21, September
1971 as special envoy of the Prime Minister; and the Minister of State for
Industrial Development, Shri Ghanshyambhai Oza, visited Zaire, Nigeria, Ghana,
Senegal, Sierra Leone and Guinea from
<P-60>
6 to 9 September, 1971. The events leading to the refugee exodus from East
Bengal were explained to the Government leaders in these countries.
Our envoys in Africa have been in close touch with the Governments of their
accreditation on these and later developments in Bangladesh. The Governments of
Ethiopia, Zambia, Kenya, Ghana, Liberia, Uganda, Tanzania, Mauritius, Senegal,
Guinea, Botswana, Swaziland, Togo, Gambia and Dahomey have made contributions
towards relief of refugees from Bangladesh.
<P-61>
INDIA
BOTSWANA LESOTHO SWAZILAND ZAMBIA MALAWI SOUTH AFRICA USA ETHIOPIA
CAMEROON KENYA LIBERIA MAURITANIA NIGER NIGERIA SENEGAL TANZANIA ZAIRE
ISRAEL EGYPT NAMIBIA CHAD SUDAN MALI SOMALIA SPAIN AUSTRALIA ANGOLA GUINEA
GUINEA!!GUINEA-BISSAU MOZAMBIQUE PORTUGAL ITALY UNITED KINGDOM MAURITIUS
UGANDA CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC LATVIA GHANA BANGLADESH BURUNDI SIERRA

LEONE

Date :

Nov 01, 1967

EUROPE
During the period under review, which coincided with the freedom struggle of
the people of Bangladesh, there were high level visits and consultations between
west European countries and India. Among those who visited European capitals, to
bring about an awareness of the gravity of the deteriorating situation in the
sub-continent and the need for urgent political solution of the Bangladesh
crisis, were the Speaker of the Lok Sabha, the Foreign Minister and the Prime
Minister. Some Ministers and Members of Parliament also visited European
capitals to create public opinion and to plead with the Governments concerned to
use their influence on Islamabad for a political solution in Bangladesh and for
Sheikh Mujibur Rahman's release.
These efforts were climaxed by the Prime Minister's visits to Austria,
Belgium, France, the FRG and the United Kingdom in October-November 1971. As the
Bangladesh crisis grew in seriousness with almost 10 million people taking
refuge in India, the Prime Minister's visits to friendly European capitals
assumed a special importance. Her visits to the European capitals emphasised
that time was running out and that political steps should be taken without
further delay, including Sheikh Mujibur Rahman's release from prison. While the
Prime Minister's visits afforded opportunities for an overall review of India's
bilateral relations with the countries visited, their particular importance lay
in the Prime Minister being able to explain to the European leaders concerned,
the extreme gravity of the situation in the sub-continent. It was made
<P-62>
clear to the European leaders that Bangladesh could not return to peace and
normalcy except through a political solution, and the longer this was delayed
the greater the hazards to the peace and security of the sub-continent as a
whole. There was no easy way out of the crisis.
The Prime Minister visited London from 28 October to 3 November, 1971, and
had talks with Prime Minister Heath and other British leaders. Although the
British press and information media gave full and fair accounts of the tragic
happenings in Bangladesh and of the enormous sufferings inflicted on its people
by Pakistan's military terror, the British official view maintained a discreet
political reticence in the matter, and held that the entire issue was an
internal affair of Pakistan. The Prime Minister's visit and her talks with Mr.
Heath and other British leaders succeeded in focussing attention on the heart of
the matter and on the urgent necessity of action by the international community
to stave off a larger tragedy and fratricidal war. There was no hope at all of
normalcy returning to devastated East Pakistan except through a political
solution acceptable to its people. The Prime Minister's visit helped to clarify
doubts and hesitations of the British Government, and the British Government

thereafter showed a better understanding of not only the issues at stake but of
India's stance. This better political appreciation was reflected in Britain's
abstention in the vote on the Security Council resolutions and the General
Assembly resolution of 9 December, 1971. The British Government's realistic and
farsighted stand on the issue at the UN was appreciated in India.
The annual bilateral talks between India and the UK were held in New Delhi
from 7 to 9 February, 1972. A happy feature of the talks was the visit of the
British Foreign Secretary, Sir Alec Douglas-Home, who led his delegation during
part of the talks. This was the first
<P-63>
time that these talks had been held at the level of Ministers. During his stay
in Delhi, Sir Alec called on the Prime Minister and the President.
On Bangladesh, the Belgian Government took the line that maintenance of
peace was of supreme importance and the merits of the case could be considered
only after this was achieved. Belgium regarded Bangladesh as Pakistan's internal
affair.
In her capacity as non-Permanent member of the Security Council, Belgium was
active in seeking United Nations intervention in the sub-continent over the
question of Bangladesh even before the outbreak of the Indo-Pak hostilities.
Belgium generally supported the call for a ceasefire without taking note of the
basic issues involved. Belgium's efforts in this regard were a matter of regret
to the Government of India.
The Prime Minister visited Belgium on 24 and 25 October, 1971 and had
discussions with the Belgian Prime Minister and other leaders of the Belgian
Government. Her visit led to a better mutual understanding of the position of
the two countries on the Bangladesh issue.
Denmark throughout the Bangladesh crisis adopted an exemplary attitude. The
Danish Government showed deep undertanding of the forces at work and the issues
involved. At the Nordic Foreign Ministers' meeting held in Helsinki, Denmark not
only raised the issue but proposed a political solution. The Danish Foreign
Minister, Mr. Andersen, speaking in the UN General Assembly in November 1971,
strongly favoured a political solution based on respect for human rights and on
the freely expressed will of the people.
On the General Assembly resolution calling for a ceasefire, Denmark
abstained. The Danish Government's attitude on the question evoked warm response
in India.
<P-64>
The FRG made generous contributions towards Bangladesh refugee relief in
India. It agreed that an early political solution was essential for the return
of the refugees to their homes. This was stated after the talks which Foreign
Minister Sardar Swaran Singh had with his counterpart, Mr. Walter Scheel in
Bonn. The FRG also intervened with President Yahya Khan to settle the Bangladesh
problem through political rather than military means.

During the Prime Minister's visit to Bonn from 10 to 12 November, 1971, she
had intensive consultations with Federal Chancellor Herr Brandt and with other
leaders of his Government. While many subjects of mutual interest were
discussed, particular importance was given to the situation in the sub-continent
following the tragic events in Bangladesh and the influx of millions of refugees
into India. The Prime Minister was assured that the FRG would continue to use
its influence for a political settlement in Bangladesh through a dialogue with
the elected representatives of its people.
In reviewing the European scene, the Prime Minister complimented the
Chancellor on the success of his Ostpolitik and welcomed the signing of the 4Power Berlin Agreement as a further concrete step towards a growing European
detente. The hope was expressed that the ratification of the Moscow-Bonn and
Warsaw-Bonn treaties signed in 1970 would facilitate efforts towards better and
easier relations between the two German States.
The annual bilateral consultations between India and FRG were held in New
Delhi on 20 and 21 January. The FRG delegation to the talks was led by State
Secretary, Mr. Paul Frank. The talks which ranged over a wide field helped to
create a better understanding of each other's points of view on a number of
important issues.
<P-65>
During the year, India's relations with France remained very cordial and
were marked by a sincere desire on the part of France to understand and
sympathise with the grave problems faced by India. Throughout the Bangladesh
crisis, India and France maintained a continuous and useful dialogue and the
French Government made evident in many ways their support for India. The Speaker
of the Lok Sabha, the Foreign Minister and the Prime Minister paid visits to
Paris and had talks with French leaders as part of India's effort to keep them
informed of the serious developments in the sub-continent.
The Prime Minister visited France from 7 to 10 November, 1971, for talks
with President Pompidou and Prime Minister Chaban Delmas. It may be noted that
France, as indeed other countries, extended generous material assistance for the
relief of Bangladesh refugees in India and had, besides, used its influence on
Islamabad for a political solution and for Mujib's release. Throughout the
crisis, France showed understanding and sympathy for the immense burden that
India shouldered on account of the millions of Bangladesh refugees in India.
With great deliberation the French Government abstained on the vote on the
U.N. Security Council and General Assembly resolutions. It is particularly
noteworthy that the French delegation explained its abstention on the General
Assembly resolution by pointing out that unless the root cause of the crisis was
tackled, a mere call for a cease-fire would not be helpful.
While the Italian Government seemed to appreciate the intolerable burden
imposed on India by the influx of Bangladesh refugees, it took the stand that
happenings in Bangladesh were purely an internal affair of Pakistan At the
United Nations, Italy took a leading part to activate the Organization to post
observers on either side of the Indo-Pak border. In the Security Council,

following the outbreak of hostilities on 3 December, Italy joined
<P-66>
Belgium in tabling a resolution calling for an unconditional cease-fire. Again,
Italy voted in favour of the General Assembly resolution of 9 December, 1971
calling for a cease-fire. The Italian Government thus regrettably failed to take
note of the basic causes of the conflict.
Sweden made generous contributions to Bangladesh refugee relief aid: Quite a
few Swedish MPs. and journalists visited India and facilities were given to them
to visit refugee camps and to study the Bangladesh problem at first hand.
However, Sweden's initial stand, that only a political solution based on respect
for human rights and on the will of the people could settle the problem of
refugees and the tragic crisis that faced Bangladesh, under, went a radical
change when hostilities started between India and Pakistan. The Swedish Foreign
Minister expressed regret that India was now "radically trying to change the
situation by military force". This statement regrettably ignored the fact that
Pakistan began the attack on India on 3 December and India fought back in selfdefense.
The Netherlands Government too considered BanglaDesh as an internal affair
of Pakistan. An unfortunate incident caused some unhappiness over India's
relations with the Netherlands. Under their Firearms Act, the Dutch Government
took steps to detain a consignment of spares and components for India awaiting
transhipment at Rotterdam. This action was taken on 20 December, 1971, three
days after the cease-fire between India and Pakistan had come into effect. A
protest was lodged with the Dutch Government over the incident.
At India's requeset, Switzerland agreed to look after India's interests in
Pakistan after Pakistan severed diplomatic relations following its attack on
India. The role of Switzerland in arranging the repatriation of members of the
Indian diplomatic Missions in Pakistan and of Pakistan's diplomatic missions in
India has been greatly appreciated.
<P-67>
A number of eminent personalities from Western Europe visited India during
the year. Prominent among them were: Dr, Hans Filbinger, Chief Minister of Baden
Wuertenberg; Mr. Orhan Eralap, Secretary-General of the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs of Turkey; and Mr. Richard Wood, British Minister of Overseas
Development.
In addition, several Members of Parliament, individually or as members of
Parliamentary delegations, came from the UK, Sweden, FRG, Ireland and the
Netherlands, for an on-the-spot study of the situation arising out of the influx
of refugees into India from East Bengal.
Among notable Indian visitors to Europe were Shri Vidya Charan Shukla,
Minister of Defence Production, and Shri A.P.Shinde, Minister of State in the
Ministry of Food and Agriculture, who visited Sweden, Switzerland and the United
Kingdom respectively.

The year 1971 marks an important milestone in the history of Indo-Soviet
relations. A Treaty of Peace, Friendship and Cooperation between India and the
U.S.S.R. was signed on 9 August, 1971 in New Delhi by the Minister of External
Affairs, Sardar Swaran Singh and the Minister of Foreign Affairs of the
U.S.S.R., Mr. A.A. Gromyko. The Treaty is the solemnisation of the close and
friendly relations between the two countries which have been developing
satisfactorily over the last two decades.
The Treaty provides a political and legal basis for further strengthening
the cooperation between India and the Soviet Union in the political, economic,
cultural, technical and scientific fields. The various articles in the Treaty
emphasise mutual cooperation and the importance of safeguarding peace and
international security. The Indo-Soviet Treaty also strengthens India's policy
of non-alignment, respect for which is expressly mentioned therin. The
conclusion of the Treaty will undoubtedly constitute an important stabilising
factor in favour of peace and security in the region.
<P-68>
An important aspect of the Indo-Soviet Treaty is the credible assurance that
in the event of an attack or a threat therof, the two sides shall immediately
enter into mutual consultations in order to remove such a threat and to take
appropriate effective measures to ensure peace and security of their countries.
It is in this context that the Indo-Soviet Treaty was referred to by the
Minister of External Affairs in his statement in the Lok Sabha/Rajya Sabha on 9
August, as "a Treaty of peace against war."
The Minister of External Affairs visited Moscow in June 1971 and explained
in detail the tragic developments in East Bengal following the brutal military
repression launched against the population in East Bengal since 25 March, 1971.
He stressed the grave threat to India's political, economic and social stability
posed by the massive inflow of millions of refugees from East Bengal into India.
The Prime Minister visited Moscow from 27 to 29 September, 1971, at the
invitation of the Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the U.S.S.R. The joint
communique issued at the conclusion of the visit reiterated the need to take
urgent measures for a political solution of the problem, taking into account the
inalienable rights and lawful interests of the people of East Bengal, as well as
for the speediest and safe return of the refugees to their homeland in
conditions safeguarding their honour and dignity. The Prime Minister reiterated
India's determination to take all necessary measures to stop the further inflow
of refugees from East Bengal into India and to ensure that those refugees who
were already in India are enable to return to their homeland without delay.
During the Prime Minister's visit to the U.S.S.R. it was also announced that
India and the Soviet Union would set up an Inter-Governmental Commission on
economic, scientific and technical cooperation for deepening mutual cooperation
<P-69>
in these fields and to identify new areas in which such mutual cooperation could
be expanded.
The Chairman of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the U.S.S.R., Mr.

N.V.Podgorny, stopped over in New Delhi on 1 October 1971, en route to Hanoi. He
had discussions with the President and the Prime Minister on matters of mutual
interest.
The Soviet Deputy Foreign Minister, Mr. N.P.Firyubin, visited India in
October 1971 for consultations under Article IX of the Indo-Soviet Treaty. The
First Deputy Foreign Minister, Mr. V.V. Kuznetsov, also visited India in
December 1971 in the context of Pakistan's unprovoked aggression against India
which commenced on 3 December, 1971. The Chairman, Policy Planning Committee,
Shri D.P. Dhar, led a similar delegation in December 1971 to Moscow for
discussions with the Soviet Government.
As an outcome of these visits and discussions, there emerged an identity of
views between India and the Soviet Union on the question of Bangladesh which
resulted in the principled stand taken by the Soviet Union in support of India,
both inside and outside the United Nations, during the Indo-Pak conflict. The
Soviet Union also offered substantial humanitarian relief to the Bangladesh
refugees.
Other important visits from India to the Soviet Union included those of Shri
K.V.R. Reddy, Minister of State for Company Affairs and Shri M. Kumaramangalam,
Minister for Steel and Mines.
As a part of the Government's effort to explain the magnitude of the refugee
burden cast on India, Ministers of the Government of India visited a large
number of foreign countries. Visits to East European countries in this
connection were made by Shri M. Kumaramangalam, Minister for Steel and Mines,
who visited Poland and
<P-70>
Rumania, Dr. Karan Singh, Minister for Tourism and Civil Aviation, who
visited Bulgaria, Yugoslavia, Czechoslovakia and the German Democratic Republic
and Shri Moin-ul-Haque Choudhury, Minister for Industrial Development, who
visited Hungary.
At the invitation of the President of India, the Yugoslav President, Marshal
Josip Broz Tito, visited Delhi from 16 to 20 October. During the visit,
President Tito had frank and wide-raging discussions on bilateral relations as
well as international questions of mutual interest, with the President and the
Prime Minister. The Yugoslav vote in favour of the resolution in the UN General
Assembly on the Indo-Pak conflict had been contrary to the position which she
had earlier taken in regard to the developments in the subcontinent. However,
the recognition of Bangladesh by Yugoslavia subsequently would seem to set the
record straight.
The Hon'ble Chief Justice of India Justice S.M. Sikri visited Yugoslavia in
response to an official invitation. Yugoslavia also offered relief for the
refugees from Bangladesh.
A three-member G.D.R. Parliamentary Delegation led by Prof. Sieber visited
India in August 1971 to study at first hand the situation resulting from the
refugee influx from East Bengal. Substantial humanitarian relief to the

Bangladesh refugees was provided by the G.D.R. G.D.R. was the first country,
apart from India and Bhutan, to extend diplomatic recognition to Bangladesh.
The G.D.R. Foreign Minister, Dr. Otto Winzer visited India in January 1972
and had discussions with the Prime Minister, the Foreign Minister, the Minister
for Tourism and Civil Aviation and the Minister for Industrial Development. The
discussions resulted in closer understanding between India and the G.D.R.
<P-71>
Distinguished visitors from India to the G.D.R. included Shri G. G. Swell,
Deputy Speaker of Lok Sabha, who led a Parliamentary Delegation and Shri B. D.
Khobragade, Deputy Chairman of the Rajya Sabha.
An Indian Parliamentary Delegation led by the Deputy Chairman of the Rajya
Sabha Shri B. D. Khobragade, visited Poland in September 1971. The delegation
had meetings with Polish Deputy Prime Minister Szyr and Foreign Minister Stefan
Jedrychowski besides meeting their counterparts.
An official delegation led by the Polish Deputy Prime Minister, Mr. J.
Mitrega, visited India in January 1972 and had discussions with the Prime
Minister, the Foreign Minister, the Minister for Steel and Mines and other
Ministers on Indo-Polish economic co-operation.
The two delegations set up Working Groups to study in depth the
possibilities of cooperation in the coal mining, ship building, engineering and
chemical industries and trade. The reports of the Working Groups from part of
the Protocol signed by the leaders at the conclusion of the discussions. The two
sides exchanged letters signifying their agreement to the establishment of an
Indo-Polish commission for economic, trade, scientific and technical
cooperation. Poland's support to India's position on Bangladesh in the General
Assembly and the Security Council was greatly appreciated. Humanitarian relief
to the refugees from Bangladesh was also provided by Poland which was amongst
the first countries to recognise the new State.
The Hungarian Deputy Foreign Minister, Mr. Imre Hollai, visited India in May
1971 and the Hungarian Minister of Food and Agriculture, Mr. Imre Dimeny, in
April 1971. The Hungarian Minister for Heavy Industry, Dr. Gyula Szeker also
visited India early in March. Hungary had supported India's stand on recent
developments in the sub-continent.
<P-72>
Important visits from India to Hungary included that of Prof. Sher Singh,
Minister of State for Agriculture.
The Deputy Foreign Minister of Czechoslovakia, Mr. Miloslav Hruza,
accompanied by the Head of the Department of South Asia of Czech Foreign Office,
Mr. Milan Macha, visited Delhi in November-December 1971. Czechoslovakia had
supported India's stand on recent developments in the sub-continent.
Czechoslovakia had also offered assistance for the refugees from Bangladesh.
The Deputy Foreign Minister of Rumania, Mr. V. Gliga paid a visit to India

in August 1971 to sign the Indo-Rumanian Cultural Exchange Programme. He met the
Foreign Minister and also had discussions with the concerned officials in the
Ministry of External Affairs. Rumania had scrupulously refrained from making any
statements on developments in the sub-continent during 1971. However later on,
Rumania had voted in favour of the resolution in the U.N. General Assembly on
the Indo-Pak conflict which called for an immediate cease-fire and withdrawals,
departing from her neutral position. Till the time of writing of the report,
Rumania remained the only European socialist country other than Albania which
had not recognised Bangladesh.
Relations with Bulgaria were further consolidated during the year. Bulgaria
had also extended support to India's stand on recent developments in the subcontinent.
<P-73>
BANGLADESH
INDIA PAKISTAN USA AUSTRIA PERU BELGIUM FRANCE UNITED KINGDOM DENMARK
FINLAND GERMANY RUSSIA POLAND ITALY SWEDEN THE NETHERLANDS SWITZERLAND
TURKEY IRELAND VIETNAM BULGARIA NORWAY SLOVAKIA YUGOSLAVIA HUNGARY
BHUTAN ALBANIA

Date :

Nov 01, 1967

THE AMERICAS
At no period in the history of Indo-American relations has there been such
intensive Indian effort at contact and communication with the United States as
in 1971. Through every stage of the crisis on the sub-continent India kept up a
constant supply of information to the United States through the Indian Embassy
in Washington and the U.S. Embassy in New Delhi through letters written at the
highest levels on important developments, through invitations to U.S. leaders to
visit the sub-continent and see the situation for themselves, to which several
Senators, Congressmen and others responded, and, finally, through visits to the
United States of the Foreign Minister and the Prime Minister. Every stratagem of
effort and persuasion was tried by India to make the United States
Administration respond with some human feeling to the epochal carnage in East
Bengal let loose by the West Pakistan military regime, starting on 25 March, 1971,
and ending only with the liberation of Bangladesh on the 16th of December, 1971.
No Government in the world uses the terms 'peace' and 'freedom' so copiously as
the leaders of the U.S. Administration do on every conceivable occasion. Yet
these words seemed to have no meaning for them as it related to the people of
Bangladesh.
When all other efforts at persuasion failed our Prime Minister undertook a
visit to Washington at a time when it was most difficult for her to leave India.
Her visit to the United States was a unique phenomenon in modern statesmanship.
No Head of Government ever visited a

<P-74>
foreign country with such directness and simplicity, so free from the
conventional idioms of diplomacy, appealing directly to the heart of the human
race as she did last November. But, it drew the curious response of hardening
the attitude of the United States, making their public pronouncements
increasingly suave and forked. It seemed that the last trace of the most
elementary justice and compassion had dried up in the U.S. Administration.
It seemed India was up against a double barrier with the U.S.
Administration. First, a complete failure to understand the forces at work on
the sub-continent and the abiding values of the Indian people. In spite of the
many years of South Asia studies by the lavishly equipped Area Studies
Departments of Universities and Research Corporations and in spite of the large
intelligence net-work of the United States Government abroad, no proper
understanding of the Indian sub-continent had been built up and the
Administration was still burdened and blinded by old colonialist theories about
'communal conflict' and 'ethnic feuds' nurtured by the Establishment through
various area study programmes.
Secondly, in the light of the many efforts by the U.S. Administration to
misrepresent the role of India and to defend the Yahya regime, it would seem
that, by and large the policies of Pakistan had at least the tacit support of
the United States Government.
From the earliest stages of the crisis, we made certain concrete suggestions
to the United States in order to check the Nazi-type atrocities of Pakistan's
military regime in East Bengal.
<P-75>
Since Pakistan's military strength was built up very largely with American
assistance*, we pointed out that the U.S. had a special responsibility to ensure
that it was not misused. We suggested that the U.S. should discontinue all
further arms supplies to Pakistan till it stopped its military action in East
Bengal.
However, though the U.S. Administration assured us that no arms were being
supplied after 25 March, 1971, the supply in some form or the other continued
till 8 November, 1971, when they announced that after discussions with the
Government of Pakistan, and with their consent they had decided to wind up the
remaining shipments and cancel outstanding licences. In contrast, the U.S.
Government acted with alacrity in respect of even the limited quantity of
military equipment that was to be sold to India, when on 1 December they
announced the cancellation of all munitions list licences for India. This was
followed in less than a week by suspension of general economic aid to India
which was in the pipeline but not yet covered by irrevocable letters of credit.
We pointed out that no country had through economic and military assistance
developed such leverage with Pakistan as the United States obviously had. They
should use that leverage to persuade the Yahya regime to come to a political
settlement with the elected leaders of East Bengal which would enable the

refugees to go back to their homes in East Bengal. They were posing an
intolerable strain on the economy of India and the stability and security of our
borders. But the US policy was to treat the crisis as an internal affair of
Pakistan and the refugee problem in India as one which she should continue to
bear indefinitely with 'restraint'. Not a word of public condemnation came from
__________________________________________
*Vide Ambassador Agha Hilaly's statement on ABC AL interview on 15 August,
1971. "The Pakistan army was equipped with American weapons almost
exclusively".
<P-76>
the U.S. Government, on the inhuman atrocities of the Pakistani forces
continuing month after month in East Bengal, although the U.S. Press reported
them more widely and thoroughly than any other Press in the world. As late as
November 1971, when the Prime Minister visited the United States, the U.S.
Administration was speaking in terms of a further time-frame and concurring in
the hypocritical measures proposed by Yahya Khan which were not calculated to
solve the problem.
Finally, when Pakistan started the war with India by a number of air strikes
on 3 December, followed by a declaration of War on 4 December, the United States
Government described India as the aggressor at the United Nations and sent a
task force of the Seventh Fleet to the Bay of Bengal, showing, beyond doubt,
that they stood solidly by the barbarous regime of Yahya Khan and against the
people of Bangladesh and the people of India.
The reaction of many responsible leaders of public opinion in the U.S. and
important sections of the U.S. Press had been critical of the policies of the
military authorities of Pakistan and of the U.S. Government's attitude to the
problem. Both the U.S. Senate and the House of Representatives had approved
amendments to the Foreign Assistance Bill which forbade economic and military
assistance to the Government of Pakistan unless conditions were created to the
extent possible, for the return of refugees to their homes. During the year,
several leading Senators, Congressmen and members of the U.S. Government visited
India. Most of them saw the refugee camps and expressed their admiration of
India's humanity and restraint. However, their reports on return to the United
States had not had any appreciable effect on the attitude of the U.S.
Administration.
<P-77>
Even after the Pakistani people themselves had given their verdict on the
Yahya regime and the U.S. Government's support of it by demanding the trial of
Yahya Khan as the "enemy of the people", the United States Administration have
continued in their statements to defend the policies of the Yehya regime, to
blame on India a war which they gave Pakistan the wherewithal to launch, and to
try, in the most amazing manner, to claim credit for themselves for the
ceasefire which India declared out of her abhorrence of war.
With all this, India has been more than willing to respond to the suggestion
of a dialogue to restore cordiality in Indo-U.S. relations. We hope that the
U.S. Administration would take a new long look at the realities of South Asia

and come to the realisation that undemocratic regimes no longer have a future in
this sub-continent.
India's relations with Canada, based on certain shared values, have been
traditionally friendly. There is broad agreement between the two countries on
several international issues. Canada has been sympathetic and responsive to our
point of view in regard to the terms and structure of foreign economic cooperation.
Referring to the situation arising out of the military action of the
Pakistan authorities in Bangladesh, the Canadian Minister for External Affairs
had stated in June, 1971 that there should be a political settlement, preferably
"one in which those individuals who have been elected pursuant to the recent
election in Pakistan should be given the responsibility of governing Pakistan,
particularly East Pakistan." He added, "unless there is a political settlement
in Pakistan, the refugees are going to remain in India and continue to be a
thorn in the side of peace." The Canadian Government also announced at the time
of suspension of export permits for arms shipment to Pakistan.
<P-78>
There Canadian Members of Parliament, Mr. Heath MacQuarrie (Progressive
Conservative Party), Mr. Andrew Browin (New Democratic Party) and Mr. George
Lachance (Liberal Party) visited India as guests of the Government of India in
July, 1971. The visit helped them to appreciate the situation on the Subcontinent.
An Indo-Canadian agreement was signed to extend the working of the Shastri
Indo-Canadian institute for a further period of three years. It is hoped that
this would further enhance the growing interest in India among Canadian
scholars.
Following the visit of the Prime Minister to Latin America in 1968, a new
and more meaningful relationship has developed between India and Latin American
countries which acquired a broader aspect during the period under review. This
has rested essentially on the growing mutual recognition that both areas belong
to the developing world, face similar problems and should, therefore, concert
action in defence of common interests.
Co-operation at the Governmental level has been on both economic and
political fronts. There is continuing consultation at the UN, in Geneva and
elsewhere on a common approach towards trade and monetary problems. Recognition
of the Latin American role in the comity of developing nations has been accorded
by the decision to hold the preliminary meeting of the Group of 77 in Lima
(Peru), last October-November and the meeting of UNCTAD III in Santiago (Chile)
in February, 1972. Shri L. N. Misra, Minister of Foreign Trade, led the Indian
Delegation at the Group of 77 and while in Lima, concluded a trade agreement
with the Government of Peru. To UNCTAD III also India will be sending a
delegation. On the political side, there has been an increasing interest in nonalignment amongst Central and South American countries. At the
<P-79>

last Non-aligned Meeting held in New York in September, 1971 at the Foreign
Ministers' level, Chile, Guyana, Cuba and Jamaica attended the meeting as
"participants" Argentina, Barbados, Bolivia, Brazil, Ecuador, Peru and Uruguay
attended the Ministerial Consultative Meeting as Observers.
In the course of the year, we received as guests from this region, Mr. Jose
Rodriguez Iturbe, MP and a prominent member of the ruling COPEI Party in
Venezuela, and Mr. Antonio Izquierdo, our Honorary Consul General in Bogota,
Columbia. During their visit (in late November 1971), they had the opportunity
of getting acquainted with the Bangladesh issue. Transient visitors, en route to
other destinations, included the Vice-President of Guatemala, H. E. Mr. Eduardo
Caceres, and the Governor of Cundinamarca Province in Columbia, Mr. Diego Uribe
Vargas.
Our relations with the Caribbean countries are close and friendly, because
(a) many of the Caribbean nations are English-speaking members of the
Commonwealth, with whom we have in the past shared the burden of colonialism,
and (b) there are substantial communities of Indian origin, especially in
Guyana, Trinidad and Tobago, and Surinam.
In the development of our friendship in the period under review, emphasis
has tended to be on cultural ties and technical assistance. ICCR will shortly
open cultural centres in Guyana and Surinam, while there are continuing schemes
for the teaching of Hindi and Sanskrit, the grant of scholarships or admissions
to Indian Universities of local students, and the presentation of books. It is
proposed to establish a Chair of Indian Studies in the University of Guyana. A
team of techno-economic experts visited Surinam, Trinidad and Tobago, and Guyana
in February, 1971, with a view to advising their Governments on the
establishment of small-scale industries.
<P-80>
Distinguished visitors to India from this region included Mr. Herbert
Eldemire, Jamaican Minister of Health, Mr. David Singh, guyanese Minister of
Trade, Mr. Basil Pitt, Minister of National Security in the Trinidad Government
and Mr. Cheddi Jagan, Leader of the opposition party in Guyana, the Peoples'
Progressive Party. Shri J. B. Muthyal Rao, ex-MP, spent a month in Guyana as the
personal guest of Prime Minister Burnham, while Shri Lalit Sen, ex-MP, gave a
series of lectures in the region on behalf of ICCR. The projected visit of Dr.
Jules Sedney, Minister-President of Surinam, and Mr. J. Lachmon, Speaker of
Surinamese Parliament, as our guests, had unfortunately to be cancelled due to
unavoidable circumstances in Surinam.
While contact was continually maintained at the diplomatic level, both in
New Delhi and in the various South American capitals, at various stages of the
Bangladesh crisis, the visits in September as Special Envoys of the Prime
Minister of Sarvashri Raj Bahadur, Minister of Parliamentary Affairs, Shipping
and Transport, and K. C. Pant, Minister in the Ministry of Home Affairs, to a
number of countries in South America served to draw the attention of the host
countries to important aspects of the problem. The visit of Shri Erasmode
Sequeira, M.P., to attend the session of the Latin American Parliament in
August, 1971, at Caracas also contributed to this end.

Attitudes inevitably were conditioned by the factors of distance,
unfamiliarity with the realities of the situation, and the policy followed by
most of these countries of non-involvement in issues that do not directly affect
them. Nonetheless, sympathy was expressed in conversations with Indian
representatives over the humanitarian aspect of the Bangladesh problem and
agreement on the necessity of creating adequate conditions to enable the
refugees to return. Some Governments were prepared to express this publicly.
Others accepted also the need for a political solution of the problem.
<P-81>
Mention should also be made of parliamentary resolutions passed by the Lower
House of the Venezuelan Parliament, and also by the Latin American Parliament on
which all important countries of the region were represented. These resolutions
contained most of the essential elements of our own thinking on the subject of
Bangladesh.
<P-82>
INDIA
USA CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC PAKISTAN BANGLADESH CANADA SWITZERLAND PERU
CHILE CUBA GUYANA JAMAICA ARGENTINA BOLIVIA BRAZIL ECUADOR URUGUAY
COLOMBIA VENEZUELA GUATEMALA TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO SURINAME

Date :

Mar 25, 1971

UNITED NATIONS AND INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCES
The seating of the People's Republic of China in the United Nations was the
most historic event of the 26th Session of the General Assembly. The unreality
of lack of representation in the world body of the most populous State which had
persisted for over two decades has thus been finally rectified.
Another significant event was the election of a successor to U. Thant as
Secretary-General of the United Nations. Many names were considered or
speculated upon during the course of the year. The ultimate choice fell on Dr.
Kurt Waldheim, Permanent Representative of Austria to the United Nations and a
former Foreign Minister of his country. The new Secretary-General's term
commenced on 1 January, 1972. The Government of India has assured the new
Secretary-General of its full co-operation in dealing with the formidable
problems that confront him.
During this session India was elected to the Security Council obtaining 107
votes out of the 116 votes cast. India's two-year term on the Security Council
runs from 1 January 1972. It is worth noting that, unlike on the previous
occasion, when we became member in 1967 after a gap of 15 years, on this
occasion India is returning to the Security Council after an absence of 3 years
only.

Pursuant to the decision at the 3rd Non-Aligned Summit Conference held at
Lusaka in September 1970 regarding the holding of periodic consultations among
the non-aligned countries, a Non-Aligned Consultative Meeting was held at the
Ministerial-level on 30 September 1971. The meeting
<P-83>
was held at New York and was preceded by an official level meeting. The primary
purpose of the consultations was to review developments in the world since the
Lusaka Conference and to co-ordinate policies on important items on the agenda
of the 26th Session of the General Assembly.
The Communique adopted at the end of the Non-Aligned Consultations was, in
so far as the question of Bangladesh was concerned, not entirely satisfactory
but went part of the way. The relevant paragraph represented a compromise
between India's position and the pre-occupation of certain countries on noninterference in what they regarded as the internal affair of Pakistan. However,
to the extent that it acknowledged that the massive influx of refugees had
imposed a tremendous burden on India and that it called for early and effective
action, including action at the international level, to stem their flow, to
alleviate their suffering and to promote "all the necessary conditions" for
enabling them to exercise their "inalienable rights" and to return to their
homeland safely and speedily, the Communique gave recognition to some of the
fundamentals of India's position.
The remainder of the Communique was largely devoted to the topics on which
decisions were taken at the Lusaka Conference. It stressed the need for the
democratization of international relations with a view to strengthening the
structure of international security; it referred to questions pertaining to
colonialism and racialism; it called for the strengthening of the United Nations
and for improving the system of security spelt out in the Charter of the world
organization; it emphasised the inadmissibility of acquisition of territory by
force in the context of the West Asian question; and with regard to the
situation in Vietnam, it described the seven-point proposal submitted by the
Provisional Revolutionary Government of South Vietnam as providing a possibility
for a "just termination of the war"
<P-84>
With reference to the specific topics on the agenda of the General Assembly,
it was agreed at the Consultative Meeting that the non-aligned countries should,
at that session, work towards a substantive discussion on the strengthening of
international security and progress and on the items on peace-keeping operations
and definition of aggression. It was also felt that in pursuance to the Lusaka
Resolution on United Nations, efforts should be made to initiate action at the
26th Session with a view to the declaration of the Indian Ocean area as a zone
of peace. As regards disarmament matters, the non-aligned countries renewed
their appeal for general and complete disarmament under effective international
control. The view was also expressed that the participation of all nuclear
weapon powers in the Committee on Disarmament would strengthen that body.
Support was given to the idea of a world disarmament conference "after due
preparations".

The Communique reiterated the non-aligned view that membership in the United
Nations should be universal in character. In this context, it was stressed that
apart from restoring the legitimate rights of the People's Republic of China in
the U. N., there was need for measures to enable the divided countries, which
still remained outside the world organization, to participate in its activities.
In so far as economic questions were concerned, the non-aligned countries,
at the Consultative Meeting, directed their efforts towards strengthening the
hands of the developing countries in the context of the preparations for the
Ministerial Meeting of the Group of `77' at Lima and the subsequent Third
Session of UNCTAD. Views were expressed in this perspective on the importance of
the Lusaka Declaration on Economic Co-operation and the need for the General
Assembly, at its 26th Session, to establish positive guidelines for UNCTAD-III.
In connection with the international monetary crisis, the Communique stated that
the develop<P-85>
ing countries were in no way responsible for it, though they were being
seriously affected by its consequences. It called for the maintence of orderly
and equitable exchange rates and for the improvement of the Bretton Woods
arrangements, keeping in mind the special needs of the developing countries.
It was agreed that the non-aligned countries should meet again at the
Ministerial level in 1972 before the 27th Session of the General Assembly. A
Preparatory Committee was established for this purpose. India is a member of
this body.
The non-aligned countries were successful in their effort to ensure a
substantive discussion on the question of the implementation of the Declaration
on the Strengthening of International Security. Priority was also given to a
draft resolution co-sponsored by India and a number of other countries, aligned
and non-aligned, and it was this draft which was adopted by the General
Assembly. The resolution gives implicit recognition to the need for a
comprehensive and integrated approach to problems of international security, a
point of view which India has been emphatically putting forward. The validity of
this approach, which implies that the Purposes and Principles of the United
Nations should be regarded as constituting an organic whole, was amply
demonstrated by the recent discussions in the United Nations on the conflict
between Pakistan and, on the other hand, India and Bangladesh.
Another important action of the General Assembly was the declaration of the
Indian Ocean as a zone of peace following the initiative taken by Ceylon. The
resolution finally adopted was co-sponsored, among others, by India it called
upon all the littoral and hinterland states of the
<P-86>
Indian Ocean to ensure that war ships and military aircraft refrain from using
the Indian Ocean for any threat or use of force against the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and independence of any littoral or hinterland state of
the Indian Ocean and also called for appropriate arrangements to be made to give

effect to any international agreement that may ultimately be reached for the
maintenance of the Indian Ocean as a zone of peace. It also called upon the
great powers, inter alia, to eliminate from the Indian Ocean all bases, military
installations, logistical special facilities, nuclear weapons and weapons of
mass destruction as well as any manifestations of great power military presence
in the Indian Ocean conceived in the context of great power rivalry.
The Group of `77' comprising the developing countries of the world met at
Lima in October-November 1971, exactly a year after the proclamation of the
Second Development Decade, to discuss their strategy for the third meeting of
UNCTAD, scheduled for Santiago in April-May 1972. The declaration adopted by
that meeting stressed the primary responsibility of the developing countries
themselves for their economic development and their determination to make all
efforts to solve their problems, to mobilise fully their basic resources and
ensure participation of their peoples in the process and the benefits of
development. The declaration also urged upon the developed countries the
adoption of various steps towards fulfilment of the requirements of the
developing countries in the field of rapid economic and social development.
The concern of the developing countries at the deterioration in the
environment was expressed both in the deliberation and in the resolution adopted
on the subject. While sharing this concern with the developed countries, the
developing countries nevertheless affirmed the link between development and
environment and addressed a
<P-87>
resolution which, among other things, recognised that no environmental policy
should adversely affect the present or future development possibilities of the
developing countries and that any adverse effect of environmental policies and
measures on the economy of the developing countries was to be avoided. India
supported this resolution.
The crisis in the international monetary situation caused considerable
concern to the developing countries. The resolution adopted on the subject fully
reflected this concern. It stated, inter alia, that the restructuring of the
international monetary order should, among other things, fully take into account
that the full participation of all interested countries in the process of
decision making was necessary and the establishment of a permanent system of
guarantees against exchange losses affecting the reserves of the developing
countries was also a requisite. India co-sponsored this resolution and played an
important role in its adoption.
The 26th Session also saw the passage of a resolution calling for the
expansion of the Economic & Social Council from 27 members to 54 members. Such
an expansion will enable an increasing number of countries from the third world
to participate more effectively and to make their contributions to the work of
the Economic and Social Council. The Governing Council of the U.N.D.P., a very
important body since it co-ordinates United Nations' economic and technical
assistance to developing countries, was also enlarged from 37 to 48 members.
The General Assembly continued to concern itself with the repugnant racist
policies pursued by the Government of the Republic of South Africa. It adopted

resolution 2775 (XXVI) on the subject, which contains 8 different parts. The
first part concerning arms embargo declared, inter alia that there existed no
distinction between arms
<P-88>
for external defence and internal repression. Another section of the resolution
condemned apartheid in sports. The establishment of the so-called Bantustan was
again condemned as was the continued and increasing co-operation of certain
states and foreign economic interests with South Africa in the military,
economic, political and other fields. The General Assembly also reaffirmed the
legitimacy of the struggles of the oppressed peoples of Southern Africa against
apartheid, racial discrimination, colonialism, etc. All national and
international trade union organisations were requested to intensify their action
against apartheid, particularly by discouraging the emigration of skilled
workers to South Africa and exerting maximum pressure on foreign, economic and
financial interests which are providing support in any way to policies of racial
discrimination against workers in South Africa. India's fullest support was
extended to these resolutions.
The General Assembly adopted resolution 2799 on the subject of West Asia
which was co-sponsored by India. The General Assembly reaffirmed that the
acquisition of territories by force is inadmissible and also acknowledged that
the termination of all claims or states of belligerency and respect for and
acknowledgement of the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence of every state in the area and its right to live in peace within
secured and recognised boundaries free from threats or acts of forces was
necessary for the establishment of a just and lasting peace in the Middle East.
The need to arrive at a just settlement of the refugee problem was also
emphasised.
On the humanitarian side, the General Assembly agreed in principle that the
Secretary-General of the U.N. should appoint a disaster relief co-ordinator who
would be authorised, on behalf of the Secretary-General to establish and
maintain the closest co-operation with all
<P-89>
organisations concerned and make feasible financial arrangements with them for
the purpose of ensuring the most effective assistance and to mobilise and coordinate the relief activities of the various organisations of the U.N. system
in response to a request for disaster assistance from a stricken state etc.
The Assembly's concern with humanising armed conflict was maintained at the
26th Session. The International Committee of the Red Cross was invited to
continue the work that was begun with the assistance of government experts in
1971 and to devote special attention to the need to ensure better application of
the existing rules relating to armed conflicts; to the need for a reaffirmation
and development of relevant rules as well as other measures to improve the
protection of the civilian population during armed conflicts; to the need to
evolve norms designed to increase the protection of persons struggling against
colonial and alien domination, foreign occupation and racist regimes. It also
requested the Secretary-General to prepare, as soon as possible, with the help

of governmental qualified consultant experts, a report on napalm and other
incendiary weapons and all aspects of their possible use. It also invited the
Economic and Social Council to request the Commission on Human Rights to
consider as a matter of top priority at its next session the question of a draft
convention for the protection of journalists engaged in dangerous missions in
areas of armed conflict. As in the previous years India played an important role
in the successful adoption of these resolutions.
India was re-elected to the Industrial Board of the United Nations
Industrial Development Organisation for a period of another 3 years. India
received 99 votes. Dr. Nagendra Singh of India was re-elected for another term
of 3 years to the International Law Commission; he received 119 votes.
<P-90>
Disarmament
During the year the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament (CCD) held
two sessions from 23 February to 13 May, and from 29 June to 30 September 1971,
consisting of 50 formal plenary meetings with records, and 4 informal meetings
without records. In addition, members of the Committee met frequently for
informal multilateral consultations on disarmament questions of common interest.
The Group of Twelve, of which India is a member, held 29 meetings.
The Committee had before it a number of subjects which were referred to it
by the UN General Assembly. Members also expressed their views on such other
issues which they considered relevant and important. However, particular
attention was devoted to:
(1)
and
(2)

The question of Chemical and Bacteriological (Biological) Weapons;
The question of a treaty banning Nuclear Weapons Tests.

Besides oral statements, a number of formal proposals and working papers
were presented by the members to assist in the examination and analysis of
possible disarmament measures. Towards the end of the session, a revised draft
Convention on the prohibition of the development, production and stockpiling of
bacteriological (biological) and toxic weapons and on their destruction was
tabled jointly by some of the members of the Committee. It was decided that this
draft convention should be submitted to the 26th Session of the U.N. General
Assembly for further consideration. The Group of Twelve submitted a joint
memorandum `on the prohibition of the development, production and stockpiling of
Chemical weapons and on their destruction'.
<P-91>
The General Assembly after considering the report of the CCD alongwith other
related subjects, adopted a number of resolutions on the following items which
were on its Agenda:
1.

General and Complete Disarmament

Under this item, the following questions were considered:
(a) Several delegations stressed in their statements the importance of
general and complete disarmament and the need for intensified efforts towards
that goal. The resolution finally adopted was of a general character calling
upon CCD to resume its efforts for the achievement of general and complete
disarmament. The resolution was adopted by 105-0-4. India voted for the
resolution.
(b) A resolution sponsored by Mexico for greater dissemination of
information regarding dangers of the arms race was adopted by 110-0-0. India
voted for the resolution.
(c) Malta had proposed a resolution requesting the IAEA to include in its
report full information on the progress of its work on the application of
safeguards in connection with the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons including safeguards relating to uranium enrichment plants. The
resolution was adopted by 89-0-17. India abstained on it.
2.

Chemical and Bacteriological (Biological) Weapons

(a) A resolution commending the Convention on the Biological and Toxic
weapons which was submitted to the UNGA by the CCD along with its report was
adopted by 110-0-1. India voted for the resolution. The resolution includes a
<P-92>
preambular paragraph on the issue of savings from disarmament being used for the
promotion of economic and social development, particularly in the developing
countries.
(b) On the question of the future negotiations on Chemical weapons, a
resolution was adopted by 110-0-1. The resolution was a result of a merger of
two resolutions one of which was co-sponsored by the Group of Twelve of the CCD
including India. India co-sponsored the resolution and voted for it.
(c) A resolution urging a moratorium on the further development,
production and stockpiling of certain highly toxic and lethal chemical agents,
was adopted by 101-0-10. India voted for the resolution.
3.

Suspension of Nuclear and Thermonuclear Tests

(a) A resolution containing a reiteration of the General Assembly's
condemnation of all nuclear weapon tests and calling for the cessation of all
such tests by 5 August, 1973 was adopted by 74-2-36. India voted for the
resolution. The negative votes were cast by Albania and the People's Republic of
China.
(b) A Saudi-Arabian draft resolution calling for a suspension of all
nuclear tests and a moratorium on the deployment of such weapons of mass
destruction was adopted by 71-2-38. India abstained on the resolution. Albania
and the People's Republic of China voted against it.

(c) A resolution calling upon the testing nuclear powers to undertake
unilateral or negotiated measures of restraint and requesting the CCD to
negotiate on underground test ban treaty as
<P-93>
a matter of highest priority was adopted by 91-2-21. India abstained on the
resolution. Albania and the People's Republic of China voted against it.
4. Establishment within the framework of IAEA of an international service for
nuclear explosion for peaceful purposes.
A resolution requesting the IAEA to continue its work in connection with the
establishment of an international service for peaceful nuclear explosions under
appropriate international control was adopted by 103-0-9. The resolution in one
of its preambular paragraphs had suggested that the IAEA should exercise this
function taking into account the relevant provisions of the NPT. India abstained
on the resolution.
5.

Implementation of UNGA Resolution 2666 (xxv)

A resolution deploring that all the nuclear-weapon States had not yet
adhered to the Additional Protocol II of the Treaty respecting the status of the
Latin-American countries as a nuclear free zone was adopted by 101-0-12. India
voted for the resolution.
6.

Economic and Social Consequences of the armament races

A resolution, inter alia, welcoming the Secretary-General's report on the
subject and calling upon the General Assembly to include this question in the
agenda at its 28th Session was adopted by 111-1-3. India co-sponsored the
resolution and voted for it.
7.

World Disarmament Conference

A resolution inviting all States to communicate to the U.N. SecretaryGeneral their views and suggestions on the various aspects and modalities of a
World Disarmament Conference and requesting the UNSG to submit a report to the
27th Session of the UNGA was adopted by acclamation.
<P-94>
8.

Outer Space

(a) A resolution endorsing the report of the Committee on Outer Space was
adopted unanimously. The resolution also expressed satisfaction at the work
carried on at the Thumba Equatorial Rocket Launching Station in India and
approved continuing sponsorship by the UN of that Station.
(b) A resolution on the convening of the Working Group on remote sensing
of the earth by satellites was adopted unanimously.
(c)

A resolution requesting the Outer Space Committee to consider the

question of elaborating a draft international treaty concerning the moon was
adopted unanimously.
9.

Atomic Energy

(a) A resolution taking note of the report of the IAEA and appreciating
its work was adopted unanimously.
(b) A resolution appreciating the report of the UN Scientific Committee
on the Effects of Atomic Radiation was adopted unanimously. India is one of the
15 members of this Committee.
With her traditional interest in disarmament and the peaceful uses of atomic
energy, India participated actively in the deliberations on those subjects in
all Committees, Conferences and other bodies of which India is a member.
The Fourth International Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy
was held in Geneva from 6 to 16 September 1971. India had supported the
convening of the Conference and, as during the earlier three Conferences,
actively participated both in its general and technical session. The late Dr.
Sarabhai was one of the Chairmen of its general session.
<P-95>
Shri V. C. Trivedi, Indian Ambassador in Vienna, who was elected Chairman of
the Board of Governors of the IAEA in September 1970, continued to hold that
office till September 1971. India continues to be a member of the Board of
Governors in her capacity as the country most advanced in the South Asia region
in the field of the peaceful uses of atomic energy.
India continued to play an active part in the work of United Nations
committees/conferences concerned with progressive development of international
law.
Further substantive work was carried out during the year by UNCITRAL and its
Working Groups on unification and harmonisation of international trade law on
topics like international sale of goods, international payments and
international shipping legislation. The Indian representatives to UNCITRAL and
its Working Groups actively participated in this work. The leader of the Indian
delegation to the fourth session of UNCITRAL, Dr. Nagendra Singh, served as
Chairman at the Fourth Session of UNCITRAL in April 1971 and the Indian
representative, Shri Kamat, to the meetings of the UNCITRAL Working Groups on
international sale of goods and international shipping legislation served as the
Rapporteur.
Effective co-ordination has now been forged between the UNCITRAL and the
UNCTAD with regard to the item on international shipping legislation which is of
considerable interest to the developing countries. India played a leading role
in forging this co-ordination.
In the field of International Sale of Goods, the Work commenced in 1969, of
examining the Uniform Law annexed to the Hague Convention, 1964, to consider
which modifications of that law would render it capable of wider acceptance was

advanced further during the year. The UNCITRAL Working Group for this topic is
now engaged
<P-96>
in examining the substantive provisions of the uniform law on seller's
obligations.
The U.N. General Assembly, under its Resolution 2750 (XXV) of 17 December
1970 decided to convene a Conference on the Law of the Sea in 1973 which would
deal with the establishment of an equitable international regime for the seabed
and its resources and also deal with other broad range of issues including
regimes of high seas, the continental shelf, the breadth of territorial sea,
international straits, contiguous zone, fishing and conservation of the living
resources of the high seas, and preservation of marine environment and
scientific research. For this purpose, the Assembly enlarged the membership of
the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of the Seabed and the Ocean Floor beyond the
Limits of National Jurisdiction. The enlarged Committee, consisting of 84
Members, held two sessions in March 1971 and July/August 1971 in Geneva. The
Indian representatives actively participated in the work of the UN Seabed
Committee.
The subject of Law of the Sea and the Seabed was also discussed by the
Asian-African Legal Consultative Committee at its Eleventh Session held in
Colombo in January 1971 and by the AALCC Working Group on the Law of the Sea
during its meetings held in June 1970 in New Delhi and in July 1971 in Geneva.
In view of the importance of the subject of the seabed and India's interest
in it, Government of India established an Inter-Ministerial Committee headed by
the Cabinet Secretary to study and formulate the Government's overall policy and
to make preparations for the 1973 Plenipotentiary Conference on the Law of the
Sea. This Committee is presently engaged in formulating India's viewpoint on the
establishment of an international regime for the seabed and its resources, and
also other issues relating to the Law of the Sea.
<P-97>
Presently, India supports the 12-mile territorial sea, freedom of transit in
straits for international navigation, an exclusive fishery zone for coastal
states, an adequate zone of seabed for exclusive coastal exploitation, and an
effective international machinery with comprehensive powers for the exploitation
of the resources of the international seabed area.
In the legal field, the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space
achieved substantial results during the year. Its Legal Sub-Committee after 8
years of negotiations, in which the Indian delegation actively participated
throughout, was able to adopt unanimously on 29 June 1971, during its 10th
Session, the text of the draft Convention on International Liability for Damage
caused by Space Objects.
The Legal Sub-Committee had approved at its 9th Session held in 1970 the
text of the title, the preamble, and 13 Articles of the draft Convention. The
outstanding issues relating to the Applicable Law, Settlement of Claims,

Relationship of International Organisations with the Convention and final
clauses. The Committee for the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space which met in New
York from 1 to 17 September 1970, could not reach agreement on these issues.
The Indian delegation after intensive consultations with other participants
submitted compromise proposals this year on all the outstanding issues to the
Legal Sub-Committee. Essential compromise elements have been incorporated in the
draft Convention mainly on the basis of the proposals made by the Indian
Delegation. The draft Convention provides for absolute liability.
The draft Convention was adopted unanimously by the Committee on the
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space at its 4th Session which met in New York from 1 to
10 September 1971.
<P-98>
The General Assembly of the United Nations at its 26th Session adopted a
resolution commending the Convention on International liability for Damage
caused by Space Objects, and requesting depositary Governments to open the
Convention for signature and ratification at the earliest possible date.
The Thirteenth Session of the Asian-African Legal Consultative Committee was
held in Lagos (Nigeria) from 19 to 25 January 1972. The Committee devoted the
major portion of its time for discussion on the Law of the Sea with a view to
build up an Asian-African view point on some of the important issues relating to
the Law of the Sea like breadth of territorial waters, limits of fishery
jurisdiction, concept of economic zone, archipelagos and regional arrangements
so that Asian-African countries could effectively participate in the work of the
UN Seabed Committee as well as the Third Law of the Sea conference likely to be
held in 1973. Although the Committee did not reach any concrete conclusions,
there was useful exchange of views on these issues. The Committee also discussed
the other two subjects, namely, Law of International Rivers and International
Sale of Goods and made further progress.
On 3 March 1971, Pakistan filed an Application and a Complaint in the
Council of International Civil Aviation Organization regarding the banning of
overflights over Indian territory (arising from the hijacking of Indian plane to
Pakistan and its blowing up). The Council called upon India to file its CounterMemorials in reply to the Pakistani Application and Complaint. India filed its
Preliminary Objections to Council's Jurisdiction on the ground that the Council
was competent only to interpret and apply the Chicago Convention of 1944 and the
International Air Transit Agreement of 1944 and could not deal with the
questions relating to the termination or suspension of these agreements. It was
contended by India that
<P-99>
in so far as Pakistan was concerned, these two agreements remained in suspension
since the armed conflict of 1965 and in any case they were suspended by India on
4 February 1971 as a result of the material breach by Pakistan of its
international obligations in relation to the hijacking incident. Overflights
over each other's territory were governed by a special agreement reached in
February 1965 between the Prime Minister of India and the President of Pakistan

which allowed this facility subject to the permission of the country concerned
and to the terms and conditions thereof. On 4 February 1971, the Government of
India withdrew that permission in terms of the special agreement. This
Preliminary Objection was filed on 28 May 1971. The Council heard the parties on
27 and 28 July and did not accept India's objections in its decision rendered on
29 July 1971. India filed an Appeal against this decision of the Council to the
International Court of Justice on 30 August 1971 on the grounds, inter alia,
that the decision of the Council both on merits as well as on the procedure
adopted by it was illegal and void or in any case erroneous. India submitted its
Memorial to the Court on 22 December 1971. After the written pleadings have been
submitted by the parties the case will come up for oral hearing.
In February 1971, India participated in oral proceedings in the case of
Namibia (South-West Africa) before the International Court of Justice. On 29
July 1970 the Court had been requested by the Security Council of the United
Nations to advise them on the following question:
"What are the legal consequences for States of the continued presence of
South Africa in Namibia, notwithstanding Security Council Resolution 276
(1970)?"
The Court rendered its Advisory Opinion on 21 June 1971 which accepted most of
the arguments raised by India and
<P-100>
other Asian African countries in support of the legal status of Namibia.
During 1971 India concluded 88 Treaties and Agreements, a list of which is
enclosed as Appendix VII. Special mention may be made of the following
Agreements concluded during the year:
1. Treaty between Indian and USSR on Friendship, Peace and Co-operation
concluded on 9 August 1971.
2. Treaty of Trade and Transit between India and Nepal concluded on 13
August 1971.
<P-101>
CHINA
USA AUSTRIA INDIA ZAMBIA BANGLADESH PAKISTAN VIETNAM PERU CHILE SOUTH
AFRICA MEXICO MALTA ALBANIA CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC SWITZERLAND SRI LANKA
NIGER NIGERIA NAMIBIA NEPAL

Date :

Jan 01, 1972

TECHNICAL AND ECONOMIC COOPERATION
The promotion of mutual cooperation among the developing countries of Asia,
Africa and Latin America in the technical and economic fields is an integral
part of India's foreign policy. Experience has shown that cooperation among
developing countries is an important dimension of international cooperation for
development. Not only does this reduce the dependence of the developing world on
the developed countries but it also promotes self-confidence and a faster rate
of growth in the Third World. On account of experience gained in the process of
development, significant results achieved therein and because of the growth of a
cadre of skilled technicians, engineers and economists in the country, India is
able to offer technical and economic cooperation to other developing countries.
The Indian Technical and Economic Cooperatin (ITEC) Programme administered
by the Ministry of External Affairs is designed both to generate political
goodwill among the partner countries and to promote mutual economic benefit. The
Programme was started about ten years ago and from small beginnings has now
assumed significant proportions. The budget allocation for technical assistance
under ITEC has gone from Rs. 4.46 lakhs in 1964-65 to well over Rs. 1 crore in
the financial year 1971-72.
The sprit of our ITEC Programme is exemplified by our efforts and activities
in countries like Afghanistan. The aims and objects are to try to make a direct
contribution in the essential development process of the country with which we
are collaborating. Hence the accent on helping
<P-102>
them to acquire sufficiency in trained technical manpower and, where possible,
taking up integrated schemes of assistance in essential sectors of the economy.
In Afghanistan for instance, the Agricultural Extension Scheme is being
integrally set up with Indian cooperation; similarly an industrial estate is
being set up. The 100-bed children's hospital has also been constructed entirely
with Indian cooperation. In the functional running of these schemes, Indian and
Afghan personnel will collaborate while India will provide training facilities
to Afghanistan until self-sufficiency is reached for them to be able to take
over the projects. Our assistance to build up industrial estates elsewhere, as
in Kenya, is of a similar character.
With some countries of the developing world where economic development is
already comparatively advanced like Iran and Ceylon, economic cooperation is
exemplified by Joint Commissions that these countries have with India providing
for economic collaboration. Here again, the training of manpower is an essential
feature. But the scope of collaboration goes beyond this to include trade plans
and technical collaboration in areas where mutual complementarity has been
established.
In the recent past there has been an increasing demand from many countries
of the developing world for technical assistance from India. This is largely due
to the impact that our economic cooperation programme may have been able to make
earlier, both through the loan of expertise and the training programmes in
India. However, in order to make the Programme more effective and to maximise
the cost-benefit ratio, a deliberate attempt is made to concentrate on a few

selected countries rather than thinly spread limited resources over a large
number of countries. Within a well defined over-all framework of priorities, the
largest beneficiary of the Programme has been Afghanistan, followed by
Mauritius, Fiji, Ethiopia, the People's Demo<P-103>
cratic Republic of Yemen, the Arab Republic of Egypt, Ceylon and Somalia.
The work taken up under the Programme falls into five categories:
(i)

Provision of training facilities in India to foreign nationals;

(ii)

Deputation of Indian experts abroad;

(iii)

Gifts of capital goods equipment, drugs and medicines, etc.

(iv) Financial assistance for conducting feasibility studies and economic
surveys; and
(v) Undertaking specific projects in certain countries with whom we have
economic cooperation agreements.
Provision of training facilities is the most important aspect of the ITEC
Programme. At present more than 400 foreign trainees from 20 countries are
receiving training in various technical fields in Indian institutions. Of these
over a 100 came to India during the current financial year. An illustrative list
of the countries they come from, the numbers they come in and the disciplines
they follow is given below:
(i) Afghanistan: Seven trainees-five in Commercial Pilots Training Course
and two in Communication Assistants Course;
(ii)

Angola: 39 students in various disciplines;

(iii) Arab Republic of Egypt: 36 trainees-34 for training at the Central
Institutes for Instructors, Bombay, Calcutta and Hyderabad and two for training
at the Small Industries Extension Training Institute, Hyderabad;
<P-104>
(iv) Cambodia: One expert at the Small Industries Extension Training
Institute, Hyderabad;
(v) Fiji: Three trainees-two in the Social Service Training Course at
Patna and one in the Merchant Navy;
(vi)

Iran: One in water resources development;

(vii)

Iraq: Two officials in water resources development;

(viii) Peoples Democratic Republic of Yemen: Four students in hospital
administration;

(ix) Sudan: Nine trainees in various disciplines such as Railways, Sugar
Technology and Satellite communications;
(x) Syria: One expert at the Small Industries Extension Training
Institute, Hyderabad.
Indian experts drawn from a variety of disciplines are deputed abroad under
the Programme. At present they number about 160 and are spread over 17
countries. During the period under review more than 80 Indian experts were
deputed abroad, the details of which are:
(i) Afghanistan: 29 experts-(a) Five agricultural experts for the
establishment of research stations in rice, potatoes and various other crops;
(b) three engineers for the Chardeh-Ghorband Irrigation Projects; (c) a
Director, Doctors, administrative officer, stores officer for the Children's
Hospital Kabul and (d) 15 teachers;
(ii)

Ethiopia: 5 experts-2 doctors, 2 nurses and one financial adviser;

(iii)

Fiji: I Coconut expert;

(iv)

Mauritius: 11 experts-one civil aviation tech-

<P-105>
nician, one broadcasting expert, one agricultural statistician, five engineers
for the Mauritian Development Corporation, one civil aviation expert (legal
side) and one Mechanical engineer;
(v)

Morocco: 3 teachers;

(vi) People's Democratic Republic of Yemen: 11 experts, 6 doctors and 5
teachers;
(vii)

Senegal: 1 cashewnut expert and one small scale industry expert;

(viii)

Somalia: 19 experts, 7 doctors, 1 legal expert and 7 teachers;

(ix)

Upper Volta: One telecommunications engineer since last year;

(x) In addition, an industrial engineer visited Ghana on a short-term
deputation in connection with the setting up of the Small-Scale Industrial
Centre and the services of two Indian experts were also made available to the
Economic Commission for Africa. Many proposals for deputation of Indian experts
are under consideration of the Government and some of them are due to go on
foreign assignments shortly.
Many developing countries have evinced interest in making direct recruitment
of experts from India to fill positions of responsibility in their respective
administrations and public services. This may be due largely to the impact of
the ITEC Programme in making known the availability and quality of Indian
expertise. Recruitment teams from Fiji, Kenya, Nigeria, Tanzania, Uganda and
Zambia visited India and selected a number of Indian experts in diverse fields,

such as medicine, engineering, teaching, accountancy, etc.
<P-106>
Under the ITEC Programme, the Government of India has also been gifting
capital goods, equipment and machinery, medical stores, books etc. to various
foreign countries. The largest single recipient of such gifts has been
Afghanistan. On gifts to the Children's Hospital at Kabul alone, an amount of
about Rs. 20 lakhs (which includes a sum of Rs. 18 lakhs on medicines and
hospital equipment and Rs. 1 lakh on the installation of lifts in the Hospital
was spent in the first six months of the current financial year. Action for
procuring and despatching electric machinery and equipment valued at about Rs.
17 lakhs for the Chardeh-Ghorband Irrigation Project has already been initiated.
The supply of nearly half of the equipment worth over Rs. 7 lakhs in the form of
hydraulic gates and accessories for the Prek Thnot Project in Cambodia is likely
to be completed by March 1972. A part of the machinery worth Rs. 4 lakhs gifted
to Ghana for setting up a Small Scale Indusutrial Centre has already been
despatched and the remaining would follow shortly. The Government of India have
indicated their willingness to assist in the establishment of the Mahatma Gandhi
Institute in Mauritius. School text books in Swahili, valued at Rs. 1.33 lakhs,
gifted to the Tanzanian Government have already been shipped. A gift of
scientific instruments was made to the People's Democratic Republic of Yemen.
Increasing emphasis is being given under the Programme to feasibility
studies and techno-economic surveys in foreign countries. Indian experts have
carried out a number of such studies and surveys in recent years. During the
year under review a three-member Indian team of experts carried out a
feasibility study for the establishment of an industrial estate near Vientiane,
Laos. The feasibility study financed from ITEC funds for the establishment of a
steel scrap melting plant in Libya which was conducted by the National
Industrial Development Corporation last year resulted in the award of a
commercial contract to NIDC for consultancy and supervision of the build<P-107>
ing of the steel scrap melting plant. An economic delegation under the
leadership of Dr. B. D. Kalelkar, former Director General of Technical
Development was sent to Nigeria to study and identify specific fields/projects
in which industrial and technical cooperation between Indian and Nigeria could
be promoted. Indian experts also undertook a survey of the water resources in
Tanzania during April/May 1971. It is intended to give increased emphasis to
this aspect of ITEC work.
Other important studies and surveys carried out by Indian experts in recent
years include (i) Afghanistan: Small Scale Industries estate; (ii) Iran:
Railways and Small Scale Industries; (iii) Iraq: Preliminary Cost-cumFeasibility Study of the Baghdad-Hsaibah Railway Projects; (iv) Mauritius:
Identification of projects in the fields of animal husbandry, fisheries,
forestry, mining and miscellaneous industries; (v) People's Democratic Republic
of Yemen: Techno-economic survey for industrial planning; and (vi) Trinidad and
Tobago; Surinam and Guyana: Survey of Small Scale Industries.
Under the auspices of the Indo-Iran Joint Commission, an Indian Railway

Team, jointly with the Iranian State Railways, prepared a report on the
feasibility of transit traffic to Europe via the Persian Gulf ports and the
overland route.
Dr. Juan B. Martin, former Foreign Minister of Argentina, presently Chairman
of the Argentine Chamber of Commerce, visited India to consider possibilities of
trade and economic cooperation between India and Argentina. A trade delegation
from Guyana, headed by Hon. David Singh Minister of Trade, also visited India in
the month of November 1971 to explore possibilities of Indo-Guyana Cooperation
in various economic and technical fields. Dr. Herbert, Jamaican Minister of
Health accompanied by his Permanent Secretary, visited India during the month of
October 1971, to see the working of Indian medical and
<P-108>
family planning institutions. A Nigerian delegation led by their Federal
Minister for Transport also visited India during the year under review. A
delegation from the Philippines led by Mr. Gerardo Sicat, Chairman, National
Economic Council visited India during November 1971 to discuss matters of common
interest in the fields of petroleum, chemicals and small scale industries. Mr.
Spasowski, Head of the Asian Division of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of
Poland, accompanied by two officials visited India in May 1971, to explore
possibilities of Indo-Polish cooperation in several fields, particularly,
mining, shipbuilding, tractors, and agricultural and textile machinery.
The third meeting of Indo-Czech Joint Committee for Economic, Trade and
Technical Cooperation was held at New Delhi from 3 to 6 December 1971, to
discuss matters arising from the second session of the Joint Committee and to
identify new areas of cooperation which should be taken up in future. The Agreed
Conclusions of the Joint Committee were signed on the 6 December 1971, by Mr. A
Barcak, Minister of Foreign Trade of Czechoslovakia and by Shri L. N. Misra,
Foreign Trade Minister of India.
The Indo-French Economic Commission met in New Delhi from 21 to 24 April
1971, to discuss questions relating to the development of trade and expansion of
economic, technical and industrial cooperation between the two countries. This
was followed by a high-level French Economic Mission which visited India in
October 1971.
The Economic Division has assumed a coordinating role with respect to ECAFE
matters both within the Ministry of External Affairs and vis-a-vis other
Ministries, working in cooperation with the ECAFE National Unit located in the
Ministry of Foreign Trade. The Division prepared studies and briefs on items
relating to regional cooperation etc. for various meetings of the ECAFE and its
subsidiary bodies. The Head of the Division participated in the 27th Annual
<P-109>
Session of the ECAFE held in Manila in April 1971. The Division has taken a
particulary active interest in the follow-up action to the Kabul Declaration
regarding regional trade and monetary cooperation.
Over the years, the Ministry of External Affairs has gained both experience

of and expertise in economic maters. There are now a number of Foreign Service
Officers who are familiar with the conduct of international economic relations.
Reflecting this, the Economic Division has been playing an increasingly active
role not only in the provision of technical assistance under the ITEC Programme
but also in bilateral economic negotiations and in multinational economic
forums. In respect of the latter, the Division continues to have a coordintaing
role through being the focal point of the Inter-Ministerial Committee for the
Second United Nations Development Decade. The Development Strategy for the
Decade concerns the working of all specialised agencies of the United Nations as
well as UNCTAD and UNIDO. For meetings of these organisations, the Division has
been undertaking studies, preparing briefs and from time to time participating
in the international conferences that are called. Similarly, the Division has
been involved in work relating to the International Monetary Fund and the IBRD.
The Ministry is grateful to other Ministries, like the Ministry of Foreign
Trade, E.A. Department, Ministry of Finance and others for taking I.F.S.
Officers on deputation and training them in financial, economic and other
matters.
<P-110>
INDIA
USA AFGHANISTAN KENYA IRAN ETHIOPIA FIJI MAURITIUS EGYPT MALI SOMALIA YEMEN
ANGOLA CAMBODIA IRAQ SUDAN SYRIA LATVIA MOROCCO SENEGAL GHANA NIGER
NIGERIA TANZANIA UGANDA ZAMBIA CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC LAOS LIBYA GUYANA
ARGENTINA JAMAICA PHILIPPINES POLAND NORWAY SLOVAKIA

Date :

Jan 01, 1972

EXTERNAL PUBLICITY
The purpose of the External Publicity Division is to explain, interpret and
clarify government's policies and activities; to increase the area of
international understanding of India's policies, and to counter-act hostile
propaganda.
Thus the functions of the External Publicity Division are:
(i) Organising regular briefly of the press and other media
representatives-Indian and foreign-functioning from Delhi and maintaining
continuous contact with them;
(ii) formulation of external publicity policies and guidelines including
control and supervision of the publicity posts abroad; and
(iii) dissemination abroad of the publicity and information material of
various kinds through different media.

Close coordination has to be maintained, for these purposes, with the
various Divisions of the Ministry and other concerned Ministries in the
Government of India. The Division liaises with All India Radio, specially its
External Services Division, the Press Information Bureau, the Photo Division,
the D.A.V.P. and the Films Division of the Ministry of Information and
Broadcasting; and the Commercial Publicity Wing of the Ministry of Foreign
Trade.
<P-111>
During the year the Division had to make extra and special effort in the
context of the Bangladesh crisis which created the stupendous refugee problem.
The unprovoked Pakistani attack on India on 3 December, 1971 and the conflict
that followed made it necessary to gear our resources to meet the challenge of
global publicity.
Maintaining regular and brisk press relations through proper briefing, and
clarification of the Government policies to the press in Delhi has resulted in
our case receiving objective and sympathetic coverage in the world press as well
as the Indian press. Briefing of the press is done daily when the Parliament is
not in session. Even while Parliament is in session, the spokesman has to be
available for consultation/clarification/verification, etc. of the news about
events in India, and the world. Coordination with all the Secretaries and the
Heads of Divisions in the Ministry of External Affairs and senior officers of
other Ministries/Departments was maintained. Besides regular day-today
briefings, special briefings in depth were arranged for specialists and
commentators whose interest transcends day-to-day news.
Reception and hospitality was arranged for visiting correspondents,
journalists, TV teams, and press delegations. Logistic facilities were provided
to 426 foreign journalists, radio and TV teams from countries abroad. Press,
Radio and TV delegations from foreign countries were invited to visit India for
which local hospitality was extended to 57 journalists during this year.
Facilities were also provided to 73 Indian journalists to visit foreign
countries during the period. Two Indian journalists, namely, Shri Giri Lal Jain
of the Times of India and Shri D. V. Gandhi of Samachar Bharati visited European
countries under the Cultural Exchange Programme for 1971-72.
During the period under review, 428 press releases were issued on various
subjects. Material for press releases
<P-112>
was generally supplied by our Missions abroad and by the Territorial Divisions
of the Ministry. The material from these releases was made use of by
representatives of mass media, both Indian and foreign, besides the Transmission
Unit of the External Publicity Division.
For the dissemination of our publicity and information material, special
steps were taken to ensure that the material reaches our Missions promptly and
within hours of events taking place here. For quick transmission of news, we
maintain a network of teleprinter links with 63 Missions abroad. It is our
intention to increase this network in a phased manner. Besides this, there are

also two-way telex links with 23 of our important Missions. Two transmissions
per day are sent from Headquarters to Missions abroad which are linked through
teleprinter facilities. To other Missions these are sent by telex or by press
cables as also by diplomatic bags. The teleprinter link with our Missions abroad
is used for transmitting news, policy statements and background material about
India. All news about the struggle in Bangladesh, the views expressed by foreign
countries and in India and the opinions of the prominent leaders of the world
were highlighted through these daily transmissions. With effect from 3 December,
1971, when Pakistan launched an armed aggression on India, an extra transmission
at midnight covering important developments on the war front was also sent. On
the basis of these transmissions, our publicity posts abroad were able to issue
daily news bulletins and news digests in English and other local languages.
The World Press Review bulletin was issued daily by the External Publicity
Division, based on cables despatches, etc. received from our Missions abroad. It
contained, news, comments and editorials of the foreign press relating to the
news items of interest to India. The mass of press clippings received from
Missions abroad are screened, analysed and used in the World Press Review.
<P-113>
A volume of "Bangladesh Documents" (719 pages) putting together all the
documentation on the Bangladesh Crisis from the beginning until 31 August, 1971
was published, and provides the principal source of primary information on this
subject. The book has received applause and appreciation in the press and media
both in India and abroad. 10,000 copies of this book were produced and
distributed, as well as put on sale in the open market. The production unit of
the Division is responsible for arranging procurement, production and
distribution of feature articles, photo features and printed literature on
various aspects of current problems and maintained a continuous flow of material
to our Missions abroad. Besides, photo features, 23 feature articles were
prepared and sent to our Missions during the period under review. These were in
addition to the supply of feature articles supplied by the Press Information
Bureau. India's steady advancement in economic and industrial spheres was the
principal theme of these articles. They also provided a glimpse of India's
heritage and social and cultural life.
During the year under review, the production unit produced 35 pamphlets. 110
newspapers and journals were supplied to our Missions abroad. Foreign language
versions of the following pamphlets were produced for distribution for our
Missions: India Today-Basic Facts; Panorma of Indian Civilisation; Changing Face
of India; and, India (a prestigious and pictorial book).
Approximately 4562 books were supplied to the libraries in Missions abroad
during the period under review. The regular publications of the Division are
Foreign Affairs Record (monthly), Indian and Foreign Review (Fortnightly) and
its French language version (fortnightly). The Indian Missions abroad brought
out about 72 regular periodicals for local distribution.
<P-114>
Extensive use was made of the audio visual medium to project an objective
image of India abroad and to counter adverse propaganda. The Missions are

normally provided with 16 mm projectors for screening documentary films. During
the period under review, more than 1600 prints of various documentary films were
supplied to our Missions abroad. Out of 61 documentary films previewed, 42 were
selected and distributed abroad through our Missions. The Films Division, Bombay
has completed the production of two documentary films in colour on behalf of
this Ministry. These are "Bhutan" and "Muslim Religious Life in India". Six more
films are in various stages of production.
To impress upon foreign audiences the gigantic problem created by the West
Pakistani military junta in Bangladesh resulting in the mass exodus of millions
of people to India, the External Publicity Division supplied to our Missions
abroad the following five documentary films for wide publicity: "Refugees 1971";
"A Time of Terror"; "Loot and Lust"; "Thus Began the Tragedy"; and "Exodus and
After". Three other films are under production, reproduction and distribution.
Apart from these documentary films, special Indian News Reels produced by
the Films Division on the subject were also supplied to important Missions
abroad.
Preparation of 16 mm prints and of ten selected documentary films in colour
is now in progress for supply to our Missions. Steps have also been taken for
the preparation and supply of ten more documentary films, in colour, in 16 mm
version. Proposals for the presentation of about 52 documentary films to various
foreign governments and institutions have been approved and action is being
taken for their supply abroad.
During the period under review, the Films Division were asked to make
compilation films on the visits of Prime Ministers of Canada, Tanzania, Fiji and
Guyana; H.M. the
<P-115>
King and Crown Prince of Bhutan, and H.M. the King and Queen of Tonga to
India. Extensive newsreel coverage was arranged on the visits of the President
of Singapore, Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, President Tito, Mrs. Marcos,
wife of the President of the Philippines, and Mr. Gromyko on the occasion of the
signing of the Indo-Soviet Peace Treaty to India and our President's visit to
Singapore and our Prime Minister's visit to Europe and the U.S.A.
Five prints each in 16 mm (Hindi version) of feature films "Satyakam" and
"Ashirvad" and one print of film "Nandanvan" (Gujarati version) have been
purchased by this Division for non-commercial distribution through Missions
abroad.
The following audio visual equipment was supplied to our Indian Missions
abroad: One 16 mm film projector each to Rome, New York (CGI), Lusaka, Muscat,
Ulan Bator, Budapest and Hongkong; one 35 mm film projector to Kathmandu; a
radio set to Sophia; a tape recorder to Santiago and a rado-cum-tape-cum-record
player to Sanaa. 76 L. P. gramophone records were supplied to Indian Missions
abroad during the period under report.
Photographs of current events were regularly supplied to all our Missions
abroad. During the year, more than 45,000 photographs, including 4,200

enlargements, on various subjects were supplied to our Missions for publicity
and display purposes. Besides, 15,752 photographs were supplied on atrocities
committed in Bangladesh by the West Pakistan army and on refugees who flooded
into India escaping from Pakistani torture. 700 slides on refugees were also
sent to our Missions abroad. The enormous refugee problem and the herculean
efforts made by the Government of India to give reasonable facilities by way of
shelter, food, clothing and medicines to the 10 million refugees were the
subject matter of these refugee photographs and slides.
<P-116>
In the matter of improvement of cultural relations there is a constant
endeavour to create better understanding and goodwill with foreign countries for
formulation and implementation of policy of improved cultural relations. All our
Missions are equipped with libraries with latest books on Indian culture,
heritage and developments in India. These attract local people especially the
students community. These libraries are also supplied with important Indian
magazines, journals and Indian newspapers and audio visual equipment.
We participated for the second time in the That Luang Festival in Laos, for
which the required exhibits were sent to our Mission there. Photographs, slides,
films, articles etc. on the theme of Ramayana were sent to our Mission in
Djakarta for use in the International Ramayana Festival held there in AugustSeptember, 1971. 12 mounted exhibition size photographs and 16 drawings on
refugees from Bangladesh were sent to our Mission in Caracas. During the period
under report, photographs and other exhibition material were sent to our
Missions in Paris, London, Manila, Beirut and Kuala Lumpur for the following
exhibitions respectively: All the World's Children; East Comes to West;
Children's Exhibition; International Exhibition of Dolls in Cyprus; and IslamIts Contribution Towards Development of Science and Technology.
One piece of Lord Buddha's image in Sarnath style was sent to our Mission in
Bangkok for the Mohamukt University.
Indian musical instruments were sent to our Missions in nairobi and Sanaa
for presentation to local institutions. More than 150 tapes were sent to various
Missions abroad.
A Secretaries' Committee on External Publicity gives the necessary
directives and guidelines in this context. It is the apex inter-Ministry body
for policy-formulation and giving direction.
<P-117>
INDIA
USA BANGLADESH PAKISTAN BHUTAN CANADA FIJI TANZANIA GUYANA TONGA REPUBLIC
OF SINGAPORE PHILIPPINES ITALY OMAN ZAMBIA HUNGARY MONGOLIA NEPAL CHILE
LAOS INDONESIA CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC VENEZUELA FRANCE LEBANON MALAYSIA
UNITED KINGDOM CYPRUS KENYA

Date :

Jan 01, 1972

CULTURAL CENTRES
The desire to project its culture abroad is common to all countries. However,
India has an added compulsion too, to the communities of Indian origin abroad
which desire to maintain their cultural and emotional links with India.
In order further to develop our cultural relations with friendly foreign
countries definite steps have been taken to expand the scope and content of the
activities of the Indian Council for Cultural Relations. The existing activities
of the Council which have been strengthened include the visits to India of
distinguished scholars, writers and artists from foreign countries, visits of
Indian scholars abroad, exchange of cultural delegations, performances of
visiting musicians and dance troupes, organising foreign art exhibitions in
India and sending Indian exhibitions abroad, sending Indian professors and
lecturers to foreign academic institutions for teaching Indian subjects,
presentation of books and objects d'art to various institutions and
personalities abroad, publication of books on Indian cultural themes,
translation of Indian literature into foreign languages, conducting essay
competitions on Indian subjects in other countries, looking after the welfare of
foreign students in India etc.
With a view to cater to the cultural wants of communities of Indian origin
abroad as well as to project Indian culture to interested foreigners the Council
has undertaken various new schemes. Indian cultural centres will soon
<P-118>
open in San Francisco (United States), Suva (Fiji) and Georgetown (Guyana). In
the next financial year, it is planned to open similar cultural centres in Kuala
Lumpur (Malaysia), Tehran (Iran) and Lima (Peru). It is expected that these
centres will create increased awareness in foreign countries of Indian culture
and heritage and also of the profound developments that have taken and are
taking place in the political, social, cultural and economic fields in India.
The ICCR also plans to establish Centres and Chairs of Indian Studies in
foreign universities in order to provide opportunities to the educated young men
and women in foreign countries to develop a better understanding and
appreciation of India. At present, the ICCR has such chairs of Indian Studies in
Iran, Laos, Singapore, Trinidad, Rumania and Yugoslavia. Another chair is to be
established in Poland. Three Centres of Indian Studies are being established in
Indonesia, Afghanistan and Lebanon.
The work regarding the establishment of the Academic Exchange Unit has been
started. Modalities regarding work on the orientation of Indian scholars going
abroad and foreign scholars coming to India are also being worked out.
The uniform framework for the regulation and review of foreign cultural
centres, other than branches of foreign missions in places where they have
diplomatic or consular representation was finalised and circulated to all

foreign diplomatic and consular missions in September 1971. The framework
provides for the promotion of activities of the cultural institutions of
friendly foreign countries in accordance with national requirements. Under its
terms a Central Cultural Committee of the Government of India will review and
regulate the activities of such centres and the ICCR
<P-119>
will be actively associated with its functioning. The precise extent of
association of the ICCR will be determined by a Central Committee in the context
of the particular requirements of each case.
The Nomination Scheme under which the Ministry has been assisting for the
past several years self-financing students from developing countries in Africa
and Asia in securing admission to medical and engineering colleges in India, was
continued during the year. In 1971, the Ministry arranged the admission of a
total of 207 such foreign students to Indian medical and engineering colleges.
Of these students, 61 joined medical colleges and 146 went to engineering
colleges. 41 of these students were from Africa, 53 from West Asia, 51 from
South East Asia and 62 from other countries.
The demand from foreign students to avail of the facilities offered by the
Government of India for medical and engineering courses is steadily increasing.
Unfortunately, however, in view of the limited number of reserved seats made
available for the Scheme, a large number of students who are otherwise well
qualified have to be refused admission every year. Efforts are being made to
increase the number of seats in consultation with the authorities concerned.
<P-120>
INDIA
USA FIJI GUYANA IRAN MALAYSIA PERU LAOS REPUBLIC OF SINGAPORE YUGOSLAVIA
POLAND AFGHANISTAN INDONESIA LEBANON

Date :

Jan 01, 1972

PROTOCOL MATTERS
During the year under report, the royal Government of Bhutan established
diplomatic relations with India and His Excellency Lyonpo Pema Wangchhuck,
Representative of Bhutan to India (Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary)
presented his Letter of Credence to the President on 17 May, 1971.
The Government of Guyana also established diplomatic relations with India
and His Excellency Mr. John Carter, High Commissioner for Guyana to the United
Kingdom and concurrently accredited as his country's High Commissioner to India,
presented his Letter of Commission to the President on 24 April, 1971.

The Government of Pakistan closed down their Deputy High Commission in
Calcutta, following which the Deputy High Commission of India in Dacca was
closed. This was followed subsequently by rupture of diplomatic relations
between India and Pakistan and the closure of the two countries' Missions in
each other's territory. By mutual agreement, the Government of Switzerland has
been entrusted with the responsibility of looking after the interests of the two
countries in each other's territory.
Following the recognition extended by the Government of India to the
Government of the Gana Prajatantri Bangladesh, the latter established in
December 1971 its Mission in New Delhi, which has been named Mission of the Gana
Prajatantri Bangladesh (People's Republic of Bangladesh). Mr. H. R. Choudhury
has been appointed Chief of the Mission.
<P-121>
The Government of Gabon proposed to establish diplomatic relations with
India by concurrent accreditation. The proposal has been agreed to in principle.
The Government of Iceland established consular relations with India and Mr.
Deepnarayan Krishnarao Hirlekar was appointed on 10 August, 1971 as Honorary
Consul of Iceland in Bombay.
The Government of Philippines proposed to close down their Consulate General
in Bombay and replace it with the "Philippines Foreign Trade Office" with effect
from December, 1971.
The Imperial Government of Iran established their Consulate General at
Hyderabad and Mr. Mohammad Taghi Moqtaderi assumed charge as Consul General with
effect from 20 July, 1971.
The total number of Diplomatic Missions in India is 78. A list of the
Diplomatic Missions in India and Sub-offices of the High Commissions is given at
Appendix IV.
The total number of Consular Posts at present is 111. A list of Consular
Posts is given at Appendix V.
A list of visits of foreign V.I.Ps. to India handled by Protocol Division
upto November, 1971 is also attached at Appendix VI.
<P-122>
BHUTAN
INDIA GUYANA CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC PAKISTAN SWITZERLAND USA BANGLADESH
GABON ICELAND PHILIPPINES IRAN

Date :

May 17, 1971

PASSPORT, VISA AND CONSULAR SERVICES
For the convenience of the public, and generally with a view to streamlining
procedures for the processing of applications for the issue of travel documents,
the Passports Rules, 1967, were revised and brought up-to-date.
Further, in deference to popular demand, it was decided to make Indian
passports initially valid for five years and renewable for a further period of
five years, as from 1 December, 1971. The total life of an Indian passport was,
thus, increased from the previous 3/6 years to 5/10 years. This measures is also
expected to bring about some economy in the working of the passport
organization.
The list of persons entitled to official passports was revised to include a
larger number of officials of Government undertakings, etc., in order to assist
them in functioning more effectively, in their respective spheres of activity,
when they have to proceed abroad on duty.
The number of passport applications carried over from the previous year, and
those received during 1971, by the passport authorities in India, was 1,74,407.
Against this, 1,45,838 passports were issued. The percentage of rejected
applications was a little more than .03 per cent of the total number of
applications received. Less than 29,000 applications were awaiting disposal at
the end of 1971, pending completion of certain formalities. At Headquarters,
2,793 official passports, 687 diplomatic passports and 3.007 visas were issued.
<P-123>
Special instructions were issued to Indian Missions in the United Kingdom,
Burma and Thailand to render prompt assistance to the large number of persons of
Indian origin there, who were prima facie entitled to "Indian Citizenship", in
obtaining proper Indian travel documents.
In view of the press reports, in the latter part of 1970, about the
exploitation and or maltreatment of young Indian girls, who had gone abroad for
training as nurses or for religious studies, instructions were issued to all
passport authorities to scrutinize and verify with extra care the personal
particulars of such applicants, as also the sponsorship documents, etc.,
submitted by them.
The Protectors of Emigrants at air and sea ports registered, under the
Emigration Act, 1922, the departure of 1,850 skilled workers during 1971, most
of whom went to the Gulf area and the East African countries.
The Regional Passport Offices in India received Rs. 27,46,536 in the way of
fees for the issue of passports, etc., during the period January-December 1971.
Broadly speaking, the Consular Division deals with cases of repatriation,
deportation of Indian nationals from foreign countries, extradition of fugitive
offenders from India to foreign countries and vice-versa under the Extradition
Act, 1962 etc. It arranges to afford financial assistance and relief to Indian
nationals stranded abroad, assist Indian nationals in tracing the whereabouts of

their relatives either in India or abroad, and deal with cases of estates of the
deceased Indian nationals abroad and foreign nationals in India. It is
responsibile for guiding the Indian Missions/Posts abroad on consular work, in
addition to offering assistance and advice on consular matters to the foreign
Missions in India. It authenticates documents required in foreign countries. It
also perform consular and quasi-consular functions on behalf of a few
Commonwealth countries, at the request of those Governments, who do not have
their resident Missions in India.
<P-124>
India is looking after the consular and quasi-consular functions of Jamaica,
Malta and Malawi on behalf of their respective Governments. This work is being
handled by the Consular Division.
Reciprocal arrangements with foreign countries in respect of service of
summons in civil cases, execution of decrees, examination of witnesses in
criminal cases and enforcement of maintenance orders etc., are processed in this
Division. For example, the following reciprocal arrangements are being pursued
by the Division:
(i) for service of summons under Section 29(c) and Rule 26(b) of Order V
of the First Schedule to the Civil Procedure Code, 1908 with the Federal
Republic of Germany, Hong Kong, Switzerland, New Zealand and Thailand and
revision of existing arrangements with Nepal;
(ii) to revise the existing reciprocal arrangements under Section 3 of
the Maintenance Orders Enforcement Act, 1921 with Australia, Tanzania; Uganda;
Malaysia; Malawi; Zambia; Lesotho and Botswana. Action is also being taken for
the conclusion of reciprocal arrangements under this Act with Nepal, Sikkim,
France and Canada;
(iii) for the Execution of Decrees under Section 44A of the Civil
Procedure Code, 1908 with Japan, Nepal, Australia and Thailand;
(iv) for the Examination of witnesses on Commission in criminal cases
under Sections 504(3) and 508A of the Criminal Procedure Code, 1898 with Nepal,
Cameroon, Czechoslovakia, Sierra Leone, Liberia, Aden, Malaysia and the Federal
Republic of Germany;
<P-125>
(v) under Section 14 of the Notaries Act, 1952 with Czechoslovakia,
Canada, Greece and the U.S.A.;
(vi) under Section 57 of the Administrator General's Act, 1963 with
Kuwait;
(vii) under the Extradition Act, 1962 with Ceylon, Ghana, Malaysia,
Federal Republic of Germany, Liberia, Lesotho, Thailand, the Netherlands and
France. Reciprocal arrangements under this Act have already been made with
Australia and Singapore.

During the period under review the different types of consular work done by
the Division are as follows:
(i) one person has been extradited from France to India and another from
India to Sikkim. 14 cases of extradition of fugitive offenders from or to India
were initiated;
(ii) 149 cases of deportation of Indian nationals from other countries
and 28 cases of arrest of Indian nationals abroad were dealt with;
(iii) 14 letters of Request and Commission for Examination of Witnesses
abroad were forwarded to the authorities concerned after scrutiny. Also, 22
summons and 3 Maintenance Orders and other processes which were sent to the
concerned authorities for servicing and execution were dealt with;
(iv) 1990 judicial and commercial documents including births, deaths,
marriage and educational certificates and Power of Attorney etc., for use
abroad, were attested;
(v) 53 cases of estates and properties of Indians abroad and 9 cases of
foreigners in India in respect of their properties were dealt with;
<P-126>
(vi) 83 destitute Indian nationals were repatriated from foreign
countries by our Missions/Posts abroad, at public expense, at a total
expenditure of Rs. 92,284.70. Efforts are being made through the State
Governments concerned to recover this amount from the repatriates/guarantors.
(vii) A total sum of Rs. 2,662.57 was advanced against undertaking to
repay the amount to 12 Indian citizens by our Missions/Posts abroad to tide over
their temporary difficulties which arose due to unforeseen circumstances, e.g.
theft, illness, delay in the departure of ships or because their travellers'
cheques were not endorsed for the country where they were stranded;
(viii) 168 cases for the grant of Indian citizenship, referred to by the
Ministry of Home Affairs, were scrutinised in addition to examination of 121
references received from our Missions/Posts abroad as well as foreign Missions
in India. These figures include requests for Indian citizenship received from
persons of Goan origin who failed to surrender their foreign passports within
the stipulated time for being recognised as Indian citizens. 601 cases received
from PV Division in respect of persons who had applied for Indian travel
documents were also examined;
(ix) 35 cases of marriages, desertion, bigamy etc., and 69 cases of
enquiries regarding whereabouts and welfare of Indian nationals abroad and
foreign nationals in India were dealt with;
(x) Reports of death of 26 Indian nationals abroad were received and
necessary action taken. 98 cases of deaths of foreign nationals in India were
reported to the concerned foreign Missions in India.
<P-127>

(xi) 59 cases relating to complaints against Indians abroad and
foreigners in India and against Indian firms and vice-versa and recovery of
outstanding dues from Indians abroad were handled. 199 cases regarding issue of
certificates of birth, death, marriages, etc., and 153 cases pertaining to the
verification of dates of birth, death etc. were dealt with. 30 requests for "No
obligation to Return to India" certificates required by Indian students residing
in Canada/U.S.A. who wanted to settle down in these countries, were processed.
56 cases relating to the settlement of claims of Indian citizens for pay,
pension, gratuity, etc., against foreign Governments were received and taken up
with the respective foreign Governments through diplomatic channels.
(xii) During the period 1942-47, a sum of Rs. 7,18,03,561 was advanced to
the evacuees from War Zones during World War II on repayable basis.
Recovery/write-off of deserving cases are being made by the concerned State
Governments/Missions abroad. Efforts are being made to recover the outstanding
balance from the evacuees through the State Governments and Missions concerned
and to write off the irrecoverable amount.
The work on preparation of 'Consuler Manual' has been finalised and printed
copies of the Manual are now available.
<P-128>
INDIA
USA CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC MALI BURMA THAILAND JAMAICA MALAWI MALTA
GERMANY HONG KONG NEW ZEALAND SWITZERLAND NEPAL AUSTRALIA TANZANIA
UGANDA BOTSWANA LESOTHO MALAYSIA ZAMBIA CANADA FRANCE JAPAN CAMEROON
LIBERIA NORWAY SIERRA LEONE SLOVAKIA GREECE KUWAIT GHANA THE NETHERLANDS
REPUBLIC OF SINGAPORE

Date :

Dec 01, 1971

ADMINISTRATION
Sardar Swaran Singh was the Minister of External Affairs throughout the year.
Shri S. Krishnamurthi, on his appointment as High Commissioner to Australia,
handed over charge of his post of Secretary (West) to Shri P. N. Menon, until
then Additional Secretary and Foreign Service Inspector. Shri Avtar Singh,
Additional Secretary (Administration) was given the additional duties of Foreign
Service Inspector and Shri N. P. Alexander was appointed Joint Secretary
(Administration).
India now has 109 resident Missions (excluding 4 Trade Missions under the
Ministry of Foreign Trade and the Special Office in Sikkim) with a total
strength of 560 officers and 2698 staff members including locally-recruited
staff. These Missions carry Indian representation to 177 capitals and cities,

including those of concurrent accreditation. A list of Indian Missions and Posts
is given in Appendix VIII.
The Indian Deputy High Commission in Dacca ceased functioning in March,
1971, when the war of liberation started in East Bengal. following the
declaration of war by Pakistan on India, the Indian High Commission in Islamabad
and Deputy High Commission in Karachi also ceased to function in December, 1971.
Our personnel in these three Missions could not immediately come away, but they
were all ultimately able to do so. A Branch Secretariat of the Ministry was
opened in Calcutta in May, 1971 to coordinate the work relating to relief and
rehabilitation of the refugees from East Bengal.
<P-129>
On the recognition of Bangladesh by India, a separate Bangla Desh Division
was set up in the Ministry. An Indian Embassy was also opened in Dacca, and Shri
S. Dutt, Indian Ambassador, presented his credentials to the President of
Bangladesh on 16-2-1972.
Our Trade Representation in Berlin (GDR) has been raised to a Consulate
General; a resident Ambassador has taken up his post in Tripoli; our Consulate
General in Hanoi and Muscat and the Trade Agency at Babrain have been upgraded
to Embassies, while the Trade Agency in Dubai is being upgraded to a Consulate
General. It has also been decided to open Embassies in Abu Dhabi and Qatar, an
Assistant High Commission in Penang and a Consulate General in Cheing Mai in
Thailand. Administrative control of the Missions in Berlin (GDR), Tripoli and
Bahrain has been transferred to this Ministry from the Ministry of Foreign
Trade.
This was a year of an intense political work by our Missions abroad.
Instructions have also been sent regarding the courteous reception of visitors,
Indian and foreign, to our Missions abroad.
The normal expenditure of the Ministry during 1971-72 is estimated to be Rs.
5273.44 lakhs as below:
Rs. in lakes
(a) External Affairs
Missions/Posts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .1233.00
Headquarters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 278.55
Other Items
Contribution to the United Nations. . . . . . . 241.47
Contribution to Commonwealth Secretariat . . . . . . .11.86
Contribution to Commonwealth Foundation . . . . . . . .4.45
Central Passport & Emigration Organisation . . . . . .24.90
Other miscellaneous items (Hospitality Fund of India,
demarcation of boundaries, Indian Delegations to the
International Commissions in Indo-China, Delegations
to International Conferences, contributions for relief
of human suffering in other countries, etc.) . . . .1279.58
------TOTAL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3073.81
-------

<P-130>
(b)

Other Revenue Expenditure

AID
Aid to Sikkim . . . . . . .

369.00

Aid to Bhutan . . . . . .

715.00

Aid to Nepal . . . . . . .

939.71

Aid to other Developing countries in Asia and Africa. 100.00
Other Items.
Indian Co-operation Mission Directorate (Nepal). .
Expenditure on Displaced Persons. . . . . . .

21.05

Grant-in-Aid to Indian Council for Cultural Relations
Contribution to Atlee Memorial . . . . . .
Miscellaneous . . . . . . . . . . .
TOTAL . . . . .

13.19

19.46

3.46

18.76
----2199.63
-------

In addition to the above, an expenditure of Rs. 400 lakhs in anticipated on
account of assistance to Bangladesh to enable it to meet the shortage of
essential commodities and to rehabilitate its shattered economy.
Details of sub-head wise expenditure on Headquarters, Missions/Posts abroad
and on External Publicity are given in Appendix IX.
The expenditure of Rs. 12.33 crores on our Missions/Posts abroad is quite
small compared to the total expenditure of about 240.00 crores incurred on
Administrative Services from the Central Revenues: it works out to 0.5 per cent
of the Government's total disbursements from revenue.
India plays an important role in international affairs and requires wide
representation abroad for the promotion of her interests. Our Missions have the
minimum complement of staff and run at a low cost compared to the Missions of
most other countries. In pursuance of the Prime
<P-131>
Minister's directive to economise to the maximum extent possible in Non-Plan
expenditure, this Ministry has made reductions in the number of posts, cut down
Foreign Allowances, and restricted the grant of home-leave passages.
In order to give incentives for efficient performance, promotions to

Selection Grades of the I.F.S. and from the I.F.S.(B) to I.F.S.(A) are made
solely on merit. For lower grades, promotion is on the basis of seniority-cummerit.
The I.F.S. Committee (Pillai Committee) had recommended that, taking all
factors into consideration, an expansion of the I.F.S. cadre to about 550 over a
period of 10 years was necessary. This target has not been reached, the present
strength being only 467. Further expansion could not take place mainly because
of financial reasons. During the year 1971-72, three I.F.S. officers were
working in the Department of Economic Affairs, Ministry of Finance, while seven
were working in the Ministry of Foreign Trade. One officer was on the Senior
Instructing Staff of the National Defence College, and two were among the
officer-trainees. It was not possible to depute more I.F.S. officers to work in
other Ministries/Departments of the Government of India due to the shortage of
hands.
No progress could be made in setting up a Directorate of Training in this
Ministry. The economy drive and shortage of personnel and accommodation are the
main factors responsible for this. However, training programmes are being
operated by the concerned Personnel Sections in the Ministry.
The Foreign Service Inspectors inspected our Missions in Suva, Wellington,
Canberra, Tokyo, Kobe, Sydney, Hong Kong and Saigon during the year, and made a
number of recommendations regarding staffing patterns, reorganization of work,
foreign allowances, etc.
<P-132>
A welfare set-up exists in the Ministry to look after the general welfare of
all those serving at Headquarters and abroad. It tries to solve some of the
special problems arising from the obligation to serve abroad, but the major
difficulties, such as children's education, lack of accommodation while posted
in India, remain in large measure. The proposal to start a Departmental Canteen
in the Ministry could also not be implemented due to lack of space.
Efforts are being made to promote and increase the use of Hindi in the
official work of the Ministry as well as of our Missions abroad. The number of
letters issued by this Ministry from 1 January, 1971 to 30 September, 1971
showed a 40 per cent increase over the corresponding figures in 1970.
Arrangements have been made for holding Hindi classes in Accra, Colombo, London,
Sydney and Tokyo. A scheme for the propagation and promotion of Hindi in Ceylon,
Fiji, Guyana, Kenya, Malaysia, Mauritius, Nepal, Surinam, Thailand and Trinidad,
where the numbers of Indians or of people of Indian origin are quite sizeable,
has been prepared by the Ministry of Education and Social Welfare. The Ministry
of External Affairs, in implementation of this scheme, has already created posts
of Hindi Officers in our Missions in Fiji, Mauritius and Trinidad.
<P-135>
AUSTRALIA
USA INDIA CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC PAKISTAN BANGLADESH GERMANY LIBYA OMAN
VIETNAM QATAR UNITED ARAB EMIRATES THAILAND BAHRAIN CHINA BHUTAN NEPAL FIJI

NEW ZEALAND HONG KONG JAPAN GHANA SRI LANKA UNITED KINGDOM GUYANA KENYA
MALAYSIA MAURITIUS

Date :

Dec 01, 1971

Appendix I: INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCES,
CONGRESSES, SEMINARS, ETC. IN WHICH INDIA
PARTICIPATED IN 1971-1972.
A. ABROAD
1.

Seminar on UNIDO Operations held in Vienna from 4 March-2 April, 1971

2. Meeting to promote Industrial Projects in Asia held in Singapore in
November, 1971.
3. Expert Group Meeting on Industrial Co-operatives held in Warsaw (Poland)
from 30 August to 3 September, 1971.
4. WIPO-Diplomatic Conference on the revision of the Berne Convention for the
Protection of Literary and Artistic Works, Paris 5-24 July, 1971.
5. Symposium on the participation of Youth in the 2nd UN Development Decade
at Geneva from 27 September-7 October, 1971.
6. UNIDO Expert Group Meeting on Processing of Selected Tropical Fruits and
Vegetables for Export to Premium Markets from 25 to 29 October, 1971 in
Salvador, Bolivia, Brazil.
7. UNIDO Expert Group Meeting on More Effective Utilisation of Industrial
Research in Developing Countries from 23-27 August, 1971, in Copenhagen
(Denmark).
8. Meeting of the Ad Hoc Group of Experts on Projector and Planning
Cartography convened by UN in New York, in November, 1971.
9. Working Group Meeting on the use of Plastics in Building Industry
organised by UNIDO from 20 to 25 September, 1971.
10. Indian delegation to Abidjan Meeting organised by UNIDO in collaboration
with ADB and ECA held from 24 November to 1 December, 1971.
11.

APC Workshop Meeting (Eleventh) in Hong Kong from 9 to 12 February, 1971.

12. VIIth International Congress of the World Feredation of Halmophila held
in Tehran from 17 to 20 May, 1971.
13.

Fourth General Session of the AARRO Conference held in Accra, Ghana, from

8 to 15 October, 1971.
<P-136>
14. Meetings. of ISO/TL 115/SL 1-Pump Dimensions SC 2-Methods of Measurement
and Testing & SC 3 Contractual requirements held in Milan from 10-14 May, 1971.
15. Indian Delegation to the 36th Annual General Meetings of the
International Electro-technical Commission held in Brussels & Badan from 9-27
January, 1971.
16. APO Syposium on Agricultural Chemicals held in Tokyo from 7-13 December,
1971.
17. WIPO-International Conference of States, Geneva, 18-29 October, 1971 for
consideration of a draft convention for the Protection of Producers of
Phonograms against unauthorized Duplicates.
18. Symposium on Agricultural Chemical in Japan from 7-13 December 1971-26th
Session.
19.

ICAO-Diplomatic Conference held in Montreal in September, 1971.

20.

6th Extraordinary Session of the IMCO Council held in October in London.

21. International Conference on Special Trade Passenger Ships held in London
from 27 September-4 October, 1971 under IMCO.
22. World Plan Committee for the International Telecommunication Net-work
held in Venice, Italy from 11-22 October, 1971.
23. ICAO Council Meeting held in October 1971 to discuss the interpretation
of Article 86 of the Convention on International Civil Aviation.
24. 9th Informal Meeting of Directors of Civil Aviation for Asia and South
Pacific held at Bangkok from 15-19 November, 1971.
25. IMCO Meeting of Experts from India, UK and IMCO Secretariat held at
London from 13-19 December, 1971.
26. 27th Session of the International Organisation Committee of World Mining
Congress held in Moscow in April, 1971.
27. XIth Biennial of Sao Paulo held in Brazil during September-November,
1971.
28. First World Congress for Women held in Copenhagen in August-September,
1971.
29. International Seminar on Vocational Education held in Berlin from 18
March-8 April, 1971.
30. International Conference on Research Utilization concerning vocational
rehabilitation held in Washington (USA) from 1-18 June, 1971.

31. International Symposium on Social Welfare Research held in USA 23 May-12
June, 1971.
<P-137>
32. International Research Seminar on Vocational Rehabilitation of the
Mentally retarded held in USA 5-26 June, 1971.
33. Committee on Governmental Experts on problems in the field of copyright
and of the protection of performers, producers of Phonograms and broadcasting
organizations, raised by transmission in a Space satellites held at France from
21-30 April, 1971.
34. Inter-Regional Seminar on Photogrammetic Techniques held in Zurich,
Switzerland from 15 March to 3 April 1971.
35.

World Hunting Exhibition held at Budapest in August-September, 1971.

36.

38th International P.E.N. Congres held in Dublin 12-18 September, 1971.

37. Fourth International Conference on Educational Radio & Television held in
Geneva in February, 1971.
38. Meeting of Governmental Experts on the Protection of Phonograms held at
Paris from 1-5 March, 1971.
39.

Symposium on Ecology held in USA from 22-27 February, 1971.

40. 12th meeting of the Inter-Governmental Oceanographic Commission Bureau
and Consulative Council Academy held in France, 1-6 March, 1971.
41. International Colloquian on the Exploitation of the Oceans "Occanex pr"
held in France, 8-14 March, 1971.
42. Planning Conference at Centre for Comparative Studies in Technological
Development and Social Change held in USA in March, 1971.
43. XIV Congress of the International Association for Hydrological Research
held in Paris from 29 August-3 September, 1971.
44. Spring Meetings of the Inter-Parliamentary Union held in Venezuela during
April, 1971.
45. Meetings of ISO/TS 34 SC-3 Fruits vegetables & their Derived Products and
its Working Group held at Paris, 8-16 March, 1971.
46. 22nd Meeting of the International Commission on Irrigation and Drainage
held in London in June, 1971.
47. XV Congress of International Union of Forestry Research Organisations
held at Florida, USA from 14-20 March, 1971.
48.

International Seminar on Manpower in Economci Development held in Berlin

in March/April, 1971.
<P-138>
49. Meeting of the Expert Committee on Insecticides (Chemistry and
Specifications) held at Geneva from 19-23 April, 1971.
50. 40th Central Assembly of the International Criminal Police Organization
held in Ottowa, From 6-11 September, 1971.
51. XXIX International Competition of Artistic Ceramics held in Italy 25 July
to 10 October, 1971.
52. Meeting of IMO Working Group on the preparation of long-term plan in
Hydrology held in France, 22-26 March, 1971.
53.

Meeting of Earthquake Experts held in San Francisco from 19-25 May, 1971.

54. XV International Congress of Administrative Sciences held in Rome from 611 September, 1971.
55. Meetings of the Standing Committee (Planning) and the Commonwealth
Telecommunications Council held in Trinidad in March/April, 1971.
56. Third International Congress of the Museums of Agriculture in Rome from
6-11 September, 1971.
57. CCITT Study Group XV meeting held at Geneva from 21 March to 5 April,
1971.
58. Symposium on the Biology of the Indian Ocean held at Kiel, W. Germany
from 30 March-16 April, 1971.
59. International Seminar on Settlement & promotion of Small and Medium
Industry held in Berlin from 14 April to 7 May, 1971.
60. 50th Session of the UNIDROIT Governing Council held at Rome from 26 to 29
April, 1971.
61. FAO/IAEA Second International Training Course on the use of Rediation and
other Meetagen Treatments for Crop Improvement from 2 June to 10 July, 1971, in
Sweden.
62. 16th International Seed Testing, Congress held at Washington from 4-12
June, 1971.
63. International Symposium on Ecology, Behaviour and Conservation of the
World Cats at Lion Country Safari (California) from 15-17 March, 1971.
64. Expert working Group on Population Research held at Paris from 3-11 June,
1971.
65. International Dairy Federation Seminar on milks other than cows milk held
in Spain from 26 to 30 April, 1971.

66. Third International Congress on Date Processing in Europe held in Austria
from 4-8 April, 1971.
<P-139>
67. Third International Conference of Farm Machinery held at Zarajoza (Spain)
from 15-17 April, 1971.
68. Expert Working Group Meeting on Pulp & paper held in Vienna from 13-17
September, 1971.
69.

International Solar Conference held in USA from 10-14 May, 1971.

70. Third International Conference of Women Engineers & Scientists held in
Turin from 5-12 September, 1971.
71. International EHV DC Power Conference held in Winnipeg (Canada) from 7-10
June, 1971.
72. PAC/ILO/WHO Expert Consultation on Worker's Feeding held at Rome from 1014 May, 1971.
73. Symposium on Agriculture Institutions for integrated Rural Development
held at Rome from 21-28 June, 1971.
74. Eighth Plenary Session of the World Energy Conference held Bucharest
(Rumania) from 27 June-2 July, 1971.
75. International Advanced Study Institute on Epidemiology of Plant Diseases
held in Netherlands from 24 August to 3 September, 1971.
76. International Meeting of Regional Development held in Thessaloniki and
Athens from 6-16 June, 1971.
77. International Conference of Paediatrics held at Vienna from 29 August to
4 September, 1971.
78.

Symposium and Man-made held in USA from 3-7 May, 1971.

79. Agriculture Products Course (1) 1971 of the Economic Development
Institute held in USA from 24 May to 23 July, 1971.
80. Fourth Session of the CPC Study group on Bananas and fourth Session on
Statistics at La Martinique (Island in the Caribbean Sea) from 3 to 12 May,
1971.
81. International Solar Energy Society Conference held in USA from 8-17 May,
1971.
82. FAO/IAFA Six Weeks Study Tour on the use of Isotopes and Radiation in
Agricultural Research held in USSR from 2 August to 10 September, 1971.
83.

12th International Co-operative Seminar for Advance Co-operative Studies

held in Sweden from 3 May to 12 June, 1971.
84. 38th Session of the International Statistical Institute held in USA from
10-20 August, 1971.
85. Third World Congress for the Theory of Machines and Mechanism held in
Yugoslavia from 13-20 September, 1971.
<P-140>
86. Second Meeting of the Asian Pacific Division of the International Society
of Haematology held at Melbourne from 24-28 May, 1971.
87. 13th International Congress of Surveyors held at Wiesbaden from 1-10
September, 1971.
88. XXI International Tuberculosis Conference held in Moscow from 12-16 July,
1971.
89. Expert Committee Meeting on Solid Water Disposal and Control in Swaziland
from 14-22 July, 1971.
90. First Asian and Oceanic Congress of Radiology held in Melbourne from 2226 November, 1971.
91. International Congress of Vexillology held at Turin from 24-27 June,
1971.
92. Meeting of the Ad-hoc Working Group of the International Hydrological
Decade held in Paris from 21-24 June, 1971.
93. 4th International Congress of Cytology held in London from 23-27 May,
1971 and WHO Advisory Committee on Medical Research held in Geneva 21-26 June,
1971.
94. 30th Plenary Meeting of International Cotton Advisory Committee held in
USA from 14-23 June, 1971.
95. First Ottawa Conference on the Conceptual basis of the Classification of
knowledge held in Canada from 1 to 5 October, 1971.
96. International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry held at Washington from
14-24 July, 1971.
97. 2nd Meeting of UN Panel on Water Resources Development Policies held at
Netherlands from 30 August to 4 September, 1971.
98. International Law Association Committee on International Water Resources
law held in Canada from 17-22 May, 1971.
99. XXI International Tuberculosis Conference arranged by the International
Union Against Tuberculosis held in Moscow in July, 1971.
100.

Symposium of the Study Group on Composile Flours held in Vienna on 21

May, 1971.
101. XXIII International Agricultural Congress held in Moscow from 27 August
to 2 September, 1971.
102. Meeting of International Epidemiology Association held in Yugoslavia
from 28 August to 4 September, 1971.
103. 17th International Hospital Congress held at Dublin (Ireland) from 13-18
June, 1971.
<P-141>
104. XXV International Congress of Physiological Sciences held at Munich
(Germany) from 25-31 July, 1971.
105. Second International Congress for Virology held at Budapest from 27 June
to 3 July, 1971.
106. Meeting of the Consultation Group on the Promotion of Research in
Documentation held in Paris from 22-24 June, 1971.
107. Seminar on Progress and Prospects of Family Planning held in USA for two
weeks in June, 1971.
108. Cardiac Rehabilitation Conference held in Yugoslavia from 7-9 June,
1971.
109. Symposium on Inter-disciplinary studies of Snow and Ice in mountain
reforms held in Moscow followed by excursion from 8 August to 23 August, 1971.
110. 37th and 38th Sessions of the Customs Cooperation Council held in Vienna
from 7-11 June, 1971.
111. 4th International Congress of Human Genetics held in Paris from 6-11
September, 1971.
112. Inter-Regional Symposium on Training of Planners for Comprehensive
Regional Development held in Warsaw (Poland), from 14-28 June, 1971.
113. International Symposium on Storage of grains and its products held at
Winnipeg from 7-9 June, 1971.
114.

COSPAR Meeting and Symposia held in USA from 18 June to 2 July, 1971.

115. International Congress of Endocrinology held at California in June,
1971.
116. II International Colloquy on Traffic System held in Hamburg from 18-20
October, 1971.
117. X Meeting & III Seminar on "Sport & Leisure" held in Madrid from 18-24
October, 1971.

118. International Union of Local Authorities Congress at Toronto (Canada)
from 18-23 July, 1971.
119. 22nd Assembly of International Rubber Study Group held in Ottawa from
20-24 September, 1971.
120.

XIV World Road Congress held in Prague from 12-19 September, 1971.

121. Diplomatic Conference for the revision of the universal copyright
convention and the Berne convention for the protection of Literary and Artistic
works, at Paris from 5 to 24 July, 1971.
122. 24th International Geological Congress held in Canada from 21-30 August,
1971.
<P-142>
123. Regular Meeting of the Tomato Working Group of ENCARPIA held in Bulgaria
from 28-30 June, 1971.
124.

UN Seminar on the use of Wood from 5-21 July, 1971, in Canada.

125. International Seminar on Nutrition in Food Policy & Planning held in
USSR from 10 August to 6 September, 1971.
126. United Nations Inter-Regional Seminar on Major Administrative Reforms in
Developing Countries held in UK from 25 October to 2 November, 1971.
127. International Seminar on New Forms of Co-operation to support the AgriProducer held in Berlin from 8 September to 1 October, 1971.
128. World Consultation on the use of wood in Housing held in Canada from 516 July, 1971.
129. 11th International Seminar for Research & Education in Physics held in
Sweden from July, 1971.
130. United Nations Inter-Regional Seminar held in USSR on Development &
Utilization of Natural Gas from 12-28 October, 1971.
131. IV International Pneumoconiosis Conference held in Bucharest (Rumania)
from 27 September to 2 October, 1971.
132. Thirty-third Session of the International Conference on Education held
at Geneva from 15-23 September, 1971.
133. Fifth Session of the Council of the International Bureau of Education
held at Geneva from 13-14 September, 1971.
134. Inter-Regional Seminar on Mobilization of Personal Savings in developing
countries from 2-11 August, 1971 in Stockholm.
135. Eight International Congress on Social Defence held in Paris from 18-22
November, 1971.

136. Meeting of the Sub-Committee for Plant Gene-pools, Canberra from 18-21
August, 1971.
137. UN Inter-Regional Seminar on Regional (Sub-national) Planning held in
Ecuador from 20 September-1 October 1971.
138. Expert Committee on Planning & Organization of a Health Laboratory
Service held at Geneva from 8-15 November, 1971.
139. XXII General Assembly of the International Union of Official Travel
Organization (IUOTO) held in Turkey from 19-27 October, 1971.
140. Meeting of International Hydrological Decade Working Group on Quality of
Water held at Geneva on 13 September, 1971.
<P-143>
141. United Nations Inter-Regional Seminar on Low-Cost Earth-quaking &
Hurricane Resistant Construction at the Institute for Seromology Earthquake
Engineering, Yugoslavia from 1-19 November, 1971.
142. Group meeting of the United Nations Conference on Trade & Development
held at Geneva from 20-22 October, 1971.
143. International Conference of States on the protection of Phonograms held
in Geneva from 18 to 29 October, 1971.
144. IAEA Panel Meeting on the Improvement of Pulse Crops held in Vienna from
8-12 November, 1971.
145. Meeting of the Protein Advisory Group of United Nations, Geneva from 1317 December, 1971.
146. Meeting of Directors of Building Research Institutes and Development
Organizations in ECAFE Region organized by ECAFE held at Melbourne from 3 to 17
March, 1971.
147. Education Research Workshop on Science Teaching in Asia from 13 February
to 12 March, 1971, in Japan.
148. Regional Seminar on Techniques & Procedures of UN Technical Assistance
held in Bangkok from 8 to 26 March, 1971.
149. Fifth International Congress of Plastics & Reconstructive Surgery held
at Melbourne in February, 1971.
150. Meeting of the organisers and Programmers of the Experimental Project on
Programmed Instructions in Asia, Tokyo from 17 to 23 February, 1971.
151. ICLA Asian Pacific Meeting on Laboratory Animals held in Tokyo from 2025 September, 1971.
152.

Meeting of Directors of Building Research Institutes and Development

Organizations in the ECAFE region held in Australia from 3 to 17 March, 1971.
153. 2nd International Congress of Pesticide Chemistry held in Tel Aviv from
21-27 February, 1971.
154. 5th All Nepal Medical Conference held at Kathmandu from 20-23 February,
1971.
155. Training Course on Multiple cropping held at the IRRI, Manila in
February, 1971.
156. Educational Workshop on Audio Visual Institution in Asia held in Japan
from 14 May-12 June, 1971.
157. VIIth Congress of the World Federation of Haemophilia, Tehran, 17-20
May, 1971.
<P-144>
158. EROPA-Third Asian Foreign Service Course. First phase held in Tehran
from 18 June to 16 July, 1971 and Second Phase held in West Berlin from 19 July7 August, 1971.
159.

Seminar on Shop Planning and Shop Management-Japan, 7-23 May, 1971.

160. Seminar on Strengthening Family Life held in the Philippines from 28
April to 7 May, 1971.
161. Conference on Training & Utilization of Auxiliary Sanitation Personnel,
Indonesia, 7 to 16 April, 1971.
162.

World Rose Convention held in New Zealand from 8-13 November, 1971.

163. Literacy Family Planning Regional Seminar from 25 April to 6 May, 1971
Erpahan (Iran).
164. Meeting of Experts on the mechanisation of Rice Production & Processing
held at Paramaribo (Surinam) from 27 September to 2 October, 1971.
165. Symposium on the Evils of Racial Discrimination held in Cameroon from 16
to 19 June, 1971.
166. IRRI Conference on `Rice Policy' held at Manila from 9-14 May, 1971 and
two-day workshop on 17-18 May, 1971.
167. Meeting of the FAO Panel of Irrigation Water requirements held in
Lebanon from 10-16 May, 1971.
168. Seminar on Vegetable Crops Research held at the University of Nigeria
from 21-25 June, 1971 sponsored by the Ford Foundation, Lagos in cooperation
with the International Institute of Tropical Agriculture.
169. 2nd Meeting of Asian Pacific Division of International Society of
Haematology held in May, 1971 at Melbourne, Australia.

170. Second Experts Meeting on Planning Common Reading Materials in Asia,
Tokyo, 20-24 July, 1971.
171. The Third Conference of Asian Pacific Weed Science Society held from 712 June, 1971, in Kuala Lumpur.
172. WHO/LAEA Seminar on Training of Radiographers and other Technical Staff
in the Medical use of Ionising Radiation and Radioisopes, Tehran, 20 September,
to 1 October, 1971.
173. Fifth FAO Regional Conference on Animal Production and Health in the Far
East, Kuala Lumpur, 20-27 September, 1971.
174. Meeting of the Advisory Committee of UNESCO on Natural Resources
Research held at Canberra from 23-27 August, 1971 (2) Pacific Science Congress
held at Canberra from 18 August-3 September, 1971.
<P-145>
175. Regional Working Party Meeting of the International Council on Social
Welfare held in Singapore from 28 June to 2 July, 1971.
176. Meeting of the Expert on Model Farms from 31 August to 9 September, 1971
at Tokyo.
177. ECAFE Regional Seminar on Ecological Implications of Rural and Urban
Population Growth held at Bangkok from 25 August to 3 September, 1971.
178. 8th Session of the Plant Protection Committee for South East Asia and
Pacific Region held in Djakarta from 4 November, 1971.
179. Asian Productivity Organization (APO) Symposium on Containerisation in
Hongkong 15-19 November, 1971.
180.

Twenty-Third Session of WMO held in Genera from 3 to 7 May, 1971.

181. Conference on Definitive Arrangements for the International
Telecommunications Satellite Consortium held at Washington on 14 April, 1971.
182. Meeting of the Executive Council of the Universal Postal Union Session
1971 held at Berne (Switzerland) from 7 May-4 June, 1971.
183. 26th Session of the Administrative Council of the ITU held in Geneva
from 1 to 21 May, 1971.
184.

IMCO Legal Committee-10th Session from 19 to 23 April, 1971 in London.

185. Eighteenth Session of the General Assembly of ICAO in Vienna from 15
June to 8 July, 1971.
186. International Astronomical Symposium on "Rotation of the Earth held from
9 to 15 May, 1971, in Japan.

187. Commission for Agricultural Meteorology of WMO-5th Session in Geneva
from 18-30 October, 1971.
188. Commission for Aeronautical Meteorology of WMO-5th Session in Geneva
from 4-16 October, 1971.
189. 2nd Meeting of the Ad Hoc Committee on F.F.H.C. project Assessment from
14 to 19 January, 1971.
190. 7th Inter-Asian Corn (Maize) Programme Workshop held in the Philippines
from 11 to 16 January, 1971.
191. 6th Session of the FAO Committee on Fisheries, Rome 15 to 21 April,
1971.
192. FAO Ad Hoc Committee on forestry held at Rome from 1 to 6 February,
1971.
193. Meeting of the P.A.G. of WHO/FAO/UNICEF from 9 to 14 February, 1971 at
Rome.
<P-146>
194. Meeting of 11th Session of Consultative Committee of the CPC Study Group
on Jute Kenaf from 1 to 3 February, 1971.
195. FAO-Indian Ocean Fishery Committee Special Session of the Committee on
the management of Indian Ocean, Rome, 22-24 April, 1971.
196. 6th Session of FAO Advisory Committee on Marine Resources Research,
Rome, 10-17 March, 1971.
197. Project Coordinator, Nuclear Research Laboratory, IARI, New DelhiIndonesia, 22-26 March, 1971.
198. 19th Session of the UN/FAO World Food Programme Inter-Governmental
Committee, Rome, 29 March-7 April, 1971.
199.

Fifth FAO Agricultural Planning Course, Rome, 22 March-21 July, 1971.

200. 19th Session of the Programme Committee of the FAO, Rome, 26 April-7
May, 1971.
201.

Fifty-sixth Session of the Council of FAO, Rome, 7-18 June, 1971.

202. Annual International Rice Research Conference, IRRI, Philippines, 19-23
April, 1971.
203. Joint FAO/IAEA Annual Meeting of the Co-ordinated Programme on the use
of Isotopes and Radiation in wheat fertilizing studies, Athens, Greece, 26-30
April, 1971.
204.

15th Session of the FAO Study Group on Rice, Rome, 24-28 May, 1971.

205. FAO-Seminar on Management of Large Scale Farming Operations, Hungary, 418 July, 1971.
206. 19th International Course on Rural Extension, Wageningen, (The
Netherlands), 5-30 July, 1971.
207. Integrated Programme of Census and current survey in the field of
agriculture, Rome, 8-18 June, 1971.
208. FAO/IAEA Training Course on the use of Radiosotopes and Radiation in
Animal Science and Veterinary Medicines, USA, 7 June-16 July, 1971.
209. FAO's International Seminar on Exploration, Introduction, Maintenance
and utilization of the Genetic Resources of cultivated Plant, USSR, 15 June-15
July, 1971.
210. Meeting of the Advisory Committee for FAO Training Centre, Rome, 21-22
June, 1971.
211. FAO/SIDA/UNICEF High Level Seminar on Food and Nutrition in Agricultural
Development Planning, Rome, September 20-October 18, 1971.
<P-147>
212. Meeting of the Technical Advisory Committee of the FAO's Consultative
Group on International Agricultural Research, Rome, 29 June-2 July, 1971.
213. 15th Session of the FAO Desert Locust Control Committee and Technical
Consultation at Rome from 15 to 24 September, 1971.
214.

20th Meeting of the Programme Committee, 6-14 September, 1971, Rome.

215. Meeting of Experts on the Mechanisation of Rice Production & Processing,
Surinam, 27 September to 2 October, 1971.
216. 5th Session of the FAO Statistical Advisory Committee Rome, 6-15
September, 1971.
217. 5th Session of the FAO Regional Commission on Farm Management for Asia
and the Far East, Kandy, 13-17 September, 1971.
218. 46th Session of FAO Committee on Commodity Problems, Rome, 4-15 October,
1971.
219. FAO Ad Hoc Expert Consultation on Agricultural Marketing Rome, 6-11
December, 1971.
220. 4th International Conference on the Peaceful uses of Atomic Energy,
Geneva, 6-16 September, 1971.
221. 12th Session of the Consultative Committee of the CCP Study Group on
Jute, Kenaf and Allied Fibres, Rome, 29 September-1 October, 1971.
222.

16th Session of FAO Conference and Session of FAO Council, Rome, 1-26

November, 1971.
223. 30th Plenary Meeting of the International Cotton Advisory Committee held
at Guatemala City, Guatemala, 14-23 June, 1971.
224. 5th Session of the UNCTAD Committee on Shipping, Geneva 22 March-3
April, 1971.
225. UNCTAD-Trade & Development Board, 11th Session, Geneva 24 August to 17
September, 1971.
226. 50th Session of ECOSOC-Committee on Non-Governmental Organizations-held
in January, 1971 in New York.
227. UN Conference on Human Environment in Geneva from 11 to 15 October,
1971.
228.

15th Session of ACASTD held in Geneva from 15-26 November, 1971.

229. Committee on Natural Resources-Second Session held in Nairobi (Kenya)
from 31 January-11 February, 1972.
230. Meeting of the Preparatory Committee for the UN Conference on Human
Environment-Geneva from 13 to 17 December, 1971.
<P-148>
231.

UNDP Governing Council-12th Session 7-25 June, 1971. New York.

232.

Joint Meetings of CPC & ACC-July 1971. Geneva.

233. UNIDP Advisory Panel on Programme Policy-3rd Session held in Geneva on 6
& 7 December, 1971.
234.

24th World Health Assembly held in Geneva from 4 May, 1971.

235. Meeting of the Scientific Group on Human Environment and Public Health
held in Geneva in April-May, 1971.
236. WHO Seminer on the Purification and Disinfection of Drinking Water,
USSR, 6-28 May, 1971.
237. 7th Congress of the World Federation of Haemophilia held in Teheran from
17 to 20 May, 1971.
238. WHO Study Group on Education and Training for Family Planning in Health
Services at Geneva from 6-10 December, 1971.
239. WHO Travelling Seminar on Health Statistics-USSR & Finland-4 to 25
August, 1971.
240. A Round Table Conference held at Geneva, WHO Headquarters on 20 & 21
October, 1971.

241.

WHO Study Group on "Youth & Drugs"-Geneva in October, 1971.

242. 24th Session of WHO Regional Committee for SEA held at Rangoon from 28
September to 5 October, 1971.
243. WHO Seminar on clinical and Public Health Aspects of Human Reproduction,
Family Planning and Population Dynamics, Djakarta, 4-6 October, 1971.
244. WHO Symposium on the use of non-Human Primates for Research on Problems
of Human Production held in Sukhumi (USSR) from 13-17 December, 1971.
245. Meeting of Experts Committee on Smallpox Eradication held in Geneva from
22-30 November, 1971.
246. WHO Scientific Group on Mental Health Aspects of Human Reproduction in
Geneva from 11-15 October, 1971.
247. Inter-regional Seminar on Public Health Aspects of Water Pollution
Dubondonf, Nr. Zurich, Switzerland, 22-27 November, 1971.
248. Inter-regional Seminar conducted by the WHO at Prague on Methods of
Epidemiological Surveillance of Communicable diseases, October, 1971.
249. Inter-regional Seminar on methods of Epidemiological Surveillance of
Communicable diseases, Zconosis and Food-Prague (Czechoslovakia), 4-15 October,
1971.
<P-149>
250. First SEARO meeting on the role of operational studies in Health Service
and Education for these services, Bangkok, 13-22 December, 1971.
251. Expert Committee Meeting on Biological Standardization, Geneva from 3-9
November, 1971.
252. Exchange of visits of collaborating Investigations in the International
Pilot Study of Schizophrenia, Washington, 22-26 November, 1971.
253. Workshop on Statistical Methods in National Family Planning Programme,
Bangkok, 15 to 28 February, 1972.
254. 56th Session of the International Labour Conference, Geneva, 2-24 June,
1971.
255. 182nd Session of the Governing Body of the I.L.O. and Committee
meetings, Geneva, 8 February to 5 March, 1971.
256. 183rd Session of the Governing Body of the I.L.O. and Committee
Meetings, Geneva, 24-29 May, 1971.
257. 6th Session of I.L.O. Committee on Work Plantations, Geneva, 20
September to 1 October, 1971.
258.

I.L.O. International Seminar on Vocational Rehabilitation of the

Mentally Handicapped, Denmark, 11-30 October, 1971.
259. I.L.O. Inter-Regional Seminar and Study Tour on Air Pollution in Working
Environment in U.S.S.R. 1-23 September, 1971.
260. 184th Session of the Governing Body of I.L.O. and Group Meetings,
Geneva, 8-23 November, 1971.
261. Afro-Asian Conference on Small Scale Industries, Tehran, 4-9 December,
1971.
262. 87th Session of the Executive Board of UNESCO, Paris, 26 April to 14
May, 1971.
263.

Meeting of the Editors of "UNESCO Courier", Paris, 26-30 April, 1971.

264. 5th Regional Conference of UNESCO National Commission in Western
Hemisphere, Ottawa, 23-28 August, 1971.
265. Multi-National Meeting of Representatives for Associated Schools Project
in Asia, Seoul, 18-23 October, 1971.
266. Meeting on the Promotion of UNESCO Clubs in South East Asia, Tokyo, 1117 October, 1971.
267. Regional Meeting of Experts on Teaching of English in Asia, Tokyo, 16-22
September, 1971.
268. 24th Session of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs, Geneva, 27 September
to 21 October, 1971.
269.

FAO-International Wheat Conference, Geneva, February, 1971.

<P-150>
270. 26th Annual Meeting of the Governors of the IBRD and the IMF,
Washington, September 1971.
271. Commonwealth Finance Ministers' Conference. Nassu, 23-24 September,
1971.
272.

ECAFF-27 Annual Session. Manila, 20-30 April, 1971.

273. 4th Session of the Conference of Asian Economic Planners, Bangkok, 22
November-1 December, 1971.
274. Expert Group Meeting on Inter-Regional Trade in Rice and Cereals and
Harmonisation of National Plans, Bangkok, 7-17 September, 1971.
275. Meeting of Working Group on Social Statistics, Bangkok, 27 September-6
October, 1971.
276. Second Preparatory Meeting on `Establishment of Asian Handicraft
Centre', Bangkok, November, 1971.

277. ECAFE Seminar on Human Resources Development, Bangkok, 13 September-30
November, 1971.
278. First Meeting of the Preparatory Committee For Establishing an Asian
Clearing Union, Bangkok, 16-22 March, 1971.
279. Seminar on Modern High Way Construction Equipment Management, Bangkok,
29 November-22 December, 1971.
280. 7th Session of Asian Highway Coordinating Committee of ECAFE, Bangkok,
26-28 October, 1971.
281. Second Asian Meeting to promote Industrial Projects, Singapore,
November, 1971.
282. First Meeting of Inter-Governmental Committee on Trade Exemption,
Bangkok, 12-20 November, 1971.
283. 4th Session of Regional Conference on International Society of Soil
Mechanics and Foundation Engineering, Bangkok, 26-30 July, 1971.
284. Meeting of the Representatives of Governments and Shippers'
Organisation, Bangkok, 7-14 December, 1971.
285. 3rd Meeting to promote Industrial Projects, Abidjan, 24 November-1
December, 1971.
286. Conference on "Institution"-Building and Development, Kathmandu (Nepal),
26-30 June, 1971.
287.

Seminar on "Programme Management", Kathmandu (Nepal), August, 1971.

288. Conference on Executive Heads of Commonwealth Universities, Ghana, 30
August to 5 September, 1971.
289. Afro-Asian Rural Reconstruction Organisation Conference Ghana, October,
1971.
<P-151>
290.

Third Commonwealth Medical Conference, Mauritius November, 1971.

291. 10th Session of the Legal Sub-Committee of the Committee on Peaceful use
of Outer Space, Geneva, 7 June to 2 July, 1971.
292. 12th Annual Session of Asian-African Legal Consultative Committee,
Colombo, 18-28 January, 1971.
293. Meeting of UNCITRAL Working Group on International Shipping Legislation
Geneva, 22-26 March, 1971.
294.

Fourth Sessional of UNCITRAL, Geneva, 29 March to 23 April, 1971.

295. Inter-sessional meeting of the Sub-Committee of Asian-African Legal
Consultative Committee on the Law relating to International Rivers, Colombo, 610 September, 1971.
296.

Meeting on UN Committee on Sea-bed, Geneva, 1-26 March, 1971.

297. 23rd Session of the UN.. International Law Commission, Geneva, 26 April
to 30 July, 1971.
298. Meeting of the Asian-African Legal Consultative Sub-Committee on the Law
of the Sea-bed, Geneva, 16-17 July, 1971.
299.

UN Sea-bed Committee meetings, Geneva, 19 July to 27 August, 1971.

300.

AALCC Sub-Committee on Law of the Sea, Geneva, 15-17 July, 1971.

301. Non-aligned Consultative Committee meeting, New York, 17-19 September,
1971.
302. 26th Session of the UN General Assembly, New York, 21 September to 21
December, 1971.
303. Special UN General Assembly for debate on Bangladesh New York, December,
1971.
304.

12th Science Week, Damascus, 27 November to 2 December, 1971.

305. 10th Session of the Executive Committee of the Afro-Asian People's
Solidarity Organisation, Damascus, 23-25 June, 1971.
306. International Planned Parenthood Federation Conference on "Islam and
Planned Parenthood", Rabat, 26-31 December, 1971.
307. 2nd Conference on International Jurists on Indo-China Algiers, 26-28
November, 1971.
<P-152>
308.

Asian Regional Conference of I.L.O. Tehran, 4-15 December, 1971.

309.

Commonwealth Parliamentary Conference, Malaysia, 3-18 September, 1971.

310. Third International Conference on Thermal Analysis, Davos (Switzerland),
23-28 August, 1971.
311. 5th Session of the Council of the International Bureau of Education,
Geneva, 13-14 September, 1971, and 33rd Session of the Indian Conference on
Education, Geneva from 15-23 September, 1971.
312. 20th Session of the International Railway Congress Association, London,
3-7 May, 1971.
313. International Symposium on Educational Satellite, Nice, (France) 3 to 7
May, 1971.

314. 9th Session on F.A.O. Consultative Sub-Committee on Hard Fibres, Rome 37 May, 1971.
315. II International Conference about the Goat Breeding at Tours, France and
10th International Zootechny Congress at Versailles, 17-23 July, 1971.
316. XX International Congress of Military Medicine and Pharmacy, Brussels,
27 June to 1 July, 1971.
317.

Annual Session of the I.D.F., Dublin, 19-24 September, 1971.

318. Conference of the Associations of the Secretaries General of Parliament
and 59th Inter-Parliamentary Union Conference in Paris, 31 August-12 September,
1971.
319. Ninth General Conference of I.C.O.M. at Paris, 28 August to 10
September, 1971.
320. Colloquim on "New Directions and Frontiers in Variable Star Research" at
Hamburg, Germany, 31 August to 8 September, 1971 (under the auspices of
International Astronomical Union).
321. Conference of IBPPPM Section of the International Biological Programme.
Marine Productivity Section at Rome from 4 to 8 October, 1971.
322. Conference on International Support for Short Film Festival and the 16th
Cork International Film Festival from 18-25 September, 1971.
323. Seminar on "Methodology of Human Resources Planning", Paris, from 20-24
September, 1971.
324. 5th International Symposium on Comparative Leukaemia Research, Padora,
Venice, 13 to 17 September, 1971.
325. 38th International Foundary Congress at Dusseldori (W. Germany) 8
October, 1971.
<P-153>
326. International Conference on Maximising the yield of Ferros Metals
Process, Liege (Belgium) 12-14 October, 1971.
327. International Export Meeting on the role of Enterpreneur in Agriculture
Marketing Development in Berlin, 8-17 November, 1971.
328. 73/74th Sessions of the Permanent Technical Committee of the Customs Cooperation Council, Brussels, 20 September-8 October, 1971.
329. 3rd International Seminar on Biotechnics at Rome, 26 September to 1
October, 1971.
330. Working Conference on the International Biological Programme
Productivity of Marine Communities held in Room, from 4-8 October, 1971.

331. Symposium on Inter-disciplinary Studies of Snow and Ice in Mountain
regions at Moscow, from 9 to 23 August, 1971.
332. XI International Seminar of Teachers in Russian language, at Moscow
1971.
333.

XXIII International Paediatrics Congress in Vienna, 1971.

334.

International Geo-chemical Congress at Moscow from 20 to 25 July, 1971.

335. 3rd International Polynological Conference from 19 to 25 July, 1971 by
Soviet Academy of Sciences, Moscow.
336.

International Geo-chemical Congress, Moscow in July, 1971.

337. 21st International Tuberculosis Conference, Moscow from 12 to 16 July,
1971.
338.

International Geo-chemical Congres Moscow, 20 July to 9 August, 1971.

339. Fourth International Congress of the International Federation for the
information Processing at Ljubljana (Yugoslavia) from 23 to 28 August, 1971.
340. Institute of Immenology, Zagreb, Yugoslavia Symposium on Bacterial
Vaccines from 27 to 28 October, 1971.
341. 7th International Congress on Acoustics in Budapest from 18 to 26
August, 1971.
342. International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC), Leningrade from 1 to 8
September, 1971.
343.

14th World Road Congress, Prague from 11 to 19 September, 1972.

344. International Symposium on prestressed concrete pipes, poles and
pressure vessels and sleepers held at Madras 14-16 February, 1971.
<P-154>
345. Commonwealth Prime Minister's Conference held in Singapore from 14 to 22
January, 1971.
346.

Health Congress at Eastbourne from 19 to 23 April, 1971.

347. International Union of Nutritional Science held at Helsinki, August,
1971.
348. World Consultation on the use of wood in Housing held at Vancouver
(Canada) 5 July to 16 July, 1971.
349. 1971 European Microwave Conference, Stockholm (Sweden), from 23 to 28
August, 1971.

350. Fourth World Conference on Medical Education held at Copenhagen, Denmark
from 25 to 29 September, 1971.
351. World Consultation on Forestry Education & Training held at Stockholm
from 28 September to 7 October, 1971.
352. Meeting of the Group of Deputies of the Planning Committee of the
Commonwealth Telecommunications Council, London from 12 May 1971 for about 11
days.
353.

VII European Rheumatology Congress, London from 6 to 11 June, 1971.

354. 22nd Meeting of the Eexcutive Council of the International Commission on
Irrigation and Drainage held in London from 21-24 June, 1971.
355. 86th Meeting of the International Rubber Study Group London, 7-9 June,
1971.
356. UN Inter-regional Seminar on Major Administrative Reforms in Developing
Countries, UK, 25 October to 2 November, 1971.
357. Seminar by Unesco on "Recent devlopments in advanced Librarianship",
Liverpool from 24 August to 1 September, 1971.
358. 37th IFLA Conference on "Organisation of Library Profession", Liverpool
27 August to 4 September, 1971.
359. Commonwealth Libraries Association Conference, London, 6-8 September,
1971.
360. Second World Conference on Smoking and Health, London, 20 to 24
September, 1971.
361. Summer School and Colloquium in Logic at Cambridge from 1 August to 21
August, 1971.
362. UNCTAD-Trade & Development Board, 2nd Part of 10th Session 1-10 March,
1971, Geneva.
<P-155>
363. Trade & Development Board of UNCTAD-3rd Part of 10th Session, Geneva, 24
May, 1971.
364.

International Tin Council Meeting, Lagos (Nigeria), 9 March, 1971.

365. UNCTAD-Inter-Government Group on Transfer of Technology Organisational
(First) Session, June, 1971.
366. UNCTAD-Committee on Shipping, 2nd Part of the 5th Session, Geneva, 31
August, 1971.
367. 6th Session of the UNCTAD Committee on Commodities, Geneva, 5-16 July,
1971.

368. 2nd Ministerial Meeting of the Group of '77', Lima, 28 October to 8
November, 1971.
369. Ministerial Meeting of the Asian Group of the Group of '77', Bangkok 5-7
October, 1971.
370. UNCTAD-Committee on Invisible and Financing related to Trade-5th
Session, Geneva. 1-14 December, 1971.
371.

ECOSOC, 50th Session, New York, 26 April to 21 May, 1971.

372.

ECOSOC, 51st Session, Geneva, 5-30 July, 1971.

373.

Panel on Foreign Investment. Tokyo, 29 November to 2 December, 1971.

374.

Conference on Asian Environment, Michigan, 14-17 June, 1971.

375. Meeting of the Inter-Governmental Working Group on Marine Pollution,
Ottawa, October, 1971.
376. International Conference on Nutrition, National Development and
Planning, Massachusetts (USA). 19-21 October, 1971.
377.

WHO study Group Discussions, Geneva, 1-7 June, 1971.

378. Cnference on Prostoglanduis in Fertility Control, Stockholm, March,
1971.
379. WHO Scientific Group in the Development of Environmental Health Criteria
for Urban Planning, Geneva, 1-9 June, 1971.
380. WHO/ICMR Research Project on Genetic Control of Mosquitoes in India,
West Germany, 15 May to 14 September, 1971.
381. WHO/UNICEF Course for Senior Teachers of Partiatrics, London/Kampala,
1971.
382. 9th Burma, India and Pakistan Malaria Co-ordination Conference, Rangoon,
September, 1971.
<P-156>
383. Programme Review Meeting and the Annual Meeting of Board of Trustees at
the IRRI, Laos, Banos, the Philippines from 4-11 February, 1971.
384.

Regional Educational Planning Seminar at Bangkok from 26-30 April, 1971.

385.

Seminar on Higher Education at Kaula Lampur from 14-16 April, 1971.

386. Third Regional Conference of Ministers of Education and those
responsible for planning in Asia, Singapore, 31 May to 7 June, 1971.
387.

Invitation from the Government of Japan for participation in the

International Symposium on Rice Insects from 19-24 July, 1971.
388. Meeting of the South Asia Travel Organization (SATC), Colombo from 3-6
September, 1971.
389. Study Group (Working Party) XIII/1 (Maintenance and grade of Service) at
Geneva, from 11-22 January, 1971.
390. 2nd Session of W.M.O. Executive Committee Panel in Meteorologicala
Aspects of Air Pullution, 22-26 March, 1971, Geneva.
391. IMCO Working Group on International Compensation Fund for Pollution
Damage-Delegation for 4th and 5th Session-Meeting of the IMCO Group, London 1-12
March, 1971.
392. Training Course on Tourism by IUOTO at Turin from 23 January to 13
February, 1971.
393. Extraordinary Session of the ICAO Assembly for an additional agenda item
proposing an increase in the size of ICAO Air Navigation Commission. 11-12
March, 1971.
394. Joint USA-Canada proposal in the form of a draft Multilateral Convention
to be introduced at the Session of the Special Legal sub-committee scheduled to
meet in Montreal from 14 to 27 April, 1971.
395. Universal Postal Union Congress, Switzerland, 1971-Pre-Congress Meetings
of Commonwealth Delegations London, 11-23 October, 1971.
396. International Solar Energy Society Conference and the International
Conference on Remote Sensing of the Environments, U.S.A., 10-14 May, 1971.
397. 26th Session of IMCO Council from 7 to 10 June, 1971, Meeting of the
Working Group on Technical Cooperation on 3 June, 1971 and Meeting of the PreCouncil Budgetary working Group on 4 and 5 June, 1971.
<P-157>
398. Meeting of the Council of ICAO from 27 July, 1971 to consider the
preliminary objections filed by India against the Pakistani application and
complaint to the ICAO Council aaginst Indian ban on Pakistani overflights across
India.
399. 7th Session of IMCO Assembly from 5-15 October, 1971-Action for reelection of India to IMCO Council for the two year period from October, 1971.
400. Committee for Development Planning-Seventh Session, Geneva, 22 March-2
April, 1971.
401.

13th Governing Body Meeting of APU in Tehran from 8 to 6 May, 1971.

402. Proposal to send an Indian delegation for participation in the meetings
of ISO in Europe from 8-19 June, 1971.

403. Deputation of Shri Sonalkar to attend the meeting of ISO/TC 39/SL 2 held
in Frankfort from 10-13 May, 1971.
404.

AARRO-Second Session of the Liaison Committee, 21 May, 1971.

405. IMCO-International Legal Conference on Maritime Carriage of nuclear
substances, Brussels from 29 November, to 1 December, 1971, Invitation to the
Government of India to participate in the Conference.
406. IMCO Conference on the Establishment of an International Compensation
Fund for Oil Pollution Damage at the Palais des Congres in Brussels on 29
November, 1971.
407. 7th Session of the IMCO Assembly at IMCO Headquarters in London from 515 October, 1971.
408. International Building Council, 5th Congress, Versailles (France) from
21-30 June, 1971.
409. Golden Jubilee Congress of Building Research Station from 9-18 June,
1971.
410. XIII International Congress of Vine and Wine, Mendoze Argentina), 5-13
March, 1971.
411.

5th General Assembly, Buenos Aires from 11-18 May, 1971.

412. 6th Session of the Council of International Sugar Organization, London,
Indian delegation thereto-18 to 26 March, 1971.
413. Refresher Colloquim in the field of Stretigraphy and Palaeontology,
Vienna 13 September to 29 October, 1971.
414.

30th General Conference of the O.I.E. from 24-29 May, 1971.

415. Summer Courses 1971 of the International School of Physics "Enrico
Ferms", Varanne from 5 July to 14 August, 1971.
<P-158>
416. Meeting of Commission III of the International Cartographic Association,
Paris, 7-12 June, 1971.
417. Conference on Quantitative Methods & Political Substances, Mannehiem
from 5-10 July, 1971.
418.

Symposium on Man-made Lakes, USA, from 3-7 May, 1971.

419. International Workshop on Earth Resources Survey System and the VII
International Symposium on Remote sensing USA from 3-2 May, 1971.
420. Meeting of the General Assembly of the International Centre, Rome from
26-29 April, 1971 and also to deliver lectures to the students of Preservation
and Restoration of Cultural Property, Rome 26 April to 10 May, 1971.

421. Second Seminar in Population. held in USA and South Korea from 5 July to
5 August, 1971.
422. 4 week Seminar on the promotion of tropical timber products from Far
Eastern countries, Geneva, 17 May to 11 June, 1971.
423. Fourth Session of the IHD Working Group on Floods and their computation,
France, 17-21 May, 1971.
424. International Workshop on Earth Resources Survey Systems, USA from 3-14
May, 1971 and 7th International Symposium on Remote sensing from 16-21 May,
1971.
425. Inter-regional Symposium on Man and the Biosphere, Bonn from 14-19 June,
1971.
426. 30th Plenary Meeting on International Cotton Advisory Committee, (USA)
from 14-23 June, 1971.
427. Meeting organised by International Society of Geographical Ophthalmology
and Prevention of Blindness, Israel, 23 to 27 August, 1971.
428. International Symposium on Deterioration of Lipids, Poland from 1-4
June, 1971.
429. Education Programmes and Projects Course 1971, Washington, 4 October to
4 December, 1971.
430. Consultation on Research Strategies on the Control of Male Fertility,
Geneva from 27-29 May, 1971.
431. International Seminar for Curriculum Development in Sweden from JulyAugust, 1971.
432.

59th Inter-Parliamentary Conference, Paris, in September, 1971.

433.

13th Triennial Conference, Oslo (Norway) 10-20 August, 1971.

434. International Institute of Refrigeration Congress, USA, 22 August-13
September, 1971.
<P-159>
435. International Conference, Advance in Orthoties, University of Dundee,
from 21-25 June, 1971.
436. Fourth International Seminar and Exhibition, Edinberg, 26 June-3 July,
1971.
437.

3rd International Conference, France, 29 August to 10 September, 1971.

438. International General Conference, France, 29 August to 10 September,
1971.

439. Conference of South West African People's Organisation (SWAPO) Brussels,
in September, 1971.
440. FAO/UNICEF High Level Seminar on Food and Nutrition in Agricultural
Development Planning, Rome, from 20 September to 18 October, 1971.
441.

Expert Group Meeting on Family Planning, Geneva, 11-13 August, 1971.

442. Meeting of Investigators on Nutritional Acanine, Geneva, 11-15 October,
1971.
443. Pre-Session Seminar for Developing Countries, Liverpool (UK) for 2 weeks
from 24 August, 1971.
444. Symposium on the use of Non-Human Primates for Research on Problems of
Human Reproduction, USSR, from 13-17 December, 1971.
445. Scientific Group on the Standardization of techniques for the collection
and reporting of data on Community water supply, Geneva 24-30 August, 1971.
446. FAO/DANIDA Post Graduate Course in Veterinary Anatomy, Royal Veterinary
Agricultural University, Copenhagen, 1 October, 1971 to 30 June, 1972.
447. FAO/DANIDA Post Produate Course in Microbiology (Bacteriology) Food
Hygiene at the Royal Veterinary Agricultural University, Copenhagen, from 1
September, 1971 to 30 June, 1972.
448. FAO/DANIDA Post Graduate Course in Animal Physiology and Priochemistry
at the Royal Veterinary Agricultural University, Copenhagen, 1 October, 1971 to
30 June. 1972.
449. Consultative Council for Postal Studies of the UPU and (ii) UPU-IATA
Contact Committee at Berne, 23 September-9 October, 1971.
450. Meeting of the ad-hoc working group of the PAG of FAO/WHO/UNICEF, USA
for one week in October, 1971.
451. 14th Session of the International Popular Commission, Bucharest, 27
September to 2 October, 1971 and Post-Session study tour, Yugoslavia from 4-6
October, 1971.
<P-160>
452. Second International Symposium on "Circum-Verticular Organs and
Cerebrospinal Fluid" and to visit Electron Microscope Laboratory in Holland in
October, 1971.
453. 5th World Psychiatric Congress, Mexico City from 28th November to 4
December, 1971.
454.

Meeting of the Advisory Group, Geneva, 22-26 November, 1971.

455.

Meeting on Methods of Waste Water treatment and health safegaurds in

relation to the re-use of effluents, Geneva, from 30 November to 6 December,
1971.
456. (i) CIMMYI Maize, (ii) Wheat Workshops, Mexico, 13-21 September,
1971, from September 21-28 Respectively.
457. Panel of Experts on the use of Isotopes and Radiation in the Control of
parasitic and associated diseases in domestic animals in Nairobi (Kenya) from
23-26 November, 1971.
458. IOFC Working Party on Stock Assessment of Indian Ocean Shrimp, at
Bahrain from 29 November to 2 December, 1971.
459. First Research Coordination Meeting for PAO/IAEA coordinated Research
programme on Meetation Breeding for disease Resistance, Nairobi (Kenya) from 610 December, 1971.
460. Inter-Regional Cholera Training Courses, Penang. Malaysia and
Philippines, 9-23 October, 1971.
461. Inter-Regional Course on Epidemiology, Prevention and Treatment of
Malnutrition in Young Children, Cheenghai (Thailand), 30 November to 11
December, 1971.
462. Inter-regional Seminar on Training and Services in Occupational Health
for developing countries. Djakarta 29 November to 10 December. 1971.
463. WHO Refresher Course in Entomology, Prabhudahabat (Thailand), 22
November to 10 December, 1971.
464. WHO Inter-regional Training Course on the Methodology of Clinical Trials
with Fertility Regulating Agents (UNFPA 1029), Tehran, 11-20 December, 1971.
465. 3rd Asian Labour Minister's Conference, Seoul, 27 September to 2
October, 1971.
466. ILO Asian Regional Fellowship Training Programme in Management
Information Systems. Analysis and Design, Bangkok 6 September 1971 to 3 March,
1972.
467. 5th Training Course in Book Production in Asia, Tokyo, 10 September to 9
November, 1971.
<P-161>
468. Meeting of the Joint Indo-Soviet Text Book Board, Moscow, September,
1971.
469.

25th Anniversary of UNESCO, Paris, November, 1971.

470.

UNESCO Seminar, Paris 8-12 December, 1971.

471. 27th Session of the Commission on Human Rights, Geneva, 22 February to
26 March, 1971.

472. 24th Session of the Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and
protection of Minorities, Geneva, 2-20 August, 1971.
B. IN INDIA
1. Meeting of the Working, Group on the Law of the Sea of Asian-African Legal
Consultative Committee, Delhi, 28 June to 1 July, 1971.
2. Regional Seminar on Personnel Management orgainsed by the Regional office
of the International Cooperative Alliance, New Delhi, 27 September to 16
October, 1971.
3. WHO-Documentation and Production Centre-Intercountry Workshop on
development of Health Education with particular refernce to Family Health, New
Delhi. 12-19 October, 1971.
4. WHO Seminar on Functional Programming of Hospital Facilities, 25 October
to 5 November, 1971.
5. Genetic Control of Mosquitose in India, 4th Meeting of the Technical
Planning & Review Group, 3-8 November, 1971.
6. Symposium on the Role of the Paediatrician in a Family Training Programme,
Madras, 6-8 December, 1971.
7. Conference on Public Health Engineering Research, Nagpur, 28-30 January,
1971.
8. 2nd International Symposium on Plant Pathology held at Indian Agricultural
Research Institute, New Delhi, 27 January to 3 February, 1971.
9.

Asian Youth Seminar on National Youth Policy, New Delhi, March, 1971.

10. IAEA-International Training Course on Food Irradiation Technology and
Techniques for Scientists from Developping countries, Bombay, 1 November to 10
December, 1971.
11. IAEA-Meeting of the International Nuclear Data Committee, Bombay, 12-16
July, 1971.
12.

International Federation of Women's Organisations, Delhi, October, 1971.

<P-162>
13. International Seminar on Physiology of Differentiation in Plants, Simla,
17-20 May, 1971.
14.

5th Training Course held in ESCES, Ahmedabad, September, 1971.

15. International Symposium on Use of Isotopes and Radiation in Agricultural
and Animal Husbandry Research, New Delhi, 29 November to 3 December 1971.
16. 4th International Conference of the Asian Association of Management
Organisations (AAMOCIOS). New Delhi, 22-27 November, 1971.

17. Asian Regional Seminar on Teaching about United Nations and the 6th
Biennial Conference of United Schools International, New Delhi, 7-10 and 12-14
December, 1971.
18.

Conference of Scientists, New Delhi, 13-15 October 1971.

19.

International Conference on Bangladesh, New Delhi, December, 1971.

20.

Seminar on National Agricultural Research Systems in Asia March 1971.

21. Fourth South East Asia Postgraduate Nametology Course at Indian
Agricultural Research Institute, New Delhi, 1 June to 7 August, 1971.
22. Seminar on Rheumatic Heart Disease, Epidemiology, etc. at the All India
Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, 22-25 February, 1971.
23. Genetic Control of Mosquitoes in India-WHO Third Meeting of Technical
Planning and Review Group, New Delhi. 29 March to 2 April, 1971.
24.

Seminar on Genetics and Our Health, New Delhi, 5-9 April, 1971.

25. Field Training in India on Malaria for Professional Staff, 12 January to
2 April, 1971.
26. Training Course in Health Planning for Maternal and Child Health/Family
Planning Administrators at National Institute of Health Administration and
Education, New Delhi, 15 November to 18, December. 1971.
27. Inter-Country Course on Immunohaematological Procedures in Blood Bank,
Bombay, 1-10 November, 1971.
28. Fourth Commonwealth and Empire Law Conference, New Delhi, 6-13, January,
1971.
29. Working Seminar on "Visual Mechanism and Form Perception", Bombay, 25
January to 6 February, 1971.
30. Inter-regional Seminar on the supply of Cheap Power to Rural areas, New
Delhi, December, 1971.
<P-163>
31.

U.N. Seminar on Water Administration, Delhi, December, 1971.

32. Inter-Regional Seminar on Industrial Processing of Rice (ECAFE), Madras,
October, 1971.
33. Second Afro-Asian Conference on Small Scale Industries. New Delhi, April,
1971.
<P-164>

INDIA
AUSTRIA REPUBLIC OF SINGAPORE USA POLAND SWITZERLAND FRANCE BOLIVIA BRAZIL
DENMARK CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC HONG KONG IRAN GHANA BELGIUM JAPAN UNITED
KINGDOM ITALY RUSSIA GERMANY HUNGARY IRELAND VENEZUELA LATVIA SWEDEN
SPAIN CANADA ROMANIA GREECE YUGOSLAVIA CZECH REPUBLIC AUSTRALIA ECUADOR
TURKEY ISRAEL NEPAL PHILIPPINES INDONESIA NEW ZEALAND SURINAME CAMEROON
LEBANON NIGER NIGERIA MALAYSIA GUATEMALA KENYA FINLAND NORWAY SLOVAKIA
KOREA MAURITIUS SRI LANKA BANGLADESH SYRIA MOROCCO ALGERIA CHINA SLOVENIA
CROATIA PERU UGANDA BURMA PAKISTAN LAOS ARGENTINA MALDIVES MEXICO BAHRAIN
THAILAND

Date :

Dec 01, 1971

Appendix II: INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATIONS OF WHICH
INDIA IS A MEMBER
1.

UN General Assembly.

2.

UN Security Council.

3.

Committees and Commissions of the General Assembly:
(a)

Committee of the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space.

(b) Committee on the Agreements for a Conference for the purpose of
Reviewing the Charter.
(c) Special Committee of 24 on the situation with regard to the
implementation of the Declaration on the granting of independence to Colonial
Countries and People:
(i)

Its Working Group.

(ii)

Sub-Committee on Petitions.

(iii)

Sub-Committee (Pacific Territories).

(d)

Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation.

(e)

Peace Observation Commission.

(f)

Disarmament Commission.

(g)

International Law Commission.

(h)

Administrative Tribunal.

(i)

Committee on Disarmament.

(j)

Investment Committee.

(k)

Scientific Advisory Committee.

(l)

Special Committee on Peace-Keeping Operation.

(m)

Committee on Conferences.

(n)

UN Council for Namibia.

(o)

UN Commission on International Trade Law.

(p) Sea-Bed-Committee on the Peaceful uses of the Sea-Bed and the Ocean
floor beyond the limits of National Jurisdiction.
(q) Special Committee on the Rationalization of the Procedure and
Organisation of the General Assembly.
<P-165>
(r)

Special Committee on Apartheid.

(s) A Special Ad hoc Committee of Government Experts for reviewing salary
structure of the UN.
(t)
4.

Committee on financial situation of the UN.

Functional Commissions and Committees of ECOSOC:
(a)

Commission of Human Rights.

(b)

Commission on Narcotic Drugs.

(c)

Statistical Commission.

(d)

Population Commission.

(e)

Commission for Social Development.

(f) Regional Commission of the Economic and Social Council; Economic
Commission for Asia and the Far East (ECAFE).
(g) Advisory Committee of Experts on the Prevention of Crime and
treatment of offenders.

5.

(h)

Preparatory Committee for the UN Conference on Human Environment.

(i)

Preparatory Committee for the Second Development Decade.

Other Subsidiary Bodies of the Economic and Social Council:
(a)

Executive Board of UN Children's Fund (UNICEF).

(b)

UN/FAO Inter-Governmental Committee on the World Food Programme.

(c) Advisory Committee on the Application of Science and Technology and
Development.
(d)

Committee for Programme and Coordination.

(e)

Committee for Development Planning.

(f) Ad hoc Working Group on the question of a Declaration on
International Economic Cooperation.

6.

(g)

Programme Committee of UNICEF.

(h)

FAO/UNICEF Joint Policy Committee.

UN Conference on Trade and Development (The Trade and Development Board).
(a)

Committee on Commodities.

(b)

Permanent Sub-Committee on Commodities.

(c)

Committee on Manufactures.

(d)

Committee on Invisibles and Financing related to Trade.

<P-166>
(e)

Inter-Governmental Group on Supplementary Financing.

(f)

Committee on Shipping.

(g)

Group of Preferences.

7. United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO)-Industrial
Development Board.
8.

United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)-Governing Council.

9.

UN Specialised Agencies:
(a)

Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO).

(b)

International Bank of Reconstruction and Development (IBRD).

(c)

International Development Association.

(d)

International Monetary Fund (IMF).

(e)

International Development Association.

(f)

International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO).

(g)

International Telecommunication Union (ITU).

(h)

World Meteorological Organization (WMO).

(i)

Universal Postal Union (UPU).

(j)

International Labour Organization (ILO).

(k)

UN Educational Scientific and Cultural Organisation (UNESCO).

(l)

World Health Organization (WHO).

(m)

Inter Governmental Maritime Organization (IMCO).

10.

International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA).

11.

Asian Institute for Economic Development and Planning, Bangkok.

12.

Asian Coconut Community, Manila.

13.

Asian Statistical Institute, Tokyo.

14.

International Social Security Association.

15.

International Commission on Irrigation and Drainage, New Delhi.

16.

International Commission on Large Dams, Paris.

17.

International Association of Hydraulic Research, Delft, Netherlands.

18.

International Association for Bridges and Structural Engineering.

<P-167>
19. British Electrical and Allied Industries Research Association, Lether
Head, Survey (England).
20.

World Energy Conference.

21.

Conference Internationale des Grands Reseaux Electriques, Paris.

22.

International Society of Soil Mechanics and Foundation Engg.

23. Permanent International Association of Navigation Congress, Brussels
(Belgium) (is a co-member with the Ministry of Shipping and Transport).
24.

International Railway Congress Association, Brussels.

25.

International Union of Railways.

26.

UIC and Office for Research and Experiments, Paris.

27.

International Telecommunications Satellite Consortium INTELSAT).

28.

Commonwealth Telecommunications Conference.

29.

Commonwealth Telecommunications Council.

30.

Commonwealth Telecommunications Bureau.

31.

Afro-Asian Rural Reconstruction Organization (AARRO), New York.

32.

Commonwealth Agriculture Bureau (CAB), London.

33.

International Office of Epizootics (OIE), Paris.

34.

Commenwealth Forestry Institute, Oxford.

35.

International Council for Bird Preservation, London.

36.

International Dairy Federation, Brussels.

37.

International Seed Testing Association, Brussels.

38.

International Society for Horticultural Science. The Hague.

39.

World Poultry Science Association, London.

40.

International Agricultural Aviation Centre, The Hague.

41. International Union for Conservation of Nature and National Resources,
Switzerland.
42.

UNFAO Inter-Governmental Committee on the World Food Programme, Rome.

43.

International Secretariat for Voluntary Service, Geneva.

44.

Commonwealth Air Transport Council (CATC).

<P-168>
45.

Commonwealth Advisory Aeronautical Research Council, London.

46.

International Criminal Police Commission, Paris.

47.

International Lead and Zinc Study Group, New York.

48.

International Tin Council, London.

49.

International Union of Geodesy and Geophysics, Paris.

50.

International Union of Geological Science, Copenhagen.

51.

Asian Development Bank, Manila.

52.

Colombo Plan.

53.

Special Commonwealth Assistance Plan.

54.

International Union for Scientific Study of Population (IUSSP).

55. International Council of Building Research Studies and Documentation,
Rotterdam.
56.

Afro-Asian Housing Conference, Cairo (Since 1970).

57.

International Astronomical Union.

58.

International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry.

59.

International Scientific Radio Union.

60.

International Union of Biological Science.

61.

International Geographical Union.

62.

International Union of Pure and Applied Physics.

63.

International Union of Crystallography.

64. International Union of History & Philosophy of Science (Division of
History).
65.

International Union of Biochemistry.

66.

International Union of Theoretical and Applied Mechanics.

67.

International Mathematical Union.

68.

International Union of Pure and Applied Biophysics.

69.

International Union of Physiological Sciences.

70.

International Union of Nutritional Sciences.

71.

Special Committee of International Biological Programme (SCIBP).

72.

Special Committee on Oceanic Research (SCOR).

73.

Special Committee on Space Research (COSTAR).

74.

Asian Broadcasting Union (ABU).

<P-169>
75.

Commonwealth Broadcasting Conference (CEC).

76. CILECT (Centre) International De Liaison Des Ecoles de Cinema El De
Television) at Paris.
77.

FIAP (International Federation of Film Archives), Brussels.

78.

International Council of Scientific Unions (ICSU).

79.

World Petroleum Congress.

80.

Asian Statisticians Conference.

81.

Commonwealth Statisticians Conference.

82.

International Statistical Institute, The Hague.

83.

Commonwealth War Graves Commission.

84.

International Committee on the History of the Second World War.

85.

Commonwealth Defence Science Organization.

86. Commonwealth Committee of Defence (Operational Clothing and Combat
Equipment).
87.

International Committee of Military Medicine and Pharmacy (Belgium).

88.

General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.

89.

International Customs Tariff Bureau, Brussels.

90.

International Union of Official Travel Organisations (IUOTC).

91.

South Asia Travel Commission (SATC).

92.

Pacific Area Travel Association (PATA).

93.

UN Fund for population Activities.

94. International Association of Regional and Environmental Planners,
Warsaw/Geneva.
95.

Commission for Geological Map of the World, Paris.

96.

International Association of Engineering Geology, Paris.

<P-170>
INDIA
USA NAMIBIA RUSSIA PHILIPPINES JAPAN LATVIA FRANCE BELGIUM UNITED KINGDOM
SWITZERLAND ITALY DENMARK SRI LANKA EGYPT POLAND

Date :

Dec 01, 1971

Appendix III: GOVERNING BODIES OF THE SPECIALISED
AGENCIES AND OTHER AGENCIES OF THE UNITED NATION
OF WHICH INDIA IS A MEMBER
Sl. No.

Name of Agency

Governing body
on which India
is represented

1. International Labour Organisation (ILO)

Governing body.

2. Food & Agricultural Organisation (FAO)
3. United Nations Educational Scientific
and Cultural Organisation (UNESCO)

Council
Executive Board.

4. World Meteorological Organisation
(WMO). . . . . .
Executive Committee.
5. International Civil Aviation Organisation
(ICAO). . . . .
Council.
6. Intergovernmental Martime Consultative
Organization (IMCO). . .
Council.
7. International Telecommunication Union
(ITU). . . . . . .
Administrative Council.
8. Universal Postal Union (UPU)

.

Executive Council.

9. International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA). . . . . . .
Board of Governors.
10. United Nations Children's Fund
(UNICEF) . . . . . .
Executive Board.
11. United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development (UNCTAD)
.
Board.

Trade and Development

12. United Nations Development Proggramme
(UNDP) . . . .
.
Governing Council.
13. United Nations Institute for Training
and Research (UNITAR). .
.
Board of Trustees.
<P-171>
14. United Nations Industrial Development
Organization (UNIDO) . .
.
Industrial Development
Board.
15. World Food Programme (WFP) .

.

Intergovernmental Com-

mittee.
In addition to the above, India is represented by an Executive Director on
each of the following Organisations:
1. International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD).
2. International Monetary Fund (IMF).
3. International Finance Corporation (IFC).
4. International Developmental Association (IDA).
<P-172>
INDIA
USA

Date :

Dec 01, 1971

Appendix IV: FOREIGN DIPLOMATIC MISSIONS IN INDIA
(I) Embassies
1.

Afghanistan

2.

Algeria

3.

Arab Republic of Egypt

4.

Argentina

5.

Austria

6.

Bangladesh (Mission of)

7.

Bhutan (Representative of)

8.

Belgium

9.

Brazil

10.

Bulgaria

11.

Burma

12.

Cambodia

13.

Chile

14.

China

15.

Colombia

16.

Cuba

17.

Czechoslovakia

18.

Denmark

19.

Ethiopia

20.

Finland

21.

France

22.

Germany (Federal Republic of)

23.

Greece

24.

Holy See (Apostolie Nunciature).

25.

Hungary

26.

Indonesia

27.

Iran

28.

Iraq

29.

Ireland

30.

Italy

31.

Japan

32.

Jordan

33.

Kuwait

34.

Laos

35.

Lebanon

36.

Mexico

37.

Mongolia

38.

Morocco

39.

Nepal

40.

Netherlands

41.

Norway

42.

Panama (Stationed in Cairo)

43.

Paraguay (Stationed in Tokyo)

44.

Peru

45.

Philippines

<P-173>
46.

Poland

47.

Rumania

48.

Saudi Arabia

49.

Spain

50.

Sudan

51.

Sweden

52.

Switzerland

53.

Syria

54.

Thailand

55.

Turkey

56.

U.S.S.R.

57.

U.S.A.

58.

Uruguay

59.

Venezuela

60.

Yemen

61.

Yugoslavia

62.

Zaire (Republic of)

(II)

High Commissions

1.

Australia

2.

Britain

3.

Canada

4.

Ceylon

5.

Ghana

6.

Guyana (Stationed in UK)

7.

Kenya

8.

Malaysia

9.

Mauritius

10.

New Zealand

11.

Nigeria

12.

Singapore

13.

Tanzania

14.

Trinidad & Tobago

15.

Uganda

(III) Legations
Albania (Stationed in Baghdad)
(IV) Sub-Offices of High Commissions
1.

Office of the Deputy High Commission for Australia in Bombay.

2.

Office of the Deputy High Commission for Australia in Calcutta.

3.

Office of the Deputy High Commission for Britain in Bombay.

4.

Office of the Deputy High Commission for Britain in Calcutta.

5.

Office of the Deputy High Commission for Britain in Madras.

6.

Office of the Deputy High Commission for Ceylon in Madras.

7.

Office of the Assistant High Commission for Malaysia in Madras.

<P-174>
INDIA
AFGHANISTAN ALGERIA EGYPT ARGENTINA AUSTRIA USA BANGLADESH BHUTAN
BELGIUM BRAZIL BULGARIA BURMA CAMBODIA CHILE CHINA COLOMBIA CUBA NORWAY
SLOVAKIA DENMARK ETHIOPIA FINLAND FRANCE GERMANY GREECE HUNGARY INDONESIA
IRAN IRAQ IRELAND ITALY JAPAN JORDAN KUWAIT LAOS LEBANON MEXICO MONGOLIA

MOROCCO NEPAL PANAMA PARAGUAY PERU PHILIPPINES POLAND SAUDI ARABIA SPAIN
SUDAN SWEDEN SWITZERLAND SYRIA THAILAND TURKEY URUGUAY VENEZUELA YEMEN
YUGOSLAVIA ZAIRE AUSTRALIA CANADA GHANA GUYANA UNITED KINGDOM KENYA
MALAYSIA MAURITIUS NEW ZEALAND NIGER NIGERIA REPUBLIC OF SINGAPORE TANZANIA
UGANDA ALBANIA

Date :

Dec 01, 1971

Appendix V: FOREIGN CONSULAR OFFICES IN INDIA
Sl. No. Country

Location

Status

1
2
3
4
-------------------------------------------------------------------1.
Afghanistan . . Bombay
Consulate General
2.

Austria

. . Bombay

Hony. Consulate General

3.

Austria

. . Madras

Hony. Consulate

4.

Austria

. . Calcutta

Hony. Vice Consulate

5.

Belgium

. . Bombay

6.

Belgium

. . Calcutta

7.

Belgium

Madras

Hony. Consulate

8.

Bolivia . . . Bombay

Hony. Consulate

9.

Bolivia . . . Calcutta

10.

Brazil . . . Bombay

11.

Brazil . . . Calcutta

Hony. Consulate

12.

Brazil . . . Madras

Hony. Consulate

13.

Burma . . . Calcutta

14.

Colombia. . . Bombay

Hony. Consulate

15.

Costa Rica. . . Bombay

Hony. Consulate General

16.

Costa Rica. . . Madras

17.

Czechoslovakia. . Bombay

18.

Czechoslovakia. . Calcutta

Consulate General
Consulate General

Hony. Consulate General
Consulate

Consulate General

Hony. Consulate General
Consulate General
Consulate General

19.

Denmark

. . Bombay

Hony. Consulate General

20.

Denmark

. . Calcutta

Hony. Consulate

21.

Denmark

. . Madras

Hony. Consulate

<P-175>
22.

Dominican Republic Bombay

Hony. Consulate General

23.

Dominican Republic Calcutta

24.

Equador

25.

El Salvador

26.

Ethiopia

. . Bombay

27.

Ethiopia

. . Calcutta

28.

Finland

. . Bombay

29.

Finland

. . Calcutta

Hony. Consulate

30.

Finland

. . Madras

Hony. Consulate

31.

France

. . . Bombay

32.

France

. . . Calcutta

Consulate General

33.

France

. . . Cochin

Hony. Consular Agent

34.

France

. . . Pondicherry

35.

Germany (F.R.G.) . Calcutta

Consulate General

36.

Germany (F.R.G.) . Madras

Consulate General

37.

Germany (F.R.G.) . Bombay

38.

Greece

. . Bombay

39.

Greece

. . Calcutta

40.

Haiti

. . . Calcutta

41.

Haiti

. . . Bombay

42.

Indonesia

. . Bombay

43.

Indonesia

. . Calcutta

44.

Iran

Hony. Consulate

. . Calcutta

Hony. Consulate

. . Calcutta

Hony. Consulate

. . . Bombay

Hony. Consulate General
Hony. Consulate General
Hony. Consulate

Consulate General

Consulate General

Consulate General
Hony. Consulate General

Hony. Consulate General
Hony. Consulate
Hony. Consulate
Consulate
Hony. Consulate
Consulate General

45.

Iran

. . . Hyderabad

Consulate General

46.

Iraq

. . . Bombay

Consulate General

47.

Israel

. . . Bombay

Consulate

Consulate General

<P-176>
48.

Italy

. . . Bombay

49.

Italy

. . . Calcutta

Consulate General

50.

Italy

. . . Cochin

Hony. Consular Agent

51.

Iceland

52.

Japan

. . . Calcutta

53.

Japan

. . . Bombay

54.

Japan

. . . Madras

55.

Jordan

. . . Bombay

56.

Kuwait

. . Bombay

Consulate General

57.

Lebanon

. . Calcutta

Hony. Consulate

58.

Liberia

59.

Mauritius

60.

Nepal

61.

Netherlands

. . Bombay

62.

Netherlands

. . Calcutta

63.

Netherlands

. . Madras

Hony. Consulate

64.

Netherlands

. . Cochin

Hony. Consulate

65.

Nicaragua

. . Bombay

Hony. Consulate

66.

Nicaragua

. . Calcutta

Hony. Consulate

67.

Norway

. . Bombay

Consulate General

68.

Norway

. . Calcutta

69.

Norway

. . Cochin

Hony. Consulate

70.

Norway

. . Madras

Hony. Consulate

. . Bombay

. . Calcutta
. . Bombay
. . . Calcutta

Hony. Consulate
Consulate General
Consulate General
Consulate General
Hony. Consulate

Hony. Consulate General
Hony. Consulate
Consulate General
Consulate General
Hony. Consulate General

Hony. Consulate General

71.

Panama

. . Bombay

72.

Panama

. . Calcutta

73.

Peru

. . . Bombay

74.

Peru

. . . Calcutta

Consulate General
Consulate General
Hony. Consulate
Consulate General

<P-177>
75.

Phillippines

. . Calcutta

Hony. Consulate General

76.

Phillippines

. . Madras

Hony. Consulate General

77.

Poland

. . . Bombay

78.

Poland

. . . Calcutta

79.

Spain

. . . Bombay

80.

Spain

. . . Calcutta

Hony. Vice Consulate

81.

Spain

. . . Madras

Hony. Vice Consulate

82.

Sudan

. . . Bombay

83.

Sweden

. . Calcutta

Hony. Consulate

84.

Sweden

. . Bombay

Hony. Consulate General

85.

Sweden

. . Madras

Hony. Consulate

86.

Switzerland

. . Bombay

87.

Switzerland

. . Cochin

88.

Syrian Arab Republic Bombay

89.

Thailand

. . Bombay

90.

Thailand

. . Calcutta

Consulate General

91.

Turkey

. . Bombay

Hony. Consulate General

92.

Turkey

. . Calcutta

Hony. Consulate General

93.

Turkey

. . Madras

Hony. Consulate General

94.

U.S.S.R.

. . Bombay

95.

U.S.S.R.

. . Calcutta

Consulate General

96.

U.S.S.R.

. . Madras

Consulate General

Consulate
Consulate
Hony. Vice Consulate

Consulate General.

Consulate General
Hony. Consular Agent
Consulate General

Hony. Consulate General

Consulate General

97.

U.S.A.

. . Bombay

Consulate General

98.

U.S.A.

. . Calcutta

Consulate General

99.

U.S.A.

. . Madras

Consulate General

100.

Yugoslavia

. . Bombay

Consulate General

<P-178>
101.

Yugoslavia

. . Calcutta

Consulate General

102.

German Democratic New Delhi.
Republic.

103.

German Democratic Bombay
Republic.

104.

German Democratic Calcutta
Republic.

Consulate

105.

German Democratic Madras
Republic.

Consulate

Consulate

106.

Koreas (DPR)

107.

Korea (Republic of) New Delhi

108.

Monaco

109.

San Marino

110.

Viet Nam (DPR)

111.

Viet Nam
(Republic of)

New Delhi

. . New Delhi
. New Delhi

Consulate General
Consulate General

Hony. Consulate General
Hony. Consulate General

New Delhi
New Delhi

Consulate General

Consulate General
Consulate General.

<P-179>
INDIA
USA AFGHANISTAN AUSTRIA BELGIUM BOLIVIA BRAZIL BURMA COLOMBIA
COSTA!!NORWAY SLOVAKIA DENMARK DOMINICA EL SALVADOR ETHIOPIA FINLAND
FRANCE GERMANY GREECE HAITI INDONESIA IRAN IRAQ ISRAEL ITALY ICELAND JAPAN
JORDAN KUWAIT LEBANON LIBERIA MAURITIUS NEPAL CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC
NICARAGUA PANAMA PERU POLAND SPAIN SUDAN SWEDEN SWITZERLAND SYRIA
THAILAND TURKEY YUGOSLAVIA KOREA MONACO SAN MARINO

Date :

Dec 01, 1971

Appendix VI: VISITS OF FOREIGN VIPs TO INDIA HANDLED
BY THE PROTOCOL DIVISION
(Up to November) 1971)
1

H. E. Mr. Alberto
2 others
Bemporad, Deputy Minister
For Foreign Affair of
Italy

2

H. E. Mr. Lim Kim San,
Minister of Education of
Singapore.

3

H. R. H. Princess Helen
of Nepal.

4 others 5th to 6th April, 1971.
(Transit Visit)

4

His Majesty The Druk

10 others 7th to 12th April, 1971.

5

H. E. General Ne Win,
17 others
8th to 12 the April,
Chairman of the Revo(Foreign Min1971
lutionary Council of the Burma arrived
Union of Burma.
on 11th and left
on 12th April)

6

Sheikh Mubarak Jaber
..
From 22nd April,
Ahmad Al-Sabuh, son of H.
1971 (Deparature
H. The Crown Prince and (Private Visit)
NOT KNOWN)
Prime Minister of Kuwait.

7

H. E. Dr. The Hon'ble
2 others
8th April to 2nd May
Sir S. Ramgoolam,
(One member
1971.
Prime Minister of
left on 4th
Mauritius.
May)

8

Their Highnesses
The Chogyal and the
Gyalmo of Sikkim.

9

Five Member Hungarian
Goodwill Delegation
(led by H. E. The
Deputy Foreign Minister
of Hungary)

10

H. E. Sir Keith Holyoake, 2 others
Prime Minister of New
Zealand.

<P-180>

..

3 others

..

29th March to 4th
April, 1971.

5th April, 1971
(Transit Visit)

29th April to 2nd May
1971.
30th April to 5th
May, 1971.

4th the May, 1971
(Transit Visit)

11

H. E. Dr. Vonsee,
Minister of Health of
Surinam

2 others

15the to 21st May,
1971.

12

H. E. Mr. Joseph S.
4 others
Tarka, Federal Minister
for Transport of Nigeria.

13

Mr. Donald Chesworth,
3 others
Chairman of "War on Want"

14

H. R. H. Princess
Helen Shah, Sisterin-Law of H. M. the
King of Nepal.

15

H. E. Mr. V.
..
Manickavasagam, Minister of Labour and
Manpower of Malaysia.

16

Hon. Congressman
1 other
Cornelius Gallagher,
Chairman of U. S. House
Sub-Committee on Asian
Pacific Affairs.

17

H. E. Mr. Lee Kuan
Yew, Prime Minister
of Singapore

5 others

18

H. R. H. The Crown
Prince of Japan.

36 others
10th June, 1971.
(Transit Visit)

19

His Majesty the
King of Nepal.

20

H. E. Mr. V.
Manickavasagam,
Minister of Labour
and Manpower of
Malaysia.

21

H. R. H. Prince
Gyanendra of Nepal

1 other

22

H. R. H. Prince
Gyanendra of Nepal.

1 other

23

H. E. Mr. Torben
Roenne, SecretaryGeneral (designate),
Ministry of Foreign

16th to 20th May, 1971.

4 others

20th May to 5th
June, 1971.

26 th to 28th May,
1971.

30th May, 1971,
(Transit visit)

7 others
..

2nd to 4th June,
1971.

7th June, 1971.
(Transit Visit)

10th to 12 June, 1971.

13th to 18th June, 1971.
(Private Visit)

..

17th to 18th June 1971.
(Transit Visit).
22nd June, 1971
(Transit Visit)
23rd to 26th June, 1971

Affairs of Denmark,
and Mrs. Roenne.
24

Mr. B. Loncar,
1 other
Secretary of Foreign
Affairs of Yugoslavia.

25th to 30th June, 1971.

<P-181>
25

The Honble Lord Casey
'former Governer General
of Australia, and Lady
Casey

..

26

H. E. Senator Dr.
Ernst Heinsen Justice
Minister of Hamburg,
Federal Republic of
Germany.

29th June to 4th July, 1971.

27

H. E. Mr. G. Duval
Foreign Minister of
Mauritius.

28

Three-Member Canadian
Parliamentary Delegation. ..
4th to 11th July, 1971
and 16th July, 1971.

29

H. E. the Hon'ble
Spiro T. Agnew,
Vice-President of the
U.S.A.

30

H. E. Dr. Henry A.
Kissinger, Personal
Representative of the
President of the U.S.A.

4 persons

31

Irish Parliamentary
Delegation (Three
Members)

..

32

H. E. Tunku Abdul
Rehman, former Prime
Minister of Malaysia.

33

H. E. Tunku Abdul Rehman, former Prime Minister of Malaysia.

34

H. E. Mr. A. A.
8 others
Gromyko, Foreign Minister of U.S.S.R. and

..

26th to 28th June, 1971.
(Private Vist)

..

3rd to 5th July, 1971.

86 others

6th July, 1971.
(Transit Visit)

6th to 8th July, 1971.

9th to 14th July, 1971.

1 other

4th August 1971.
(Transit Visit)

1 other

8th to 12th August
1971.

Mrs, Gromyko.
35

H.E. Col. Kyaw Soe.
1 other
Home Minister of Burma.

36

Hon. Senator Edward
2 others
M. Kennedy of the
(The party
U.S.A.
arrived in
advance on
2-8-71)

37

H. E. Dr. Cheddi
Jagan, former Prime
Minister of Guyana.

38

H. E. Mr. Shambhu
Prasad Gyawali,
Minister of Justice
and Home Affairs of
Nepal.

..

10th August 1971.
(Transit Visit)
10th to 17 August
1971.

14 th 20th August,
1971.
..

21st to 22nd August,
1971. (Transit Visit)

<P-182>
39

Their Royal Highnesses
Prince Himalaya B. B.
Shah Dev and Princess
Princep.

..

25th August, 1971.
(Transit Visit)

40

Senator Charles
Persy of U.S.A.
and Mrs. Persy.

2 children

28 to 29th August,
1970.

41

Senator Howard H.
Bekar of U.S.A.

2 others

30th August to
7th Sept. 1971.

42

H. E. Mr. Geoffrey
Johnson Smith, Under
Secretary of State
for Defence, Army, of
Britain.

43

H. E. Mr. Shambhu
Prasad Gyawali, Minister of Justice and
Home Affairs of
Nepal.

44

H. R. H. Prince
Dhirendra, son of
H. M. the King of
Nepal.

45

Mr. Inge Hindal

3 others.

30th August, 1971.
(Transit Visit)

..

31st August, 1971.
(Transit Visit)

1 other
(Private
Visit)

2nd to 8th September
1971.

..

8th to 9th September

Chief of Protocol
in the Royal Ministry of Foreign
Affairs of Norway.

1971.

46

Their Majesties the
King and the Queen
of Nepal.

4 others

47

H. R. H. Namgyal
Wangchuk, Tengye
Lyonpo, Minister
of Trade, Commerce
and Industry of Bhutan.

48

Ex-King Lleopold of
Belgium

49

H. E. Mr. Lakota.
Chairman of the
National Panchayat
of Nepal.

3 others

15 to 16th September,
1971.

50

Their Majesties the
King and the Queen
of Nepal.

4 others

18th Sept., 1971.
(Transit Visit)

2 others

7 others

9th Septe., 1971.
(Transit Visit)
12th to 13 September
1971.

2th 14th September,
1971.

<P-183>
51

H. E. Chief Hammer
De Roburt, O. B. E.,
M. P., President, Head
of State, Minister for
Island Development and
Industry and Minister
for External Affairs
of the Republic of
Nauru.

2 others

52

H. E. Mr. N. V.
58 others 1st to 2nd October, 1971.
Podgorny, Chairman
of the Presidium of
the Supreme Soviet of
the U. S. S. R.

53

Their Majesties the
King and the Queen of
Tonga.

54

H. E. Mr. Ion Arram,
Minister of Machine
Building Industry of
Rumania.

6 others

2 others

19th to 22nd September,
1971.

1st to 11th October,
1971.
6th Oct., 1971.
(Transit Visit)

55

Her Excellency Mrs.
Imelda R. Marcos,
First Lady of the
Phillippines.

10 others

56

Their Imperial Highnesses Prince and Princess Mikasa of Japan.

5 others

57

H.E. Mr. Vishnu Prasad
Lohani Minister of
Industry and Commerce
of Nepal.

58

Their Majesties the
King and the Queen
of Nepal.

59

H. E. Mr. Josip
51 others
Broz Tito, President of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia,
and Madame Jovanka
Broz.

60

H. E. the Foreign
Minister of Kuwait.

61

Their Imperial
Highnesses Prince
and Princess Mikasa
of Japan.

62

H. E. Mr. Salah
..
Abu Zaid, Minister
of State and Personal
Representative of H.
M. the King of Jordan,
and Mrs. Zaid.

10th to 11th October,
1971.

11th Oct. 1971.
Transit Visit)

2 others
11th to 12th October,
1971 (Private Visit)

5 others

13th Oct. 1971
(Transit Visit)
16th to 20th October,
1971.

6 others 20th to 21st October 1971.
5 others

23rd Oct., 1971.
(Transit Visit)

29th October, 1971
(Transit Visit)

<P-184>
63

H. R. H. Namgyal
Wangchuk, Minister
of Trade and Industry of Bhutan.

64

Madame Ne Win,
wife of the Chairman of the Revolutionary Council of

2 others

2 others

1st to 2nd November,
1971.

5th November, 1971.
(Transit Visit)

Burma.
65

H.R.H. Prince
Gyanendra B.B.
Shah of Nepal.

1 other

66

H. H. Prince
Sadruddin Aga
Khan, U. N. High
Commissioner for
Refugees.

67

H. R. H. Prince
..
Sultan Mohammad Ghazi,
President of the
Civil Aviation
Organization of
Afghanistan

68

Their Majesties the
King and the Queen of
Nepal.

69

H.E. Dr. Hans Filbinger, Chief Minister of BadenWuerttemberg Federal Republic of
Germany.

70

H. R. H. the Queen
of Malaysia.

..

71

H. E. Mr. Lee Kuan
Yew, Prime Minister
of the Republic of
Singapore.

8 others

72

H. H. The Chogyal
of Sikkim.

..

73

H. R. H. Prince
3 others
Sultan Mohammad Ghazi,
President of the
Civil Aviation
Organisation of
Afghanistan.

..

5th November, 1971.
(Transit Visit)

6th to 9th November, 1971.

10th to 11th November, 1971.

5 others

10th to 13th November,
1971.

12 others 13th to 25th November,
(5 not our guests)
1971.

19th Nov. 1971.
(Transit Visit)
21st to 25th November,
1971.

25th Nov., 1971
(Transit Visit)
28th Nov., 1971.
(Transit Visit)

<P-185>
INDIA
ITALY REPUBLIC OF SINGAPORE NEPAL UNITED KINGDOM BURMA KUWAIT MAURITIUS USA

HUNGARY NIGER NIGERIA MALAYSIA JAPAN DENMARK CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC
YUGOSLAVIA AUSTRALIA GERMANY GUYANA NORWAY BHUTAN BELGIUM NAURU TONGA
JORDAN AFGHANISTAN

Date :

Dec 01, 1971

Appendix VII: TREATIES/CONVENTIONS/AGREEMENTS
CONCLUDED OR RENEWED BY INDIA WITH OTHER
COUNTRIES IN 1971
List of Treaties/Agreements as on 15-1-1972**
**This list is not exhaustive.
S. No Title of Convention/ Date of Date of Date on Remarks
/Treaty/Agreement Signature Ratifi- Which
cation entered
Accept- into
ance
force
Confirmation
1

2

3

4

5

6

MULTILATERAL
ASIAN AFRICAN LEGAL CONSULTATIVE COMMITTEE (AALCC)
1. Exchange of Letters 18-11-1971
between the Government of India and the
Asian African Legal
Consultative Committee for amending
the agreement of 3rd
September 1966 on
Privileges and
Immunities.

..

18-11-1971

..

<P-186>
2. Convention On War Crimes and Crimes against Humanity.
Convention on the
Non-Applicability
of Statutory Limit-

26-11-1968 *13-4-1971 11-11-1990
away
after

*go

ations to War Crimes and and Crimes
against Humanity1970 (Convention
was adopted by the
General Assembly
of the United Nations at its 23rd
Session.)

the
date
of
deposit
of
instrum
ment
of
Acce
ssion i
e 12
th J
anua
ry,
1971

3. International Development Association Credit No. 226
IN
Development Credit
Agreement between
India and International Development Association regarding
Andhra Pradesh
Agricultural
Credit Project.

8-1-1971

..

10-5-1971

..

4. Credit No. 226 IN
Andhra Pradesh
8-1-1971
Agreement between
the State of Andhra Pradesh and
International Development Association regarding
Andhra Pradesh
Agricultural Credit Project.

..

10-5-1971

..

5. Credit No. 226 IN
Project Agreement
(Andhra Pradesh
Agricultural Credit Project) bet-

8-1-1971

..

10-5-1971

..

ween International
Development Association and Agricultural Re-finance
Corporation and the
Andhra Pradesh Cooperative Central Land
Mortgage Bank Limited
and the Andhra Pradesh
State Agro-Industries
Corporation Ltd
<P-187>
6. Credit No. 230 IN
Development Credit 28-1-1971 ..
Agreement between
India and the International Development
Association regarding
Agricultural Aviation
Project. ..

25-5-1971

..

7. Credit No. 230 IN
Project Agreement
28-1-71
(Agricultural Aviation Project) between International
Development Association and Agricultural Refinance
Corporation.

..

25-5-1971

..

3-5-71

..

25-6-71

..

3-5-71

..

29-7-71

..

8. Credit No. 241 IN
Development Credit
Agreement between
India and International Development Association regarding
Fourth Telecommunications
Project.
9. Credit No. 242 IN
Development Credit
Agreement between
India and International Dev-

elopment Association regarding
(Second Power
Transmiss on
Project).
10. Credit No. 249 IN
Development Credit 11-6-71
Agreement between
India and International Development Association regarding
Haryana Agricultural
Credit Project.

..

2-11-71

..

..

2-11-1971

..

<P-188>
11. Credit No. 249 IN
Project Credit bet- 11-6-1971
ween International
Development Association and Agricultural Refinance
Corporation and the
Haryana State Cooperative Land Mortgage
Bank Ltd. and the Haryana Agro-Industries
Corporation Ltd.
12. Credit No. 249 IN
Haryana Agreement
between the State
of Haryana and
International Development Association regarding
Haryana Agricultural
Credit Project.

11-6-71

..

2-11-1971

..

13. Credit No. 250 IN
Development Credit
11-6-1971 ..
Agreement between
India and International Development
Association regarding
Tamil Nadu Agricultural Credit

2-11-1971

..

Project.
14.

Credit No. 250 IN

Project Agreement
11-6-1971
between International Development
Association and
Agricultural Refinance
Corporation and Tamil
Nadu Cooperative State
Land Development Bank
and the State of Tamil
Nadu.

..

2-11-1971

..

<P-189>
15.

Credit No. 250 IN

Tamil Nadu Agreement 11-6-1971 ..
between the State of
Tamil Nadu and International Development
Association regarding
Tamil Nadu Agricultural
Credit Project.
16.

..

7-12-1971

..

Credit No. 264 IN

Project Agreement
30-7-1971
(Cochin II Fertilizer
Project) between
International Development Association
and the Fertilizers
and Chemicals, Travancore Limited.
18.

..

Credit No. 264 IN

Development Credit 30-7-1971
Agreement (Cochin II
Fertilizer Project)
between India and
International Development Association.
17.

2-11-1971

..

7-12-1971

..

15-11-71

..

Credit No. 268 IN

Development Credit 23-8-71
Agreement between
India and International
Development Association

..

regarding Pochampad
Irrigation Project.
19.

Credit No. 268 IN

Project Agreement
23-8-71
(Pochampad Irrigation
Project) between
International Development Association
and the State of
Andhra Pradesh....

..

15-11-71

..

<P-190>
MULTILATERAL
International Atomic Energy Agency / CANADA
20. Agreement between
30-9-71
the International
Atomic Energy Agency,
the Government of
Canada and the
Government of
India relating
to Safeguards
Provisions....
International Atomic 27-1-71
Energy Agency/United
State of America.

..

..

30-9-71

27-1-71

..

..

21. Agreement between
the International
Atomic Energy Agency,
the Government of
India and the
Government of India
and the Government
of United States of
America relating to
Safeguards Provisions.
BILATERAL
AUSTRIA
22. Agreement on Capital 4-11-71
Repayment 1972 between
the Austrian Federal
Government and the
Govt. of India.

..

4-11-71

..

AUSTRALIA
23. Exchange of Letters
between India and
Australia for grant
of 65,000 metric
tonnes of Wheat
under International
Grains Agreement.

31-5-71

31-5-71 31-5-71

..

<P-191>
24. Application of
..
Extradition Procedure to Commonwealth of Australia
on Reciprocal basis.

..

30-8-71

..

CANADA
25. Development Loan
Agreement between
the Government of
India and the Government of Canada
for forty Million
Canadian dollars
($400,00,000) for
Commodities and
Fertilizers.

7-4-71

.

..

..

26. Development Loan
Agreement between
the Government of
India and the Government of Canada
for three million
Canadian dollars
($3,000,000) for
equipment, Materials
and Services for oil
and gas exploration
and development.

7-4-71

..

..

..

27. Supplementary to the 5-5-71
Loan Agreement (for
$37.5 million dated
27-9-67) between the
Government of India
and the Export Development Corporation
of Canada for one

..

..

..

million five hundred
thousand dollars
($1,500,000) for
Rajasthan Atomic
Power Project
(Stage II).
28. Exchange of letters 2-7-71
regarding the reduction in the development Loan amount
in respect of Idikki
Hydro-Electric Project
from C $ 19.5 million
to C $ 11.00 million

2-7-71

..

..

<P-192>
29. Canadian Development 16-7-71
Line of Credit Agreement between the Government of India and
the Government of
Canada for ten million
Canadian dollars
($ 10,000,000).
30. Development Loan
Agreement between
the Government of
India and the Government of Canada
for one million
Canadian dollars
($ 1,000,000) for
certain Fertilizer
Bulk Handling Facility at the port
of Kandla.

12-8-71

..

..

..

..

31. Exchange of Letters 25-8-71
between the Government of India
and the Government
of Canada for grant
of Wheat Worth forty
million Canadian
dollars ($ 40,
000,000) under
International Grains
Arrangement.

25-8-71 25-8-71

32. Exchange of Letters

5-9-71

5-9-71

..

..

..

..

..

between the Government of India
and the Government
of Canada regarding
Industrial Commodities and Fertilizers Agreement
dated 7 April 1971
for carrying out
the changes in the
profile with reference to Annex `A'
of the said Agreement.
<P-193>
DENMARK
33. Agreement between
the Government of
India and the
Government of
Denmark on the
Continuation of
the Indo-Danish
Cattle Development Project
in Mysore.

28-1-71

34. Agreement between
the Government of
India and the Government of Denmark
on the Establishment
of a Technical
Training Centre
and a Service
Centre at Bangalore,
Mysore State.

8-7-71

..

..

..

8-7-71

..

21-1-71

..

..

FRANCE
35. Financial Protocol 21-1-71
between the Government of India
and the Government
of France for French
Credits meant for
financing the Development Plan of
India....

..

36. Exchange of Letters
between the Government of India
and the Government
of France for reducing the rate of
interest of Loan.....
37. Convention between
the Government of
India ahd the Credit
National Limited
for the refund
of Loan which
has been granted
to India under
the Indo-French
Financial Protocol
of 21-1-71..

21-1-71

21-1-71

22-1-71

..

5-2-71

..

..

..

..

..

<P-194>
38. Convention between
the Government of
India and French
Banks regarding
the Utilisation
of the bank Credits..

39. Credit Agreement
between the Government of India
and the French
banks for sixty
five million
French Francs
(FF. 65.000000)
29-3-71
40. Financial Protocol between
the Government
of India and
the Government
of France relating to the
Alleviation of
the Indian External Debt1971-72
22-6-71
41. Financial Protocol between
the Government

..

..

..

..

..

..

22-6-71

..

of India and
the Republic of
Franch relating
to French credits meant for
financing of the
Development Plan
of India 1971-72...

22-6-71

42. Exchange of Letters
between the Government of India
and the Government
of France for the
benefits of Private
importers of the
Capital goods by
the deferred payment
system.
22-6-71
43. Exchange of Letters
between the Government of India
and the Government
of Franch on the
exemption of amount
of interest from
Indian taxes..
22-6-71

..

22-6-71

22-6-71

..

22-6-71

..

..

..

..

<P-195>
44. Exchange of Letters
between the Government of India
and the Government of France
on the modalities
of the application
of the Protocol. .... 5-7-71

5-7-71

..

45. FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY
Exchange of Letters
between the Government of India
and Federal Republic of Germany
concerning the
extension of the
Joint Advisory
activities for
the development
of agriculture in

..

the District of
Kangra, Himachal
Pradesh.
4-2-71

4-2-71

46. Supplementary Loan
Agreement between
KREDITANSTALT FUR
WIEDERAUFBAU and
India and Hindustan
Steel Limited as
Joint Debtors for
DM 4,000,000. ...
21-2-71
47. Arbitration Agreement between KREDITANSTALT FUR
WIEDERAUFBAU and
India and Hindustan
Steel Limited. ... 21-2-71

..

..

..

..

..

..

48. Loan Agreement between KREDITANSTALT
FUR WIEDERAUFBAU
and the National
Small Industries
Corporation Ltd.
for DM 10,000,000. .... 14-5-71
49. Arbitration Agreement between KREDITANSTALT FUR WIEDERAUFBAU and The
National Small Industries Corporation
Ltd. New Delhi. .
28-5-71

4-2-71

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

<P-196>
50. Guarantee Agreement
between KREDITANSTALT
FUR WIEDERAUFBAU and
India to the Loan
Agreement dt., 14-5-71
between KREDITANSTALT
URF WIEDERAUFBAU and
the National Small
Industries Corporation Ltd., New
Delhi....
28-5-71
..
51. Loan Agreement
between KREDITANSTALT FUR WIED-

..

..

ERAUFBAU and The
Industrial Credit
and Investment
Corporation Ltd.
for DM 10,000,000
22-6-71

..

..

..

52. Arbitration Agreement between KREDTANSTALT FUR WIEDERAUFBAU and The
Industrial Credit
and Investment Corporation of India,
Limited, Bombay. .. 22-6-71

..

..

..

53. Guarantee Agreement
between KREDITANSTALT
FUR WIEDERAUFBAU and
India to the loan
Agreement dated 22
June 1971 between
KREDITANSTALT FUR
WIEDERAUFBAU and the
Industrial Credit and
Investment Corporation of India, Ltd.,
Bombay. ...
22-6-71
..

..

..

54. Loan Agreement
between KREDITANSTALT
FUR WIEDERAUFBAU
and the Industrial
Finance Corporation
of India for DM
10,000,000. .
22-6-71
..

..

..

<P-197>
55. Arbitration Agreement
between KREDITANSTALT
FUR WIEDERAUFBAU and
the Industrial Finance
Corp. of India,
New Delhi. ...
22-6-71
..
56. Guarantee Agreement
between KREDITANSTALT
FUR WIEDERAUFBAU and
India to the Loan Agreement dated 22 June,
1971 between KREDITANSTALT FUR WIEDERAUFBAU and the Ind-

..

..

ustrial Finance
Corporation of India
New Delhi. ...
22-6-71

..

57. Fourteenth Supplementary Agreement
(to the Agreement
of 28 March 1966)
between the Government of India
and the Government
of the Federal Republic of Germany
concerning Technical
Co-operation regarding Collaboration in respect of the IndoGerman Agricultural
Development Project,
Nilgiri, Tamil
Nadu State. ...
10-8-71

..

58. Agreement between
the Government of
India and the
Government of the
Federal Republic
of Germany concerning
Financial
Assistance. ....
2-12-71

..

..

..

10-8-71

..

2-12-71

..

GERMAN DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC
59. Protocol on the
Handing over of
an Apparatus for
Measuring of the
Ionospheric Absorption of Electromagnetic Waves,
between the Government of India
and the Government
of the German
Democratic
Republic....
23-6-71
<P-198>
ITALY
60. Financial Convention

..

23-6-71

..

between the Government
of India and Istitutodi
Credito per Le Imprese
di Pubblica UtilitaICIPU, EFIBANCA-Ente
Finanziario Interbancario S.P.A.
Instituto Mobiliare
Italiano (I.M.I)
MEDIO BANCA-Banca
di Credito Finanziario S.P.A.
3-8-71

..

..

..

JAPAN
61. Loan Agreement
between the Government of India
and the Export
-Import Bank of
Japan for the
economic development of
India. ...
20-4-71

..

62. Loan Agreement
between the Government of India
and the Government of Japan
for five billion
two hundred and
seventy four
million yen,
(Y,5,274,
000,000). ...
11-5-71
63. Exchange of Letters
between the Government
of India and the
Government of Japan
regarding rescheduling of
repayments instalements of Loan. .. 27-7-71
<P-199>
NEPAL
64. Tredrty between
the Government of
India and the

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

Government of
Nepal regarding
trade and Transit.

13-8-71

..

5-8-71

..

NETHERLANDS
65. Loan Agreement
between the Government of India
and the De Nederland Investerings
Bank Voor Ontwikkalingslanden
for fifty million
Netherlands guilders
as a contribution
towards the foreign
currency requirements
of India resulting
from India's
Development Plans. ... 18-5-71

..

66. Fourth Addendum
to the Loan Agreements between the
President of India
and DENEDERLAND
INVFSTERINGS BANK
VOOR ONTWEIKKELINGS
LANDEN N. V.
concerning the
loans I upto and
including VI. A. .. 27-8-71
..

..

..

..

..

NORWAY
67. Grant Agreement between the Government
of the Republic of
India and the
Government of the
Kingdom of Norway
relating to the
partial financing
of the All India
Hospital Postpartum Family
Planning Programme. ...
22-12-71
<P-200>
SWEDEN

..

22-12-71

..

68. Development credit
Agreement between
the Government of
India and the Government of Sweden
for one hundred
twenty five million
Swedish Kronor
(Skr 125,000
,000 ...
10-3-71

..

10-4-71

..

SWITZERLAND
69. Agreement between
the Government of
India and the Swiss
Confederation Concerning Technical
Cooperation for
the establishment
of an Indo-Swiss
Project for Cattle
Breeding in
Punjab State.
17-6-71

..

17-6-71

..

UNITED KINGDOM
70. Exchange of Notes
between the Government of India
and the Government
of United Kingdom
for I.C.I. C.I.
(Industrial Credit
and Investment
Corporation of
India) Loan 1971
for a sum of œ
1,000,000 (One
million pounds
sterling) for
the purpose of
assisting in
financing certain
development project. . 18-3-71
71. Exchange of Notes
between the Government of India
and the Government
of the United
Kingdom for Capital

18-3-71

..

..

Investment Loan,
1971 for œ 12
million (twelve
million pounds
sterling) for
the purpose of
assisting in
financing certain
development capital
investments. .
18-3-71

18-3-71

..

..

<P-201>
72. Exchange of Notes
between the Government of India and
the Government of
the United Kingdom
for œ 3,000,000
for Mixed Project
Loan Agreement.
18-3-71
73. Exchange of Notes
between the Government of India
and the Government
of the United Kingdom for mixed
imports Loan 1971
for œ 2,000,000
(two million pounds
sterling) for the
purchase of certain
goods and services
in the United
Kingdom. .....
31-3-71
74. Exchange of Notes
between the Government of India
and the Government
of the United
Kingdom for Wheat
Grant to India
which would be
known as the
"UK/India Food
Aid Grant, 1971".
17-6-71
75. Exchange of Letters
between the Government of India
and the Government

18-3-71

31-3-71

17-6-71

..

..

..

..

..

..

of the United Kingdom regarding
amendment of the
Loan Agreement
dated 5th December
1968. ....
13-7-71
76. Exchange of Notes
between the Government of India and
the Government of
the United Kingdom
for Wheat Grant
to India which
would be known
as "The UK/India
Food Aid Grant
(No. 2) 1971". .... 4-8-71

13-7-71

4-8-71

..

-

..

..

<P-202>
77. Exchange of Notes
between the Government of India
and the Government
of the United
Kingdom for debt
refinancing Loan
1071 for œ7,500,
000 (Seven
million five
hundred thousand
pounds sterling)
for the purpose of
reimbursing the
Government of
India for payments
made to the Department
of Trade and Industry of the Government of the United
Kingdom during the
period 1st April,
1971 to 31st
March, 1972. ..... 6-9-71
78. Exchange of Notes
between the Government of India
and the Government
of United Kingdom
for interest free
loan of œ27,000

6-9-71

..

..

,000. (twenty
seven million
pounds
sterling). ...

18-11-71

..

..

UNITED STATES
79. Aid Loan No. 386-H-212
Loan Agreement
(India Production
Loan 1971) between
the Government of
India and the Government of the
United States
of America for one
hundred and fifty
five million United
Satates Dollars
($ 155,000,000)
13-3-71

..

..

..

<P-203>
80. PL 480
Seventh Supplementary
Agreement between the
Government of India
and the Government
of the United States
of America for Sales
of Agricultural
Commodities.
1-4-71

..

..

..

81. AID LOAN No. 386-H-212
Amendatory Agreement
No. 1 to Loan Agreement dated 13 March,
1971 between the
Government of India
and the Government
of the United
States.
22-4-71
82. PL 480
Exchange of Letters
between the Government
of India and the
Government of the
USA for amending

..

..

..

the PL 480 agreement
regarding sales of
agricultural commodities
dated 1 April,
1971.
7-5-71
83. Arrangements between
the Government of
India and the Government of the United
States of America
concluded for debt
relief in respect
of Loan Agreement
dated 15 June,
1951.
25-6-71

7-5-71

..

7-5-71

..

..

..

AID LOAN No. 386-H-212
84. Amendatory Agreement
No. 2 to Loan Agreement dt. 13 March,
1971 between the
Government of
India and the Government of the
United States of
America.
9-7-71

..

..

..

<P-204>
85. UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
The Treaty of Peace,
Friendship and Cooperation between
the Republic of
India and the
Union of Soviet
Socialist
Republics.
9-8-71

..

18-8-71

..

JOINT COMMUNIQUES
86. Joint Communique-Ceylon
Joint communique Sardar
Swaran Singh's
(Foreign Minister)
visit to Ceylon.
11-9-71

..

JOINT COMMUNIQUE-INDONESIA
87. Joint Communique-Sardar

..

..

Swaran Singh's
(Foreign Minister)
Visit to Indonesia. 15-8-71

..

..

..

88. Joint Communique-Nepal
Joint Communique-Sardar
Swaran Singh's
(Foreign Minister)
visit to Nepal.
5-9-71

..

..

..

<P-205>
INDIA
USA LATVIA CANADA AUSTRIA AUSTRALIA CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC DENMARK
FRANCE GERMANY ITALY JAPAN NEPAL NORWAY SWEDEN SWITZERLAND UNITED
KINGDOM INDONESIA

Date :

Dec 01, 1971

Appendix VIII: INDIAN MISSIONS/POSTS ABROAD (AS ON
25-1-72)
Country
1

2

Location

Remarks
3

4

I. EMBASSIES-(a) Resident
1.

Afghanistan

Kabul

2.

Algeria

Algiers

3.

Argentina

Buenos Aires

4.

Austria

Vienna

5.

Bahrain

Bahrain

6.

Belgium

Brussels

Ambassador concurrently
accredited to Paraguay
and Uruguayas Ambassador.

Ambassador concurrently
accredited to Luxembourg as Ambassador.
Additionally, the
Ambassador is India's
Special Representative
for Economic Financial
and Commercial Affairs

and he is also accredited to the European
Economic Community
and the European
Coal and Steel
Community.
7.

Brazil

Brazilia

8.

Bulgaria

Sofia

9.

Burma

Rangoon

Ambassador concurrently accredited to
Venezuela and Bolivia
as Ambassador.

10. Cambodia

Phnom Penh

11. Chile

Santiago

Ambassador concurrently accredited to
Colombia, Ecuador
and Peru as Ambassador.

12. China

Peking

Under the charge of
Minister C.D.A.

<P-206>
13. Cuba

Havana

14. Czechoslovakia

Prague

15. Denmark

Copenhagen

16. Ethiopia

Addis Ababa

17. Finland

Helsinki

18. France

Paris

19. Federal Republic
of Germany

Bonn

20. Guinea

Conakary

21. Hungary

Budapest

22. Indonesia

Djakarta

23. Iran

Tehran

24. Iraq

Baghdad

25. Ireland

Dublin

26. Italy

Rome

Incharge of a
Counsellor/Charge
d' Affaires, Ambassador
resident in Mexico City.

Ambassador concurrently

accredited as High
Commissioner to Malta.
First Secretary in the
Embassy of India, Italy
is concurrently accredited to the Republic
of San Marino as Consul General.
27. Japan

Tokyo

28. Jordan

Amman

In charge of First
Secretary/Charge
d'Affaires, Ambassador
resident in Beirut.

29. Kuwait

Kuwait

Ambassador's jurisdiction extends to
Dubai.

30. Laos

Vientiane

31. Lebanon

Beirut

32. Libya

Ambassador concurrently
accredited as Ambassador to Jordan and as
High Commissioner to
Cyprus.

Tripoli

<P-207>
33. Madagascar

Tananarive

Ambassador concurrently accredited as ConsulGeneral to Reunion
Island and Comores.

34. Mexico

Mexico City

Ambassador concurrently accredited to Cuba,
Panama and Nicaragua as
Ambassador.

35. Mongolia

Ulan Bator

36. Morocco

Rabat

37. Nepal

Kathmandu

38. Netherlands

The Hague

39. Norway

Oslo

40. Oman

Muscat

Concurrently accredited
as Consul General to
Union of Arab Emirates
and Qatar.

41. Peru

Lima

In charge of First

Ambassador concurrently accredited to Tunisia as Ambassador.

Secy C.D.A. Ambassador
resident in Santiago.
42. Philippines

Manila

43. Poland

Warsaw

44. Rumania

Bucharest

45. Saudi Arabia

Jeddha

46. Senegal

Dakar

47. Somalia

Mogadishu

48. Spain

Madrid

49. Sudan

Khartoum

50. Sweden

Stockholm

51. Switzerland

Berne

52. Syrian Arabic
Republic

Damascus

53. Thailand

Bangkok

Also Permanent
Representative of India
to ECAFE.

54. Tunisia

Tunis

In Charge of a First
Secretary/Charge
d'Affaires.
Ambassador resident
in Rabat.

55. Turkey

Ankara

56. United Arab
Republic

Cairo

57. United States
of America

Washington

58. Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics

Moscow

59. Vietnam Democratic
Republic of

Hanoi

Ambassador concurrently accredited as Ambassador to Ivory Coast
and Upper Volta &
Mauritania and High
Commissioner to
Gambia.

Ambassador concurrently
accredited to Vatican
as Ambassador.

<P-208>

Ambassador concurrently
accredited as Ambassador
to Yemen Arab Republic.

60. Venezuela

Caracas

In charge of Counsellor
/C.D.A. Ambassador resident in Brazilia.

61. Yemen Arab Republic

Saana

Incharge of First
Secy.C.D.A./Ambassador
resident in Cairo.

62. Yemen-People's
Democratic Republic

Aden

63. Yugoslavia

Belgrade

Ambassador concurrently
accredited to Greece as
Ambassador.

64. Zaire

Kinshasa

Ambassador concurrently
accredited to Gabon and
Congo (Brazzaville).

II. EMBASSIES-(b) Non-resident
1.

Bolivia

Ambassador resident in Brazilia

2.

Burundi

Ambassador resident in Kampala

3.

Cameroun

Ambassador resident in Lagos

4.

Colombia

Ambassador resident in Santiago (Chile)

5.

Congo

Ambassador resident in Kinshasa

6.

Costa Rica

Ambassador resident in New York

7.

Dahomey

Ambassador resident in Lagos

8.

Ecuador

Ambassador resident in Santiago

9.

Gabon

Ambassador resident in Kinshasa

<P-209>
10. Greece

Ambassador resident in Belgrade

11. Ivory Coast

Ambassador resident in Dakar

12. Liberia

Ambassador resident in Accra

13. Luxembourg

Ambassador resident in Brussels

14. Maldives

Ambassador resident in Colombo

15. Mali

Ambassador resident in Conakary

16. Mauritania

Ambassador resident in Dakar

17. Panama

Ambassador resident in Mexico City

18. Paraguay

Ambassador resident in Buenos Aires

19. Rwanda

Ambassador resident in Kampala

20. Togo

Ambassador resident in Lagos

21. Upper Volta

Ambassador resident in Dakar

22. Uruguay

Ambassador resident in Buenos Aires

23. Vatican

Ambassador resident in Berne
III. HIGH COMMISSIONS-(a) Resident

1.

Australia

Canberra

Jurisdiction extended
to U.N. Trust Territories of Papua and
Newguinea.

2.

Canada

Ottawa

3.

Ceylon

Colombo

4.

Fiji

Suva

Jurisdiction extends to
the UN Trust Territory
of Caroline and Marshal
Island: Naur; Soloman
Island; New Hebrides;
Gilbert and Elice
Islands: New Caledonia
and Society Islands.
Also concurrently
accredited as High
Commissioner of India
to Kingdom of Tonga.

5.

Ghana

Accra

High Commissioner accredited to Liberia as
Ambassador and as High
Commissioner to Sierra
Leone.

6.

Guyana

George Town

7.

Kenya

Nairobi

High Commissioner
accredited to Maldives Islands as
Ambassador.

<P-210>
8.

Malawi

Blantyre

9.

Malaysia

Kuala Lumpur

10. Mauritius

Port Louis

11. New Zealand

Wellington

Concurrently accredited
to Swaziland as High
Commissioner.

Jursidiction extended
to Western Samoa.

12. Nigeria

Lagos

High Commissioner
concurrently accredited to Togo,
Dahomey and Camerons
as Ambassador.

13. Singapore

Singapore

14. Tanzania

Dar-es-Salaam

15. Trinidad & Tobago

Port of Spain

16. Uganda

Kampala

17. United Kingdom

London

18. Zambia

Lusaka

High Commissioner
concurrently accredited as High Commissioner to Jamaica,
Barbados, Antigua,
Grenada, Dominica, St.
Kitts, St. Lucia, St.
Vincent Montserrat
and as Consul General
to Surinam.
High Commissioner
concurrently accredited
as Ambassador to Ruanda
and Burundi.

IV. HIGH COMMISSIONS- (b) Non-resident
1.

Barbados

High Commissioner resident in Port of Spain.

2.

Cyprus

High Commissioner resident at Beirut.

3.

Gambia

High Commissioner resident in Dakar.

4.

Jamaica

High Commissioner resident in Port of Spain.

5.

Lesotho

High Commissioner resident in Blantyre.

6.

Malta

High Commissioner resident in Rome.

7.

Sierra Leone

High Commissioner resident in Accra.

8.

Swaziland

High Commissioner resident in Blantyre.

9.

Tonga-Kingdom High Commissioner resident in Suva.
of

<P-211>
V. DEPUTY HIGH COMMISSION/ASSISTANT HIGH COMMISSION-Resident
1.

Australia

Sydney

2.

Ceylon

Kandy

Deputy High Commissioner.
Assistant High Commissioner.

VI. COMMISSIONS-(a) Resident

1.

Hon Kong

Hong Kong

2.

Kenya

Mombasa

Asstt. Commissioner.

VII. COMMISSIONS-(b) Non-resident
1.

Antigua

Commissioner resident in Port of Spain.

2.

Dominica

Do.

3.

Grenada

Do.

4.

Montserrat

Do.

5.

St. Kitts

Do.

6.

St. Lucia

Do.

7.

St. Vincent

Do.

VIII. CONSULATES GENERAL-(a) Resident
1. Federal Republic of
Germany

Berlin

2. Do.

Frankfurt

3. Do.

Hamburg

4. German Democratic
Republic

Berlin

Consul General.

5. Indonesia

Medan

Consul General.

6. Japan

Kobe

7. Korea-(Democratic Republic of

Pyong Yong

8. Korea (Republic of

Seoul

Consular jurisdiction
includes the States of
Hessen, Saarland &
Rhinland Pfalz.
Consular jurisdiction
include the State of Hamburg
Bremen, Schleawig, Holstein
and Lower Saxony.

Ambassador resident in
Tokyo.

<P-212>
9. U.S.A.

New York

Ambassador resident in
Washington.

10. U.S.A.

San Francisco

Resident Consul General.
Ambassador resident in
Washington.

11. U.S.S.R.

Odessa

Consul General resident.

12. Vietnam-Republic
of

Saigon

IX. CONSULATES GENERAL-(b) Non-resident
1.

Comores

Consul General resident in Trananarive

2.

Reunon Island

Consul General resident in Trananarive

3.

San Marino Republic
of

Consul General resident in Rome

4.

Surinam

Consul General resident in Port of Spain.

X. CONSULATES-Resident
1.

Afghanistan

Jalalabad

Consul Ambassador resident
in Kabul.

2.

Do.

Kandhar

Do.

3.

Afars and Issas-French territories of

Djibouti

Hon. Consul.

4.

Burma

Mandalay

Consul. Ambassador resident
in Rangoon.

5.

Canary Islands

Las Palmas

6.

Iran

Khorramshahr

7.

Iraq

Basra

8.

Italy

Genova

9.

Panama

Bandar Abbas

Hon. Consul. Amb. resident in Mexico.

10. Spain

Barcelona

Hon. Consul. Amb. resident in Madrid.

11. U.S.A.

Cleveland

{Hon. Consul. Amb. resident in Washington

12. U.S.A.

Honolulu

Hon. Consul.
Ambassador resident in
Tehran.
Ambassador reisent in
Baghdad.
Honl. Consul Amb. resident in Rome.

XI. VICE CONSULATES-Resident
1.

Iran

Zahidan

2.

Switzerland

Geneva

Ambassador resident in
Tehran.
Ambassador resident in Berne.

<P-213>
XII. TRADE COMMISSIONS AND OFFICES-Resident

1.

Canada

Vancouver

2.

Dubai

Dubai

High Commissioner resident Ottawa.
In charge of a Trade Agent.

XIII. SPECIAL MISSIONS-(a) Resident
1.

Bangla Desh

Dacca

Acting Head of Mission.

2.

Bhutan

Thimpu

Representative of India.

3.

Sikkim

Gangtok

4.

Permanent Mission
New York
of India to the U.N.

5.

Permanent Mission
of India to U.N.
Office in Geneva

Geneva

Political Officer.
Permanent Representative.
Permanent Representative/Ambassador.

XIV. HONY. CONSULATES GENERAL
1.

Belgium

Ghent

Consul General

2.

Denmark

Copenhagen

Consul General

3.

Germany

Munich

Consul General

4.

Germany

Stuttgart

Consul General

5.

Greece

Athens

Consul General

6.

Paraguay

Asuncion

Consul General

7.

Uruguay

Montevideo

Consul General

XV. HONY. CONSULATES
1.

Afars & Issas (French Territory)

Djibouti

Consul

2.

Canary Islands

Las Palmas

Consul

3.

Cleveland (Ohio)

Cleveland

Consul

4.

Hawaii

Honolulu

Consul

5.

Italy

Genoa

Consul

6.

Panama

Panama

Consul

7.

Spain

Barcelona

Consul

<P-214>
INDIA
AFGHANISTAN ALGERIA ARGENTINA PARAGUAY URUGUAY AUSTRIA USA BAHRAIN
BELGIUM BRAZIL BOLIVIA VENEZUELA BULGARIA BURMA CAMBODIA CHILE COLOMBIA
ECUADOR PERU CHINA CUBA MEXICO CZECH REPUBLIC NORWAY SLOVAKIA DENMARK

ETHIOPIA FINLAND FRANCE GERMANY GUINEA HUNGARY INDONESIA IRAN IRAQ IRELAND
ITALY MALTA SAN MARINO JAPAN JORDAN LEBANON KUWAIT LAOS CYPRUS LIBYA
CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC MADAGASCAR NICARAGUA PANAMA MONGOLIA MOROCCO
NEPAL OMAN QATAR PHILIPPINES POLAND ROMANIA SAUDI ARABIA SENEGAL MAURITANIA
MALI SOMALIA SPAIN SUDAN SWEDEN SWITZERLAND SYRIA THAILAND TUNISIA TURKEY
EGYPT YEMEN RUSSIA VIETNAM YUGOSLAVIA GREECE ZAIRE GABON CONGO BURUNDI
UGANDA COSTA!!GHANA LIBERIA MALDIVES SRI LANKA RWANDA AUSTRALIA CANADA FIJI
TONGA CAYMAN ISLANDS GUYANA KENYA MALAWI SWAZILAND MALAYSIA MAURITIUS
NEW ZEALAND WESTERN SAMOA NIGER NIGERIA REPUBLIC OF SINGAPORE TANZANIA
JAMAICA DOMINICA GRENADA MONTSERRAT UNITED KINGDOM ZAMBIA LESOTHO SIERRA
LEONE HONG KONG KOREA DJIBOUTI BHUTAN

Date :

Dec 01, 1971

Appendix IX: EXPENDITURE ON HEADQUARTERS AND
MISSIONS/POSTS ABROAD DURING 1971-72
The expenditure during 1971-72 on Headquarters of this Ministry is of the
order of Rs. 278.55 lakhs, a sum of Rs 130.50 lakhs is towards Establishment
Charges, a sum of Rs. 111.05 lakhs for publicity, cables diplomatic bags
services etc., a sum of Rs. 30.000 lakhs for travelling expenses and the balance
of Rs. 7.00 lakhs for Interim Relief.
The expenditure on Missions/Posts and Missions in Thimpu and Gangtok is Rs.
1233.00 lakhs out of which a sum of Rs. 714.94 lakhs is spent on establishment
charges including foreign and other compensatory allowances, a sum of Rs. 67.87
lakhs on passages for transfers and Local Tours, Rs. 34.56 lakhs for Publicity
Contingencies and Rs. 415.63 lakhs on Official and residential accommodation, P.
& T., Charges and other office contingencies. The average expenditure per
Mission comes to Rs. 11.32 lakhs.
The expenditure mentioned above (viz., Rs. 1511.55 lakhs as per details
below) on Headquarters and Missions Posts abroad includes expenditure on
External Publicity Programme (Activities. The break-up of this expenditure is as
under:(Rs. in lakhs)
(a) HEADQUARTERS:
(i) Salaries (Officers 29, Staff 117)
(ii) Travelling Expenses
(iii) Publicity Contingent Charges

.
.

.

.

.

8.90

.

.

.

2.10

.

.

.

.

52.62

41.62

MISSIONS/POSTS ABROAD:
(i) Salaries (Officers 64, Staff 395)

.

.

.

. 43.97

(ii) Foreign Allowance, Compensatory Allowance

.

(iii) Passages and Travelling Expenses

.

.

.

(iv) Publicity Contingencies

.

.

. 34.56

. .

.

(v) Other Charges including rent of residential
accommodation and other office contigencies

.

.

. 28.57

3.20

.

. 20.81

131.11
TOTAL : EXTERNAL PUBLICITY

.

.

.

. 183.73

<P-215>
The expenditure on External Publicity as detailed above comes to 12.15 per
cent of the expenditure on Headquarters and Missions/Posts abroad.
DETAILS OF EXPENDITURE ON HEADQUARTERS AND MISSIONS/POSTS ABROAD DURING
1971-72
(In lakhs of Rupees)
Establishment Travelling Other Total
Charges Expenses Charges
I. SECRETARIAT:
(a) Headquarters

.

128.60 27.90 69.43 225.93

(b) External Publicity Division .
TOTAL :

.

.

.

.

8.90

2.10 41.62 52.62

137.50 30.00 111.05 278.55

II. OVERSEAS ESTABLISHMENT :
(a) Missions/Posts abroad
(b) Publicity Wings
TOTAL

.

.

GRAND TOTAL :

642.40 64.67 394.82 1101.89
.

.

72.54 3.20 55.37 131.11

. 714.94 67.87 450.19 1233.00
. 852.44 97.87 561.24 1511.55

Date :

Dec 01, 1971


