1972-73

Contents
Jan 01, 1972
REPORT
1972-73
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS
NEW DELHI
CHAPTER

CONTENTS

PAGES

Introduction

1

I.

India's Neighbours

6

II.

South East Asia

22

III.

East Asia

26

IV.

West Asia and North Africa

33

V.

Africa (South of the Sahara)

35

VI.

Europe

39

VI.

The Americas

54

VIII.

United Nations and International Conferences

59

IX.

Technical and Economic Co-operation

75

X.

External Publicity

88

XI.

Cultural Relations

93

XII.

protocol Matters.

97

XIII.
XIV.

Passport, Visa and Consular Services

98

Administration and Organisation

102

APPENDICES
NUMBER

PAGES

I. International Conferences, Congresses,
in which India participated in 1972-73.

Seminars etc.,

106

II.
International Organisations of which India became a
member/ceased to be a member.

121

III.
Treaties/Conventions/Agreements concluded or renewed
by India with other countries in 1972.

122

IV.
Expenditure on Headquarters and Missions/-Posts abroad
during 1972-73.

151

V.

153

List of Indian Missions/Posts opened in 1972-73 .

INDIA

Jan 01, 1972

Introduction
Jan 01, 1972
INTRODUCTION
The year under review witnessed a wider acceptance of the
principle of non-alignment as endorsed at the Conference of
Foreign Ministers of Non-aligned countries held at Guyana. India
also noted with satisfaction the acceptance of the principle of
peaceful co-existence by the major powers as determining relations between them. It was gratifying to note that in the communiques issued following President Nixon's visit to China as
well as his visit to the Soviet Union; the five principles of Panch

Sheel found reference in one form or another. The general trend
towards relaxation of tensions and promotion of the detente in
the relations between the hitherto hostile blocs has been welcomed by all peace-loving peoples. It is hoped that the stalemate in West Asia will also. end soon and the Agreement on
Vietnam will lead to a durable peace in South-East Asia.
India has welcomed the significant moves in Europe which
have brought about a general atmosphere of detente between the
Western and the Eastern European countries. The Four-Power
agreement on Berlin and the agreements between the two Germanys have been noted with interest by India. The conclusion
of the "Basic Treaty" between the two German States augurs
well for the future of peace in Europe. The proposed European
Security Conference and the Strategic Arms Limitation Talks
between the USA and the Soviet Union are further trends in the
same direction. It is hoped that these will yield concrete results
leading to further improvement in the international situation with
a view to strengthen international peace and security.
India has watched with interest the emergence of an enlarged
European Economic Community. She hopes that Britain's
entry will not adversely affect her economic ties with Britain or
other European countries. She expects that the new Community
would be outward looking and would make a genuine contribution to wards the lessening of disparities between the industrialised and advanced nations of Europe and the poor and developing
nations of the Third World.
India welcomes the intention of the European Council of
Ministers to enter into. negotiations with her to conclude a Commercial Co-operation Agreement. India hopes that this will safeguard her trade interests and strengthen relations between her
and the European Economic Community.
<pg1>
<pg2>
The visit of President Nixon to Peking last year brought about
a welcome relaxation in the relations between the countries of
South-East Asia. India welcomes the normalisation of relations
between China and Japan and the trends in the same direction A
in the relations between China on the one hand and the various
other countries in South East Asia, on the other, including Australia and New Zealand. Indian believes that this will lead to the
lessening of tensions in this region.
India welcomed the long awaited Agreement which has led
to the stoppage of fighting in Vietnam. She hopes that the resultant negotiations will lead to a durable peace which will extend

to Cambodia and Laos. It is India's sincere belief that the recognition of the independence, sovereignty and integrity of the
states of Indo-China will contribute to peace and stability in
South East Asia.
India's own contribution towards peace has been widely welcomed and acknowledged. India took the initiative in opening
a dialogue with Pakistan in-order to eliminate once and for all
the politics of confrontation and to usher in an era of good
neighbourly and harmonious cooperation in the, sub-continent,
It was in this spirit that India concluded the Simla Agreement and
later arrived at an agreement regarding the Line of Control in
Jammu and Kashmir by mutual accommodation, to the satisfaction of both the parties and thereafter promptly brought about the
withdrawal of Indian and Pakistani forces to their own sides of
the international border. India, however, feels that if a durable
peace has to be established in the Indian sub-continent, Pakistan
should recognise the reality of the new situation and recognise
the independent, sovereign state of Bangladesh. Such a step will
help to solve the question of the return of prisoners of war who
surrendered to the Joint Command of India and Bangladesh.
India a sincerely believes that it is possible for all the states in
the sub-continent to live in peace with each other and to move
forward towards the goal of prosperity and development for their
peoples.
India's faith in the need for harmony and cooperation between
the countries of the sub-continent has already been vindicated in
her relations with Bangladesh, her newly independent neighbour.
Further steps were taken to strengthen the ties between the two
countries in the economic, technological, cultural and other fields.
India welcomed the adoption by Bangladesh of a new Constitution providing for secularism, socialism and democracy and sup.
ported the admission of that country to various international
<pg3>
agencies. It is hoped that the international community will recognise the new realities in the sub-continent and there will be no
further opposition to the admission of Bangladesh to the United
Nations.
While striving for normalisation of relations with Pakistan and
consolidating her relations with Bangladesh, India continued to
have close and friendly relations with the neighbouring states of
Nepal, Bhutan, Afghanistan, Burma, Indonesia, Malaysia, Singapore and Sri Lanka. The positive attitude adopted by these States
towards the realities in the sub-continent has been encouraging
and provides a sound basis for promoting mutually beneficial
relations with all of them.
India, with a large coastline, is naturally concerned about her

security in the context of the situation in the Indian Ocean, which
she has consistently advocated to be kept free from big power
rivalry, free from foreign bases and from nuclear weapons. India,
therefore, welcomed the unanimous endorsement of this wish by
the UN General Assembly. India will welcome any discussion
among the littoral powers on this issue and will support the initiatives taken by Sri Lanka in this regard.
It is a matter of high satisfaction for the Government of
India that their initiatives towards strengthening relations with
African neighbours across the Indian Ocean have received enthusiastic response. The President's State visits to Ethiopia,
Tanzania and Zambia brought these countries closer to India and
opened up prospects of establishing bilateral cooperation with
them in various fields. While India has already been engaged in
joint ventures of various kinds in several countries of West and
East Africa, the conclusion of an agreement with Tanzania for
cooperation in economic and industrial development has been a
major achievement of the year under review. It was however,
distressing to note the manner in which the people of Asian
origin were forced to leave Uganda. While India appreciates the
desire of the African countries to follow a policy of gradual
Africanization, she feels concerned at the practice of the policy
of racial discrimination by the African Government when India
has been foremost in condemning the policy of racial discrimination practised by the White rulers of South Africa, Portugal and
Rhodesia against the Africans and others. The Government of
India is in touch with the Government of Uganda to alleviate the
suffering of the Indians and are making various efforts to obtain
<pg4>
fair compensation for the assets left behind by the displaced
Indians.
In West Asia India has strengthened her ties with the States
of the Gulf and close cooperation has been established with Iraq.
India continues to have friendly relations with the Arab states in
general. She hopes that these States will accept the realities of
the new situation in the Indian sub-continent and will recognise
the newly independent state of Bangladesh. India is concerned
that no progress has been made for resolving the stalemate between the Arab countries and Israel. India believes that a satisfactory solution can be achieved on the basis of the Security
Council resolution of 1967. She is convinced of the justice of
the Arab cause and feels that the aspirations of the peoples of
Palestine should be satisfied and Israel should withdraw from all
the territories occupied by her during the 1967 conflict. India
also welcomes the agreement for unity signed between the two
Republic of Yemen as contributing to stability and peace in the
region.
India's relations with the countries of Europe have been

steadily growing. There was a strong undercurrent of realism
in the attitude of the countries of Western Europe towards the
developments in the Indian sub-continent and consequently a
better understanding of its problems and of India's earnest desire
to promote stable, peaceful and friendly relations with her
neighbours. Annual bilateral consultations with some countries
and the exchange of high-level visits with others helped in promoting this understanding further.
The Treaty of Peace, Friendship and Cooperation signed between India and the Soviet Union in 1971 has guided the two
governments in their efforts to strengthen their cooperation in
various fields. The setting up of a joint Indo-Soviet Commission
for Economic, Scientific and Technological Cooperation will, it is
hoped, be instrumental in accelerating India's development. Cooperation and understanding with the Soviet Union will continue
to be a basic feature of India's foreign policy as India sincerely
believes that this is in the interests not only of India and the
Soviet Union but also of peace in this region and the world at
large.
It is a matter of regret that India's efforts to normalise her
relations with China have not yet been successful. The positive
trends noticed in China's attitude towards this country before the
<pg5>
developments in Bangladesh have unfortunately been overshadowed by the unrealistic attitude adopted by China towards
Indo-Pakistan relations and towards Bangladesh. India is still
willing and ready to hold bilateral discussions with China on the
basis of the five principles of peaceful co-existence subscribed to
by both.
India's relations with the USA came under a strain as a result
of the unhappy approach adopted by that country towards developments in the sub-continent. India appreciates that the two
governments may not see eye to eye on all problems but this
should not prevent friendship and cooperation between. them based
on an understanding of each other's points of view. India is
ready to join in any serious efforts to bring this about. India
believes that there need be no conflict of basic interests between
her and the USA and that their relations must, therefore, be put
on a realistic basis of equality, mutual respect and mutual benefit. Their relations with other countries should not come in the
way of improvement in their relations.
GUYANA
INDIA CHINA VIETNAM GERMANY USA MALI JAPAN NEW ZEALAND CAMBODIA LAOS
PAKISTAN BANGLADESH AFGHANISTAN BHUTAN BURMA INDONESIA MALAYSIA NEPAL SRI
LANKA ETHIOPIA TANZANIA ZAMBIA UGANDA PORTUGAL SOUTH AFRICA IRAQ ISRAEL
YEMEN

Jan 01, 1972

India's Neighbours
CHAPTER I
INDIA'S NEIGHBOURS
Afghanistan
India continued to have close and friendly relations with
Afghanistan. President. V. V. Giri made an official visit to that
country in July 1972. He was received with utmost cordiality
and friendship. Later in December the visit of their Royal Highnesses the Crown Prince and Princess of Afghanistan to India
demonstrated the friendly ties existing between India and
Afghanistan.
Bangladesh
India during the year consolidated her relations with her new
Asian neighbour, Bangladesh. Massive economic assistance was
given to Bangladesh for the speedy rehabilitation and reconstruction of its economy. An historic Treaty and several agreements
were signed crystalising the friendship and cooperation between
the two countries. The prompt withdrawal of the Indian army
from Bangladesh even before Mar 25, 1972, the date stipulated
by the two Prime Ministers, won acclaim the world over.
The Government of India appointed on 16 February 1972
Shri Subimal Dutt, one of its most senior officials and a diplomat
and administrator of wide and varied experience, as its first
Ambassador to Bangladesh. Dr. A. R. Mallick, a distinguished
scholar and educationist, was appointed on 13 March as the first
Ambassador of Bangladesh to India. The Missions in the two
countries were designated as High Commissions upon Bangladesh
becoming a member of the Commonwealth.
The visit of Sheikh Mujibur Rahman to Calcutta in February
and the visit of the Prime Minister of India to Dacca between 17
and 19 March 1972 highlighted the friendship between the two
countries. The meeting between the Prime Ministers of the two
countries in Dacca led to the establishment of a Joint Rivers
Commission and for regular consultations on various technological and scientific matters as well as regular consultations between
the officials of Foreign Affairs, Defence and other Ministries dealing with economic, commercial, cultural and technical affairs of

<pg6>
<pg7>
the two Governments, as well as between the Planning Commissions of the two countries. The Dacca meeting also saw the signing of the Treaty of Friendship, Cooperation and Peace between
India and Bangladesh. The Treaty gave concrete expression to
the similarity of views, ideals and interests of the two countries.
The visit to India of the President of Bangladesh, Mr. Abu
sayeed Choudhary, otwards the end of the year, symbolised further the closest friendship and cooperation between the peoples
and Governments of India and Bangladesh.
Talks were held throughout the year at the official and Ministerial levels between the two countries on various' spheres of
activity including finance, planning, relief and rehabilitation, education, law, commerce and industry. These talks gave shape and
substance to the cooperation envisaged in the Dacca Declaration
Signed following the visit of the Prime Minister of India to
Bangladesh in March 1972. Trade and credit agreements were
entered into as well as a telecommunications agreement and an
Inland Water Transport Protocol. A programme for the exchange of scholars and cultural troupes and the provision of research facilities is under way. A Cultural Cooperation Agreement
was signed on 12 December 1972. A 14-member Bangladesh
Education Commission Delegation toured India during January
1973. Continued cooperation is envisaged in these activities as
well as in railways, shipping, atomic energy, defence and postal
matters.
In its external relations, Bangladesh had India's full support,
wedded as the two countries are to common tenets in international affairs. India's Missions abroad actively supported
Bangladesh's admission to the United Nations, its technical
agencies and to other international bodies. These included the
WHO., UNCTAD., IMF., World Bank, UNDP., ILO., ICAO.,
UPU., GATT,, the Commonwealth and the Colombo Plan.
India also consistently supported Bangladesh's right to recognition as a sovereign and independent State.
On issues common to India, Bangladesh and Pakistan, India's
stand was based on considerations of durable peace, harmony and
cooperation on the subcontinent. India was in complete agreement with Prime Minister Sheikh Mujibur Rahman that he could
not engage in talks with President Bhutto except on a basis of
equality. Pakistan's failure to recognise Bangladesh hampered
the process of durable peace and normalisation of relations on
the subcontinent. India could appreciate Bangladesh's legitimate
<pg8>

right to try Pakistani prisoners of war and civilian. internees who
were charged with genocide, atrocities and various war crimes
committed on the soil of Bangladesh. India shared Bangladesh's
concern that about four lakh Bangladesh nationals were being
held as hostages in Pakistan. They had committed no crime and
were not prisoners of war; their misfortune was that they happened
to be in Pakistan at the time of the liberation struggle.
In the interest of peace and cooperation on the subcontinent, the Indian Government kept the Bangladesh Government
informed of its talks with Pakistan, both through special emissaries and through normal diplomatic channnels. it was also repeatedly of to Pakistan that explained to issues common to all
three countries could not be discussed alone between India and
Pakistan and that Bangladesh's participation in such discussions
was necessary.
The guiding principle of India's economic relations with
Bangladesh was to ensure that each proved a strong and reliable
friend to the other. Initial Indian aid for the rehabilitation and
reconstruction of the Bangladesh economy was succeeded by a
more diversified, mutually beneficial relationship Out of
Rs. 200 crores budgeted for economic assistance to Bangladesh
in the financial year 1972-73, Rs. 167.63 crores had been fully
allocated-Rs. 132.80 crores in the form of grants and Rs. 34.83
crores in the form of loans on concessional terms. The largest
component was the grant of 750,000 tons of foodgrains, which
was further augmented by another 150,000 tons by the end of
November 1972 to meet shortages in northern Bangladesh. The
total amount of foodgrains supplied by India to Bangladesh till
the end of December 1972 was 930,000 tons. India succeeded
in actually delivering to Bangladesh around Rs. 150 crores worth
of aid material within about 11 months, in addition to several
crores worth of goods under commercial arrangements, despite
the disruption of transport and communications within Bangladesh. These supplies from India enabled Bangladesh to conserve
its hard currency for resumption of its trade relations. Indian
railway engineers successfully completed the repair of the Hardinge Bridge in Bangladesh. This vital bridge, which was form-ally
reopened on 12 October 1972, will help to ease the transportation
problem within Bangladesh.
A three-tier trade agreement between India and Bangladesh
was signed in New Delhi on 28 March 1972, covering border
trade, barter trade and short-term trade arrangements. The total
volume of trade between the two countries under this agreement
<pg9>
was to be of the order of a little over Rs. 100 crores for the year
1972-73. This agreement was followed by several specific

agreements to effect its implementation. After the mid-yearly
review of this trade agreement in Dacca in early October 1972,
when the causes and solutions for the earlier slack movement of
trade were discussed, agreements were reached on prices, delivery,
etc. regarding five major commodities included in the trade agreement, viz. fish and jute from Bangladesh, and coal, cement and
tobacco from India. A joint Indo-Bangladesh group had already
agreed on limestone supply from Meghalaya to the Chhatak
Cement Company in the Sylhet district of Bangladesh. While
border trade was temporarily suspended in order to curb smuggling, both Governments have agreed to consider alternative
arrangements to alleviate any difficulties experienced by border
communities. Under the Limited Payments Arrangement, efforts
are in hand to reach the target of Rs. 20 crores each way by
March 1973.
India participated in the meeting held in Dacca in January
1973 under the auspices of UNDP for the establishment of 'Jute
International' which will be responsible for coordinating all
matters dealing with jute, including research in the field of agriculture as well as with manufacture of jute.
Pursuant to the Joint Statement of the two Prime Ministers
in Calcutta on 8 February 1972, and the Joint Declaration at
Dacca on 19 March, 1972 considerable progress was made in
initiating joint studies on flood control and on possibilities of cooperation in respect of river-waters. Following the visit to
Dacca of Dr. K. L. Rao, India's Minister for Irrigation and Power
in April 1972, a comprehensive Action Programme was drawn
up for active cooperation with Bangladesh in the field of flood
forecasting and warning, cyclone warning and special flood control problems of Bangladesh. Institutional arrangements had
since been entered into with the establishment of an India-Bangladesh Joint Rivers Commission. The Commission has held three
meetings so far (the first in New Delhi in June, the second in
Dacca in September and the third in New Delhi in December
1972) and had accorded priority to problems relating to flood
forecasting and flood warning and the solution of certain border
rivers problems. Satisfactory progress had been made in these
cases. Special Joint Study Groups had been set up for the study
of the problems of river development in the Meghna and Tista
valleys. The Commission decided to carry out an aerial photographic survery of the river Ganges from below Farakka in India up
to Gorai off-take in Bangladesh. The Inland Waters Protocol has
<pg10>
made possible the resumption of river water links. Cooperation
between the Railways, Shipping & Transport and Posts & Telegraphs departments of the two countries has substantially contributed to restoring the communications infrastructure in Bangladesh. An India-Bangladesh Joint Power Coordination Board

was constituted on 5 January 1973.
Both the Bangladesh and the Indian Governments were conscious of the necessity for effective, close and intimate cooperation
between the Bangladesh and Indian authorities in border districts,
and for joint coordinated efforts to deal with various types of
undesirable trans-border activities indulged in by certain elements. Various trans-border problems were discussed with the
Bangladesh Government by the West Bengal Chief Minister,
Shri S. S. Ray, and his delegation, when they visited Bangladesh
in mid-June 1972. They were also touched upon by the Indian
delegation, led by Shri Avtar Singh, Secretary in the Ministry of
External Affairs, which visited Bangladesh in early August 1972
to finalise travel arrangements between India and Bangladesh.
Formal procedures governing travel between India and Bangladesh were., agreed upon, on 3 August 1972, and the IndiaBangladesh passport and visa system was introduced with effect
from 1 September 1972. Periodic consultations between border
authorities of India and Bangladesh were also initiated during
the year.
Pakistan
India's consistent approach on relations with Pakistan, despite the outbreak of war in December 1971 resulting from
Pakistan's aggression, was that if Pakistan showed willingness to
live in peace with India, India would respond in full measure to
establish mutually beneficial and friendly relations, leading to
durable peace India's declaration of unilateral cease-fire in the
Western theatre, on 16 December 1971, was a concrete step to
reassure the people of Pakistan that India, while fighting in selfdefence, was not governed by any territorial ambitions against
Pakistan. The Minister of External Affairs speaking before the
UN Security Council on' 21 December 1971 highlighted India's
willingness to enter into negotiations. India formally took the
initiative in this direction and addressed a letter to the UN
Secretary General, on 14 February 1972, proposing direct talks
with Pakistan "at any time, at any level and without any preconditions".
On receiving indication from Pakistan about its willingness to
enter into negotiations, India suggested that a preliminary meeting should be held, at the level of special emissaries, to prepare
<pg11>
the ground for a summit-level meeting between the Prime Minister of India and the President of Pakistan. Shri D. P. Dhar, the
then Chairman of the Policy Planning Committee in the Ministry,
was designated as the Prime Minister's Special Emissary and led
a delegation to Pakistan for talks with President Bhutto's Special
Emissary Mr. Aziz Ahmed, Secretary General, Pakistan's Minis-

try of Foreign Affairs. The Emissary-level talks were held at
Murree and Rawalpindi from 26 to 29 April 1972.
The Emissary-level talks were successful in formulating an
agreed agenda, and settling the modalities, for the Summit Meeting. Discussions were also held on issues of common concern
and on matters relating to the establishment of durable peace in
the sub-continent. An additional feature of the Emissary-level
meeting at Murree was the agreement to stop hostile radio
propaganda which was liable to injure the susceptibilities of the
people in either country. This agreement was the result of the
initiative taken earlier by the Prime Minister.
The Summit Meeting between the Prime Minister of India
and the President of Pakistan was held at Simla from 28 June
to 2 July 1972. It resulted in the signing of an agreement for
bilateral relations between the Governments of India and
Pakistan. The Simla Agreement was a first step towards the
establishment of durable peace and set in motion the process of
reconciliation and good neighbourliness between India and
Pakistan. It was signed on the basis of sovereign equality and
not in the spirit of a victor dictating his terms to the vanquished.
It provided the framework which could mark the beginning of a
new chapter in the history of the sub-continent by putting an
end to the conflict and confrontation that had hitherto marred
the relations between the two countries.
The experience of the past 25 years had shown that outside
agencies and third party involvement had made the solution of
problems between the two countries extremely difficult. Recognising this, it was agreed by both sides that they would settle
their differences by peaceful means through bilateral negotiations
or any other peaceful means mutually agreed upon between the
two countries. Further, they would refrain from the threat or
use of force against the territorial integrity and political independence of each other. In Jammu & Kashmir both sides agreed
to respect the Line of Control resulting from the cease-fire of 17
December 1971, without prejudice to the recognised position of
either side. Neither country would seek to alter the Line of
<pg12>
Control unilaterally and both would refrain from the threat or use
of force in violation of this line. Both countries also agreed to
withdraw their forces to their side of the international border.
By agreeing to withdraw from over 5911 square miles of
Pakistani territory, India demonstrated once again that she did
not covet an inch of the territory of Pakistan. This was a vindication of the categorical assurances given to this effect by the
Prime Minister of India before, during and after the December
1971 conflict.
Within framework of achieving a durable peace the two

countries agreed to adopt a step-by-step approach for progressive
normalisation of relations. Steps to this effect were to include
resumption of communications, travel facilities, trade, cooperation in economic and other agreed fields and exchanges in the
fields of science and culture.
On the question of the repatriation of Pakistani POWs and
civilian internees, Pakistan was informed that since the bulk of
these POWs and civilian internees had surrendered to the Joint
Command of India and Bangladesh forces in the Eastern Sector,
the association and concurrence of Bangladesh was essential for
any discussions for their repatriation. Pakistan appreciated this
position and indicated that they would be able to see their way
through removing the obstacle for the participation of Bangladesh Government in discussions on this subject, towards the
middle of August.
The first stage of the implementation of the Simla Agreement
involved the delineation of the Line of Control in Jammu &
Kashmir and withdrawal of troops to the international borders.
Some difficulties and unexpected delays were experienced during
negotiations with Pakistan on the delineation of the Line of Control. There was also delay on the part of Pakistan in responding
to communications, in pursuance of discussions at Simla, on issues
such as the safe-return of Pakistani displaced persons from the
Sind areas of Pakistan occupied by Indian troops. The Prime
Minister wrote to President Bhutto, on 19 August 1972, suggesting that representatives of the two governments might meet to
exchange views on the developments that had taken place since
the Simla Agreement was signed and to resolve any doubts about
the future prospects of settling outstanding problems in the spirit
of mutual confidence, as envisaged in the Agreement. A meeting
was held at Delhi 'between the representatives of the two sides between 25 and 29 August 1972, at the end of which a Joint Statement was issued to the Press. The two sides agreed that the Line
<pg13>
of Control in Jammu & Kashmir would be, delineated along its
entire length and maps showing this Line would be exchanged.
Whereas the delineation of the Line of Control was agreed to be
completed by 4 September 1972, withdrawals to the international
borders were to be completed by 15 September 1972.
There was also discussion on the question of the repatriation
of POWs and civilian internees at the Delhi meeting. India reiterated her position that this question could not be settled without
the participation of Bangladesh in discussions on the subject, due
to the fact that the prisoners and civilian internees in the Eastern
theatre had been taken into custody by the Joint Command of
Indo-Bangladesh forces. it was pointed out that Pakistan's action
in delaying recognition of Bangladesh was the main obstacle in
the way of early talks to resolve the POW- question. The Pakistan

side indicated that the recognition of Bangladesh was receiving
serious consideration by their government.
India had earlier taken up with Pakistan the question of ensuring the safety of the person and property of the Pakistani nationals
affected by the war who had remained in Pakistani territories
occcpied by our forces in Sind or crossed into Indian territory.
This matter was discussed during the Delhi meeting and it was
agreed that political leaders from Sind, Pakistan, would visit
these areas in order to assure the inhabitants that they would be
welcome to remain in or return to their homes in Pakistan in
safety and dignity from camps in India. Similar assurances were
also given by the President of Pakistan, in a letter to our Prime
Minister.
The Senior Military Commanders of India and Pakistan, who
were entrusted with the task of delineating the Line of Control
on maps, were able to reach agreement on 19 maps delineating
the entire length of the Line of' Control, by 18 October, in their
seventh round of discussions. These maps were to be signed in
the eighth round. On that occasion, however, Pakistan's Senior
Military Commander raised a fresh controversy over Thako Chak,
a pocket approximately 1 1/2 sq. miles in area, which was in
Pakistan's occupation but separate from the Line of Control. in
spite of several initiatives taken by India, the issue could not be
resolved at the Senior Commanders' level and it was decided to
hold a meeting at another level to resolve this question. Two
meetings were held between the Chiefs of Army Staff of India
and Pakistan and in their second meeting at Lahore, on 7 December 1972, they were able to resolve the differences. Pakistan
agreed to withdraw from Thako Chak thus accepting India's

<pg14>
position that there was a basic difference between the International border dividing the State of Jammu & Kashmir and
Pakistan and the Line of Control in Jammu & Kashmir. In view
of Pakistan's agreement to settle the controversy over Thako
Chak, India's Chief of Army Staff reviewed some of the claims
which Pakistan had earlier made on the Line of Control, and as
a gesture in the interest of peace and in order to rationalise the
Line of Control, agreed to minor adjustments along the Line.
The importance of the Agreement between the two Chiefs of
Staff was thus not in terms of any adjustment of territorial claims
but in the acceptance by the Government of Pakistan of India's
position that Thako, Chak lay on the international border between
India and Pakistan, south of the Line of Control in Jammu &
Kashmir.
The Line of Control was delineated in Jammu & Kashmir, in

accordance with the Simla Agreement, and approved by the
Governments of India and Pakistan on 11 December. In an
announcement made in New Delhi and Islamabad, it was agreed
that adjustments on ground positions will be carried out to conform to the Line of Control approved by both governments within a period of 5 days.
The process of withdrawal of troops to the international border
which had commenced alongwith the adjustment of ground
positions to the new Line of Control in Jammu & Kashmir, was
completed within the record period of 40 days , time. With the
completion of this process, paragraphs 4(i) and (ii) of the Simla
Agreement were implemented in full in full.
Even though no progress could be made on the POW issue
due to Pakistan's continued non-recognition of Bangladesh, the
Governments of India and Bangladesh jointly took action to
release certain categories of POWs and civilian internees on
humanitarian considerations. Accordingly, all the 591 sick and
wounded Pakistani prisoners of war and civilian internees were
repatriated in different batches. Similarly, as a gesture of goodwill on the occasion of Id, India' repatriated 184 women and
children to Pakistan. On 20 November 1972, the Governments
of India and Bangladesh announced their joint decision to release
and repatriate to Pakistan all the members of families (women
and children) of Pakistani POWs and civilian internees, hoping
that Pakistan would reciprocate by permitting all families (women
and children) of Bangladesh nationals detained/interned in
Pakistan to return to Bangladesh. Despite Pakistan's limited
<pg15>
response of agreeing, as a first step, to the return to Bangladesh
of only 10,000 Bengali women and children in Pakistan, the
Governments of India and Bangladesh agreed to commence repatriation of all families of Pakistani POWs and civilian internees in India. India also repatriated the 542 Pakistani POWs
captured from the Western sector, while Pakistan returned 616
Indian POWs. Earlier India had repatriated 585 Pakistani
civilians taken into custody from occupied areas along the Western border. Pakistan repatriated 273 Indian nationals of the
same category.
Another significant development, in pursuance of the principle of bilateralism enshrined in the Simla Agreement, concerned the question of the resumption of overflights between India
and Pakistan. In early July 1972, India took the initiative in
proposing to Pakistan the withdrawal of pending cases before
the International Court of Justice and the International Civil
Aviation Organisation. It was suggested that this would facilitate the resumption of overflights without prejudice to the respective claims of the two sides which can be settled bilaterally.
while Pakistan Government did not agree to the Indian proposal
at that time, they have since communicated their willingness to

hold bilateral negotiations on this subject with India while the
consideration of their respective complaints before ICAO remains suspended. India has agreed to this proposal and bilateral negotiations on this subject are to be held in the near future.
Pakistan broke off diplomatic relations with India on 6
December 1971, and this position has continued. The Government of India feel that mere resumption of diplomatic relations,
without progress on substantive issues, would only create an
illusion of normalisation. India hopes, however, to take necessary steps in this direction at the appropriate time.
Sri Lanka
A 5-member Ministerial Delegation from Sri Lanka headed
by Mr. T. B. Ilangaratne, Minister of Foreign and Internal Trade,
visited India from 4 to 8 April 1972 to participate in the Second
Meeting of the Indo-Sri Lanka Joint Committee for Economic
Cooperation. It was agreed that India would buy specified
amounts of certain commodities from Sri Lanka. The Government of India are also cooperating with the Government of Sri
Lanka in establishing certain industries in Sri Lanka with a
potential market in India.
<pg16>
New proposals to speed up the pace of implementation of
the Indo-Sri Lanka Agreement of 1964 are being examined by
the two Governments. A meeting of officials of Sri Lanka and
India led by their respective Foreign Secretaries was held in
Colombo from 14 to 17 February 1973 to review progress in the
implementation of the Indo-Ceylon Agreement of 30 October
1964. The two delegations discussed all aspects of the agreement
in a friendly atmosphere and in a spirit of mutual accommodation.
Both sides reiterated that it was in their interest to ensure smooth
speedy and effective implementation of the agreement and agreed
to take all possible measures in that direction.
The Minister of Plantation, Industry and Constitutional Affairs
of Sri Lanka, Mr. Colvin R. De Silva visited India from
4 to 13 September 1972. Maj. Gen. D. S. Attygalle, Commander of the Sri Lanka Army, visited India in October/November 1972 when he held useful discussions with Indian Army
authorities.
Mr. Maithripala Senanayake, Minister of Irrigation, Power
and Highways of Sri Lanka visited India from 18 to 25 January
1973. During his stay in India, he visited Central Water and
Power Research Station, Poona, Bhakra Dam, and also called
on the President, the Prime Minister, the Minister of External
Affairs, Minister of Irrigation and Power and the Minister of
Planning.

Nepal
The traditionally close ties of India with Nepal were further
strengthened by the visit of the Prime Minister of Nepal and
Smt. Bista, from 17 April to 2 May 1972. When in Delhi Shri
Bista met the President, the Vice-President, the Prime Minister,
the Minister of External Affairs and other Cabinet Ministers and
matters of mutual interest were discussed. In addition to Delhi the
Prime Minister of Nepal and party also visited industrial units and
places of interest in other parts of India. Upon his return to
Kathmandu, Prime Minister Bista referred to Indian assistance
to Nepal and to India's progress, and observed that the talks
he had with the Prime Minister and other leaders of India had
further strengthened the ties of friendship existing between Nepal
and India.
From 7 February to 10 February 1973, the Prime Minister
paid a goodwill visited to Nepal. The visit was the first of a
<pg17>
high ranking foreign dignitary to Nepal since the accession of His
Majesty King Birendra in January 1972 and gave the Prime
Minister an opportunity to exchange views with King Birendra.
Fruitful discussions were also held with Prime Minister Bista,
particularly with a view to expand economic cooperation between India and Nepal.
On 25 July 1972, an Agreement was signed between India
and Nepal on the revision of the Air Services Agreement of
1964. The revised agreement provided for the operation of services by, the Royal Nepal Airlines to Varanasi in addition to the
points in India already being served by the Airline, namely Delhi,
Patna and Calcutta. Further, the Royal Nepal Airlines will also
have the opportunity to operate some international air services
through Calcutta to Rangoon and through Delhi to Karachi.
Reciprocally, provision was made for Indian air services to operate
international services through Nepal.
During the year under review, Indian aid to Nepal continued
under the Indo-Nepal Economic Cooperation Programme. Up
to 31 March 1972, India had provided an aid of Rs. 90.52 crores
towards the Cooperation Programme in Nepal. A sum of
Rs. 9 crores has been provided in the budget for the year 1972-73.
Indian assistance to Nepal was mainly in the fields of roadbuilding and communications. The Eastern Sector of the
Mahendra Rajmarg (East-West Highway), constructed with
Indian assistance at a cost of about Rs. 22 crores, is now nearing
completion. In June 1972 an Agreement on the construction of
the Central Sector, estimated to cost Rs. 25.82 crores was also

signed.
The Kathmandu-Raxaul Land Line Telecommunications Project is nearing completion and is expected to be inaugurated
shortly. India also signed an Agreement for the establishment of
three telephone exchanges, at a cost of Rs. 51.80 lakhs, at Biratnagar, Janakpur and Japa. The Overseas Telecommunications
Service of India, too, lent equipment to the Nepal Telecommunication's Board for linking Kathmandu with Bombay through
a Radio telephone link, thus making it possible to facilitate speedy
communication with other parts of the world through the satellite.
An agreement was signed with Nepal on 2 February 1973
for the distribution of Iodised salt throughout Nepal for a period
of five years from 1972-73 costing Rs. 1.25 crores. A 15-bed
hospital at Taulihawa was inaugurated during the year. This
<pg18>
hospital is the second in the chain of two 25-bed hospitals, three
15-bed hospitals, one Health Centre and six Health Posts which
are currently under construction with Indian assistance.
The Government of India's assistance in deputing teaching
staff such as Professors, Readers and Lecturers to the Tribhuvan
University and other technicians and coaches continued to be
rendered during the year, under the Technical Assistance Programme to Nepal.
India continued to provide educational facilities to Nepalese
students in various institutions in India for higher studies in
Medicine, Engineering and other fields, both on scholarship and
on a self-financing basis.
An agreement for establishing two Industrial Estates at
Nepalganj and Dharan at a cost of Rs. 40.91 lakhs was signed
in May 1972. Indian aid for development of village and cottage industries in Nepal was continued during the current year.
A sum of Rs. 30.55 lakhs has been sanctioned for this purpose
from 1967-68 up to date.
Indian assistance to Nepal in the fields of Horticulture, Veterinary, Water Supply, Rural Development, Village and Cottage
Industries etc. continued this year also as in the past.
An Agreement was signed on 2 January 1973, between the
Press Trust of India and the Rashtriya Samachar Samiti of Nepal
(RSS), on the mutual exchange of news.
The Government of India signed an Agreement with the
Government of Nepal, on 23 February 1973, for making avail-

able a standby credit of Rs. 10 crores to be utilised for expenditure only in India.
Bhutan
The news of the sudden demise of His Majesty Jigme Dorji
Wangchuk of Bhutan at Nairobi on 21 July was received with
shock and grief in India. During his reign, he was instrumental
in forging extremely close and friendly ties with India. Under
his sagacious leadership Bhutan had made great progress, politically, economically, and socially. In his death Bhutan lost a great
leader and India a close and sincere friend. The Vice President,
accompanied by the Defence Minister, Secretaries Ministry of
Defence and External Affairs, and the G.O.C. Eastern Command
went to Thimpn, in August, to pay their respects to the departed
<pg19>
ruler. The Prime Minister of India, accompanied by the Foreign
Secretary, attended the cremation ceremony of the late King in
Kurjay in Bhutan on 28 October.
The Crown Prince Jigme Singye Wangchuk was enthroned, on
23 July, as His Majesty the King of Bhutan. His accession to the
throne was unanimously ratified by Tshogdu, the National
Assembly of Bhutan, on 10 September. The new King stated
that he would follow in the footsteps of his illustrious father and
further strengthen the existing ties of close friendship and cooperation between India and Bhutan.
A Planning Commission team, led by Shri A. Mitra, Secretary, Planning Commission, paid a six day visit to Bhutan in
April, to hold general discussions with the Planning Committee
of the Government of Bhutan on Bhutan's Annual Plan 1972-73.
Consequent to the discussions, India agreed to make available
financial assistance to the extent of Rs. 7.27 crores, towards
Development expenditure in Bhutan during 1972-73.
The Government of India agreed to provide Rs. 33 crores in
grants a and loans to finance Bhutan's Third Five-Year Plan which
commenced in April 1971. The Plan provides for several
schemes in vital sectors of development such as agriculture,
industry, education, transport, communications, health, etc. The
Government of India continued to provide the services of experts in these fields at Bhutan Government's request. Over 180
Bhutanese students continued to receive Government of India
scholarships for study in India.
As in previous years, there was regular flow of cultural delegations between India and Bhutan during the year. A 16-member Sachin Shankar's Ballet troupe was specially flown to Bhutan
to participate on the historical occasion of the appointment of
His Royal Highness Jigme Singye Wangchuk (now ruler) as

Tongsa Penlop (Governor of Tongsa).
H. E. Dasho Singhkhar Lam, Speaker of the Tshogdu
(National Assembly of Bhutan), paid an official visit to India
from 9 to 20 November at the invitation of the Speaker, Lok
Sabha. This was followed by the visits of Her Royal Highness
Ashi Dechen, Wangmo Wangchuk, sister of His Majesty the
King of Bhutan and His Royal Highness Namgyal Wangchuk,
uncle of His Majesty the King of Bhutan to India from 5 to
17 December 1972. The former is the Representative of His
Majesty the King of Bhutan in the Ministry of Development of
<pg20>
the Royal Government of Bhutan and was invited by Shri D. P.
Dhar, our Planning Minister. The latter is Bhutan's Minister of
Trade and Industry and was invited by our Minister of Foreign
Trade, Shri L. N. Mishra. During this visit fruitful discussions
were held on matters connected with Bhutan's development,
trade and industry. The delegation also visited places of agricultural, horticultural, industrial and tourist interest in Himachal
Pradesh, Haryana, Punjab and Uttar Pradesh.
The following delegations from Bhutan visited India during
December 1972 and January 1973 :(i) A fifteen-member Tshogdu (National Assembly)
delegation;
(ii) An eight-member delegation of Bhutanese officials
and their wives;
(iii) A five-member Farmers' delegation;
(iv) A twelve-member delegation of Royal Advisory
Councillors of Bhutan and their wives.
On the invitation of the Minister of External Affairs, His
Excellency Lyonpo Dawa Tsering, Foreign Minister of Bhutan,
accompanied by his family, paid a state visit to India from 15 to
27 January.
On 16 December 1972, an agreement was signed between
India and Bhutan in New Delhi for the exchange of Postal parcels
between the two countries.
Sikkim
Relations between India and Sikkim continued to be warm
and friendly. These relations were further cemented by the
visit of their Highnesses, the Chogyal and the Gyalmo to New
Delhi in May 1972. The visit followed the visit of the Foreign

Secretary to Sikkim in March 1972 when he held discussions with
the Chogyal on matters of mutual interest.
A Planning Commission team, led by, Mr. Asok Mitra, Secretary, Planning Commission, visited Sikkim in April 1972, to
discuss the progress of Sikkim's Fourth Plan. An official delegation from Sikkim visited New Delhi in September 1972 to discuss Sikkim's Annual Plan for 1972-73. The Government of
India decided to give a sum of Rs. 18.5 crores in grants and
loans to Sikkim for the implementation of its Fourth Five Year
Plan which is now in its Second Year.
<pg21>
During the year under review, the Government of India continued to provide a number of experts to Sikkim in Administrative and development fields and facilities for training and education of Sikkimese personnel in India. Over 250 Sikkimese
scholars continued to receive Scholarships for studies in various
educational institutions in India.
Under the cultural activities programme, a group of Oraon
tribal and Kathakali-Manipuri dancers visited Sikkim, on the
occasion of the 25th Anniversary celebrations of India's Independence.
INDIA
AFGHANISTAN BANGLADESH USA SRI LANKA PAKISTAN MALI RUSSIA LATVIA CENTRAL
AFRICAN REPUBLIC NEPAL BHUTAN KENYA UNITED KINGDOM
Mar 25, 1972

South East Asia
CHAPTER II
SOUTH EAST ASIA
The countries of South East Asia showed a growing awareness of the need to adjust to the new situation created in the
area by the Sino-US detente, the prospects of peace in Vietnam
and the repproachment between Japan and China, as well as
by the new situation in the Indian sub-continent. During the course
of the year all the countries of this region gave formal recognition to Bangladesh. All these countries share with India the

desire for peace, stability and rapid economic development
throughout the entire region. India's relations with these countries have been close and friendly and during the year under
review constant efforts were made to strengthen them further
particularly through economic and/or cultural collaboration.
The then Australian Foreign Minister, the Hon. N. H. Bowen,
Q.C., M.P., visited India from May 29, 1972 2 June 1972. During
his visit the Australian Foreign Minister called on the Prime
Minister and had talks with the Minister of External Affairs on
the situation in the sub-continent, the Indian Ocean and economic cooperation between the two countries.
Dr. R. Ramanna, Director of the Bhabha Atomic Research
Centre, Bombay, visited Burma from 19 to 26 November 1972
at the invitation of the Burmese Government. During his visit
Dr. Ramanna discussed with the Burmese authorities the programme of development of atomic sciences in Burma.
The demarcation work of the Indo-Burma boundary and the
repatriation of persons of Indian origin from Burma is continuing.
The growing relations between India and Fiji were reflected
in the visits of such important personalities as the Hon. R. D.
Patel, the Speaker of the Fijian House of Representatives, Col.
P. F. Manueli, Chief of Staff, Royal Fiji Military Forces and
Mr. T. Bhim, Auditor-General of Fiji.
The Indian Cultural Centre at Suva was formally inaugurated
by the Prime Minister of Fiji, on 15 August 1972.
<pg22>
<pg23>
The Government of India sent relief supplies including medicines, blankets and foodstuff to the hurricane victims in Fiji.
A 10-member delegation of Indonesian physicians and surgeons visited various medical institutions in India at the invitation of our Ministry of Health and Family Planning. Dr. Mohd.
Hatta, Former Vice President of Indonesia, visited India in
December 1972 at the invitation of the Government of India.
The next round of annual consultations between India and
Indonesia is likely to be held soon.
The Labour Minister of Malaysia Mr. V. Manickavasagam
visited India in May, 1972. During his visit, he called on the
Minister of External Affairs. The Malaysian Minister of Technology Research and Local Government Dato Ong Kee Hui, who was

in India in connection with the Colombo Plan Consultative Committee Meeting, visited various scientific, industrial and commercial establishments in Hyderabad, Bangalore and Bombay.
The programme for technical and economic cooperation with
Malaysia has been making satisfactory progress. Over 20 IndoMalaysian joint ventures have already been approved and a
majority of them have gone into production.
Mr. V. T. Sambanthan, Minister for National Unity of
Malaysia, visited Delhi from 17 to 20 January and during his
stay, besides courtesy calls on the President, Vice-President and
the Prime Minister, had talks with the Minister of External Affairs
and the Minister for Education.
The President paid a State visit to Malaysia from 5 to 9
March, 1973. During his visit he met the Agung (King), the
Prime Minister and other leaders of Malaysia and exchanged views
with them on matters of mutual interest. The welcome received
by the President from the Government and the people of
Malaysia reflected the friendly relations between the two countries.
A two-man Ministerial goodwill delegation, beaded by the
Maldivian Minister of Finance, Mr. Abdul Sattar, paid a visit
to India from 19 to 25 April 1972, to discuss matters of mutual
interest. India offered training facilities to Maldives for coastal
fishing, navigation, engineering and wireless communication. The
Maldivian Government will be opening an office of the Maldivian
National Trading Corporation and Maldivian Shipping Corporation at Bombay. It has also been agreed that the State Bank
of India will open an office in the Maldives.
<pg24>
The new Prime Minister of New Zealand His Excellency
Norman E. Kirk, who was then the Leader of the Opposition,
visited India from 7 to 8 February 1972. During his stay Mr.
Kirk called on the Prime Minister, the Ministers of Finance,
External Affairs and Labour, Employment & Rahabilitation and
held discussions on matters of mutual interest.
A Defence Ministry Delegation from Singapore led by Brig.
Kirpa Ram Vij visited India in October 1972. The Defence
Minister of Singapore also visited India in November 1972. The
Foreign Minister of Singapore, Mr. S. Rajaratnam, visited India
in December 1972 at the invitation of our Minister of External
Affairs. During the visit the the two Foreign Ministers discussed
a wide range of international issues.
Shri C. Subramaniam, who was then Minister of Planning
visited Manila in April 1972 to attend the celebrations of the 10th
Anniversary of the International Rice Research Institute. In

August 1972, the Government of India donated medicines worth
Rs. 10,000 for the flood victims in the Philippines.
His Royal Highness Tuipelehake, Prime Minister of Tonga
paid an informal visit to India from 4 to 11 November 1972.
During his stay the Prime Minister of Tonga called on the President, the Prime Minister and the Minister of External Affairs
and held discussions on matters of mutual interest.
The friendly relations between India and Thailand were highlighted when the President visited Thailand from 27 to 30 March
1972. The King and Queen of Thailand along with the Government and the people gave a warm welcome to the Indian President. During this visit discussions were held with Thai leaders
on a wide range of bilateral and international issues. The President extended an invitation to Their Majesties the King and
Queen of Thailand to pay a State visit to India in the near
future.
The Assistant Chairman of National Executive Council of
Thailand, Mr. Pote Sarasin, visited India from 4 to 10 November. 1972 as leader of the Thai Ministerial Delegation to the 22nd
meeting of the Colombo Plan Consultative Committee held in
New Delhi. During his stay in New Delhi Mr. Sarasin called
on the President, the Prime Minister and the Minister of External
Affairs. A 10-member delegation of the Royal Thai Navy led by
Vice-Admiral Satap Kayanon. Deputy Chief of Staff for Opera<pg25>
tions, visited a number of Defence Establishments in India in
November 1972.
The following countries from this region participated in the
Third Asian International Trade Fair: Australia, Burma, Fiji,
Indonesia, Malaysia, New Zealand, Sri Lanka, Thailand and the
Philippines.
USA
VIETNAM CHINA JAPAN INDIA BANGLADESH AUSTRALIA BURMA FIJI INDONESIA
MALAYSIA SRI LANKA MALDIVES NEW ZEALAND REPUBLIC OF SINGAPORE PHILIPPINES
TONGA THAILAND
May 29, 1972

East Asia

CHAPTER III
EAST ASIA
China
The Government continued to seek normalisation of relations
with the People's Republic of China and this desire was expressed
on various occasions by Indian leaders. On Nov 30, 1972
Minister of External Affairs made a comprehensive statement in
the Rajya Sabha where he expressed the Indian attitude in the
clearest possible terms as follows :
"It is our firm belief that India and China can and must
normalise their relations on the basis of the Five Principles
of Peaceful Co-existence which our two countries were
the first to subscribe to. It is necessary that positive steps
must be taken by both sides for this purpose. We are
willing and ready to hold bilateral discussions with China
on the problems that bedevil our mutual relations. We
hope and believe that in the larger interests of peace and
stability in Asia, India and China would be able to take
positive steps towards normalisation of relations on the
basis of mutual respect, equality and reciprocity."
"We can assure China that we have no desire or intention
to interfere in her internal affairs. We regard Tibet as
part of China, and any allegation that we are encouraging
fissiparous tendencies in Tibet is totally unfounded and
baseless. We hope that China will also respect our territorial integrity and sovereignty and not encourage any
fissiparous elements in our country."
"There is no reason why India and China-two great
countries of Asia-should not be able to solve their mutual
Problems bilaterally and peacefully in their mutual interest
and in the larger interests of peace, stability and progress
in Asia".
2. This was done despite some unjustified outbursts from
China in the U.N. in 1972, where China continued to take an
unrealistic attitude towards the developments in the Indian subcontinent. Not only was there no appreciation of the initiatives
taken by India to seek a peaceful and bilateral settlement of Indo<pg26>
<pg27>
Pakistan problems, but there was also an attempt to attribute nonexistent motives to India. However, India continued to observe

an attitude of restraint and maintained its stand of seeking normalisation of relations with China in the larger interest of peace in
this area.
3. By the end of the year, there seemed to be a certain change
in Chinese attitude. The Indian Embassy's reception in Peking
to mark the Republic Day was attended at a slightly higher level
and China did not oppose India's candidature on some of the U.N.
bodies as she had done in the past. After a lapse of 1 1/2 years,
China also sent in March 1973 a new Counsellor to the Chinese
Embassy in Delhi to act as Charge d' Affaires.
Japan
The year saw a significant exchange of numerous high level
visits between the two countries.
The 7th Indo-Japan bilateral consultations between the two
Foreign Ministries were held in New Delhi on 2 and 3 March
1972. The Japanese Delegation was led by the Deputy ViceMinister for Foreign Affairs Mr. S. Hogen.
The Foreign Secretary Shri T. N. Kaul visited Tokyo, in
transit, from 15 to 17 September and he also utilised the opportunity to meet the Japanese Foreign Office officials and hold talks
with them.
The Finance Minister Shri Y. B. Chavan paid an official visit
to Japan in October 1972.
On the Japanese side, an officially sponsored Japanese Delegation of businessmen, led by Mr. Junji Hiraga and accompanied
by representatives of the Ministries of Foreign Affairs, Trade and
Industry and Planning Agency, visited India in November 1972
to study the investment climate in India. Besides visiting a number of industrial establishments in Bombay, Cochin, Bangalore
and Madras, the Delegation also held talks with senior Government leaders and officials in New Delhi. Mr. Hiraga on his
return to Japan declared that the situation in India should be
judged on the basis of long-term prospects which were excellent.
The Fifth Joint Meeting of the Business Cooperation Committees of India and Japan was held in New Delhi from 6 to 8
December 1972. The Japanese Delegation was composed of
<pg28>
nearly 40 important representatives of Japanese business and
industry led by Dr. Nagano, President of the Nippon Steel himself. The discussions covered a wide-range of subjects in the
field of economic activity and provided useful occasion for exchange of ideas and concrete proposals for Indo-Japanese econo-

mic cooperation.
A 5-member Delegation belonging to the opposition Komeito
Party led by its Chairman Mr. Y. Takeiri visited India during
September,
Another notable development in Indo-Japanese relations was
the formation of a Committee of Japanese Parliamentarians on
Indian Affairs. The Committee consists of 18 Diet men led by
Mr. Y. Cori, former Minister of Justice and includes important
Japanese leaders like Mr. Y. Sakurauchi, who had led a friendly
delegation to India last year and who since has become a member
of the Prime Minister Tanaka's new Cabinet on 24 December.
This friendly exchange of visits reached a culmination when
the Minister of External Affairs, Sardar Swaran Singh, paid an
official visit to Japan from 6 to 10 January 1973 in response to
an invitation from the Japanese Foreign Minister Mr. Ohira.
The Minister was accompanied by Shri M. S. Pathak, Member
of the Planning Commission. He had a very useful exchange
of views with the Japanese leaders on a wide-ranging variety of
subjects and the visit strengthened the already existing friendly
cooperation between the two countries.
The Two Koreas
The two Koreas took an important and welcome step forward
on 4 July 1972 when they issued a Joint Communique signifying
the desire of both sides to achieve a peaceful reunification of the
country through bilateral discussions without any external interference. Contacts between the two States continued throughout
the year and on 4 November another Joint Communique detailed
the specific measures that both sides had decided upon in order
to implement their earlier decision. In view of this welcome
development, India decided to abstain on the raising of the Korean
question at the UN.
Republic of Korea
Friendly relations with the Republic of Korea continued to
grow. Vice Foreign Minister Suk Heun Yun paid a brief visit
to India in July in order to explain the Korean situation. The
official visit of the ROK Foreign Minister Kim Yong Shik in
August, as guest of the Government of India, helped in further
<pg29>
promoting mutual understanding. He had discussions with our
Minister of External Affairs on matters of mutual interest and
international questions, ROK participated in the 3rd Asia International Trade Fair and the Korean Minister for Trade attended
their National Day Function at the Fair. The ROK Pavilion

became, a great success and was seen by nearly a million visitors.
A 51-member Korean Folk Art Troupe also visited India at the
end of November and gave, performances in Delhi to appreciative
audiences. The delegation was led by the Ex-ROK Consul
General of India, Mr. Ben C. Limb.
Democratic People's Republic of Korea
Relations with the DPRK also continued to grow. Vice
Foreign Minister Pak Suk Gyun visited India in July 1972 and
held discussions with the Foreign Secretary.
Cultural contacts were further strengthened by the visit of
an Indian Trade Delegation to DPRK and the visit of a DPRK
Table Tennis Team to India at the end of December.
Trade between India and the DPRK registered a sharp increase and contracts worth Rs. 70 million were signed during the
year. Many new items were exported to DPRK by India during
the year such as engineering goods, luxury buses and tanned
leather.
Mongolia
The year under review saw a marked and significant growth
in the friendly relations between India and Mongolia. Mongolia
had all along given unstinted support to India during the unfortunate happenings in the sub-continent in 1971 and became
the fourth nation in the world to recognise Bangladesh (on 11
January 1972).
The Foreign Secretary led a Delegation to Ulan Bator in
September 1972 for the Second Bilateral Talks between the
Foreign Ministries of India and Mongolia. The exchange was
most friendly and useful. A cultural exchange programme between the two countries for a further period of two years was also
signed. The Acting President of Mongolia decorated the Foreign
Secretary with the 50th Anniversary Celebrations Medal.
Mongolia participated in the 3rd Asian International Trade
Fair held in New Delhi in November-December 1972. A
Mongolian delegation led by Damdin, Minister for Light and
Food Industry, visited India for the Fair.

<pg30>
For the first time in the history of relations between the two
countries a beginning was made in the field of trade and trade
contracts were signed for a number of goods like wool, silk,
snuff etc.

The high-point of the relations, however, was reached when
the Mongolian Prime Minister Mr. Tsedenbal made an official
visit to India at the end of February 1973 and held friendly discussions with Prime Minister Mrs, Gandhi.
Vietnam
The situation in Vietnam continued to be a matter of deep
concern to the Government. While hopes of peace flickered
throughout the year, the war continued unabated and, in fact,
escalated from month to month. Early 1972 witnessed some of
the heaviest ground fighting of the war, and the U.S. decision,
announced on 8 May to mine all the DRVN ports added a new
dimension to the gravity of the situation. October 1972 brought
hopes of an early peace accord even before the American Presidential elections, but the hopes were soon belied. With the resumption of secret talks in Paris in the months of November and
December, these hopes were, however, revived, but these talks
became deadlocked and on 18 December bombing on an unprecedented scale was unleashed on the entire DRVN territory. The
Minister of External Affairs expressed in the Parliament India's
sore disappointment at the tragic turn of events and expressed
his hope for immediate stoppage of all bombing and acts of war
and the signing of an early accord of peace in Vietnam.
The bombings north of the 20th parallel were, however,
ordered stopped on the night of 30 December and peace talks
were resumed in Paris on 8 January. To the great relief of the
world, the talks this time proved successful and a final agreement
on peace in Vietnam was signed in Paris by the four parties concerned (USA, DRVN, RVN and the PRG) on Saturday 27
January 1973. Our Prime Minister sent congratulatory messages
to both President Nixon and the DRVN Prime Minister Mr. Pham
Van Dong. The Paris Agreement also resulted in the creation of
a new 4-Power Vietnam Commission consisting of Canada,
Hungary, Indonesia and Poland which replaced the old 3-member International Commission for Supervision and Control.
India's bilateral relations with DRVN registered a steady
progress during the year. The relations were raised to the
Embassy level as of 7 January 1972, and DRVN's first Ambassa<pg31>
dor Mr. Chu Van Bien presented his credentials in Delhi on 26
November 1972 while India's first Ambassador to DRVN, Dr.
Sisir Gupta, presented his credentials. on 4 December 1972. A
4-member DRVN Agricultural Delegation visited India in April/
May 1972 and toured the country extensively for 5 weeks as
guests of the Government.
As far as the Republic of Vietnam is concerned, it unfortunately adopted a negative attitude towards India and reacted

sharply against our elevation of level of our representation in the
DRVN. It expressed opposition to India's membership and
Chairmanship of the ICSC for Vietnam and adopted an obstructive and unjustifiable attitude towards the Indian component in
the ICSC in Saigon. Climax was reached when it refused to extend visas of the Indian component beyond 30 September 1972.
In order to preserve this international machinery created under
the Geneva Agreement of 1954, the three delegations of the
ICSC (India, Poland and Canada) unanimously decided on 28
September 1972, to shift the headquarters of the Indian SecretaryGeneral from Saigon to Hanoi until further notice. The Canadian and Polish Delegations continued to remain in Saigon.
Laos
Alongside the hostilities in Vietnam, fighting in Laos also
continued. Nevertheless, it was a hopeful sign that the dialogue
in Laos between the two sides was resumed during the year. As
the, year ended, concrete peace proposals had been put forth by
the two sides. An agreement on the Re-establishment of Peace
and National Concord in Laos, signed in Vientiane on 21 February 1973 was welcomed by our Prime Minister. The Agreement re-affirmed support to the existing International Commission
or Supervision and Control in Laos set up under the Geneva
Agreement of 1962 and entrusted it with the task of supervising
the ceasefire.
We continued to maintain close and friendly relations with
Laos. A few Lao students continued their studies in fields like
mining and forestry in India under the Colombo Plan. A team
of Lao forestry experts visited India during March and exchanged
views with their counterparts here. India's participation in a
project to bring out a Lao Ramayana continued. India also
participated in the That Luang Festival in November 1972. At
the Asian Highway Conference held in Vientiane in October, India
was represented by Shri Om Mehta, Minister of State in the
Ministry of Transport & Shipping. The ICSC in Laos under
<pg32>
India's Chairmanship also continued to receive full cooperation
from the Royal Lao Government, and it was able to do some useful work by way of providing facilities asked for when the RLG
and the Pathet Lao delegations met for bilateral discussions.
Cambodia
The situation in Cambodia continued to be fluid. Despite the
uncertainties created by a shooting war, we continue to participate in the Prek Thnot irrigation Project in Cambodia.

CHINA
MALI INDIA USA PAKISTAN JAPAN PERU KOREA UNITED KINGDOM MONGOLIA
BANGLADESH VIETNAM FRANCE CANADA HUNGARY INDONESIA POLAND SWITZERLAND
LAOS SRI LANKA CAMBODIA LATVIA
Nov 30, 1972

Africa (South of the Sahara)
CHAPTER V
AFRICA (SOUTH OF THE SAHARA)
India's relations with the African countries registered further
progress during the year. An economic agreement was concluded with Mauritius early this year. Talks were held with
several other countries in Africa with a view to concluding similar
agreements with them. By the end of the year, India concluded
an agreement with Tanzania under which India placed a Rs. 5
crore credit at her disposal to finance some of her industrial
projects. India also agreed to provide her with a number of
experts and technicians at her cost to conduct feasibility study
add exploratory work in the fields of petroleum, coal-mining and
small scale industries.
There was a marked increase during the year in the number
of Indian technicians and experts recruited by friendly countries
in Africa. New, joint ventures and projects in industries
and agriculture have been started and more are now being negotiated. There was an increasing demand for India's participation
in developmental activity. Scholarship schemes and technical
training, facilities in India are also being augmented to meet the
growing requirements.
Contacts between leaders at political level became more frequent and intimate exchanges at all levels continued to take
Place. The India's Minister of External Affairs visited five
African countries, namely Senegal, Sierra Leone, Guinea, Liberia
and Nigeria in July 1972. The President of India paid State
visits to three African countries viz, Ethiopia, Tanzania and
Zambia in September and October 1972. The visits not only enabled the leaders to discuss matters of mutual interest but also
demonstrated India's abiding, interest in the progress and prosperity of the African countries. During these visits both the
Indian leaders reiterated India's preparedness to share with them
the experience gained in the Process of India's own development and underlined her traditional interest in Africa's larger

causes, namely, elimination of the remaining vestiges of racialism
and colonialism.
General Mobutu President of Zaire, paid a State visit to
India form Jan 21, 1973 25 January 1973, on the way back from China
President Mobutu and its principal advisers including the

<pg35>
<pg36>
Minister of Foreign Affairs, the Minister of Agriculture and
senior Army Officers had discussions with our Prime Minister
covering the general international situation with special reference to Africa and bilateral relations. During the visit a
Protocol of understanding on cooperation between India and
Zaire in the fields of trade. cultural exchange, technical cooperation aviation and shipping was signed. President Kaunda
postponed his visit to New Delhi on 25 January, to receive
Jawaharlal Nehru Award for International Understanding, due
to serious emergency in Zambia resulting from Rhodesia's decision to close its border with Zambia. Mr. Aboud Jumbe, the
Chairman of the Revolutionary Council of Zanzibar and First
Vice-President of Tanzania and party visited India from 20
February to 1 March 1973. In the discussions the Tanzanian
team had with the Indian side, an understanding was reached on
Indian assistance to Tanzania to the tune of Rs. 1 million for
establishing a common services centre and a workshop. India
has also agreed to send to Zanzibar, technical experts in small
scale industries, fisheries, agriculture and irrigation and to receive trainees from Zanzibar in these fields.
Almost all the African countries have launched the, programme
of Africanization of their economy. The method employed for
achieving the objectives, however, varies from country to country and the speed is also regulated in the, context of national
interest and availability of skilled and indigenous man-power. The
policy of Africanization is being pursued in all these countries
by introducing measures designed to give increasing opportunities
to their citizens in certain fields of trade and commerce. While
expressing sympathy and support for their national aspirations
India has always taken the view that in exercise of their sovereign right, they must ensure that non-citizens who lived in those
countries for generations were treated in a fair and equitable
manner without discrimination in respect of race or colour. In
case their business and properties had been taken over, they
should be paid adequate compensation.
However, India was shocked and surprised when in early
August President Amin of Uganda ordered wholesale expulsion

of Asians including Indian nationals within a matter of three
months. The surprise was all the more as India was maintaining
excellent relations with Uganda. Many Indian engineers, doctors, teachers and technicians were participating in the developmental activities of the country. A number of Indian entrepre<pg37>
neurs had made sizeable investments in Uganda's industrial sector
and there were considerable possibilities of diversifying the field
of India's cooperation and assistance with that country. The
manner in which the eviction was carried out, the military and
security checks throughout the country, the short notice given
for closing down business and dispossessing of properties led to
an unhealthy atmosphere in which harassment, humiliation and
expropriation became evident.
As Indian nationals left behind almost all their assets in
Uganda, the Government of India set itself the task of retrieving as much of them as possible. India has pressed firmly
with the Uganda Government for fair compensation as promised
by President Amin himself. The expulsion order issued against
the First Secretary in the Indian High Commission on unsubstantiated allegations of "improper diplomatic conduct" caused
deep disappointment and concern and India lodged a strong
protest with the Ugandan Government, reserving her right to take
appropriate action to protect India's legitimate interest.
The activities of the Organisation of African Unity have been
followed by India with great interest. India welcomed the
positive trends towards strengthening of African Unity demonstrated at the 9th OAU Summit Meeting held in June 1972 at
Rabat. Its emerging role as an Organisation capable of settling
disputes between African States has been hailed by India.
The President of India during his State visit to Ethiopia in
September 1972, visited OAU's headquarters in Addis Ababa
and was warmly welcomed by the Secretary General on behalf of
the Organisation.
The "Acceptability Test" to assess the views of all racial
groups in Rhodesia on the proposals agreed upon between the
British Foreign Secretary and the Smith Regime in November
1971 was carried out by a Commission headed by Lord Pearce,
a former Appeals Judge in the UK. The Commission reported in
May 1972 that although the European population, the Asian
community and a small minority of Africans favoured the proposals, the majority of the Africans was opposed to the same.
The Commission concluded that the people of Rhodesia as a
whole did not regard the proposals as an acceptable basis for
independence. The U.K. Government announced that in view of
the Commission's findings, they would continue the present
arrangements including sanctions until it could be judged whether

or not opportunity would occur again for a settlement.
<pg38>
The Government of India reiterated that they would continue
in their stand that the Smith Regime must be compelled to implement the principle of one-man-one-vote and that if necessary the
UK should use force in her capacity as Administering Power to
achieve this end.
India also urged in the United Nations and other forums that
all concerned powers should cooperate in enforcing effective sanctions. The Commonwealth Sanctions Committee which met in
London in mid-1972 and in which India participated urged that
Member-states of the UN and its specialised agencies should show
greater determination and political will to implement the sanctions against Rhodesia.
The Government of India continued to give moral and material support to the liberation movement operating in Africa e.g.
in Guinea-Bissau, Mozambique, Angola and Zimbabwe (Rhodesia).
India reiterated the view that South Africa has no locus standi
in Namibia and that the future of the country should be decided
in accordance with the wishes of the people there. India lent
consistent support to the efforts of the UN through the Council for
Namibia to achieve this objective.
INDIA
MAURITIUS USA TANZANIA GUINEA LIBERIA SENEGAL SIERRA LEONE NIGER NIGERIA
ETHIOPIA ZAMBIA ZAIRE CHINA LATVIA UGANDA CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC MOROCCO
UNITED KINGDOM ANGOLA GUINEA!!GUINEA-BISSAU MOZAMBIQUE ZIMBABWE SOUTH
AFRICA NAMIBIA
Jan 21, 1973

Europe
CHAPTER VI
EUROPE
WESTERN EUROPE

The period under review recorded a steady growth in India's
relations with the countries of Western Europe. The high-level
personal contacts established during the previous year were further extended, resulting not only in closer cooperation in diverse
fields but also a better understanding of the problems of the subcontinent and of India's earnest desire, as testified in the Simla
Agreement, to promote stable, peaceful and friendly relations
among the countries of the sub-continent on the basis of existing
realities, renunciation of force in mutual relations and settlement
of disputes through bilateral negotiations. After the establishment of Bangladesh, as a sovereign independent State, most
West European countries did not delay for long their recognition
of the new State, and all of them supported the new State's
application for U.N. membership. A few of them, however,
seemed to favour release of the Pakistani POWs immediately and
prior to Pakistan's recognition of Bangladesh but it was put across
to them that in any discussion on the question of repatriation of
prisoners of war, who had surrendered to the joint Indo-Bangladesh command, the association of Bangladesh was essential.
The Prime Minister, Shrimati Indira Gandhi, paid an official
visit to Sweden, at the invitation of Prime Minister Olaf Palme
of Sweden, from Jun 13, 1972 17 June 1972. During her visit, she
addressed the UN Conference on Human Environment, and held
discussions with the Swedish leaders on international problems and
Other matters of mutual interest. On both sides there was keenness to strengthen existing industrial and technical relations and
it was decided that the two countries should set up a Joint Commission on Economic, Industrial and Technical Cooperation.
The Swedish Foreign Minister, Mr. Krister Wickman, paid a
visit to India from 10 to 17 November 1972. During his visit,
letters were. exchanged between him and India's Minister of External Affairs for setting up the Joint Commission for Economic,
Industrial, Technical and Scientific Cooperation.. The Commission will review economic, industrial, technical and scientific relations between the two countries and pay special attention to prob<pg39>
<pg40>
lems relating to exchange of data between enterprises, private, or
governmental, of the two countries, notably in the fields of technology and science. This is the first Joint Commission set up by
India with a developed West European country.
Two other notable visitors from Sweden were Mrs. Alva
Myrdal, Minister for Disarmament, and Professor Gunar Myrdal, who were guests of the Government from 20 to 29 January

1973. During their stay in Delhi, Professor and Mrs. Myrdal
called on the President, the Prime Minister and the Minister for
External Affairs. They had talks with senior officials of the
Government of India on the problems of disarmament, humanisation of the laws of war and economic and technological cooperation between the developed and developing countries.
The Danish Foreign Minister, Mr. K. B. Andersen, paid
an official visit to India from 29 November to 5 December, as
guest of India's Minister of External Affairs. The discussions
revealed a similarity of approach on most international issues.
It is India's hope that Denmark's entry into the EEC would inject into the EEC a better appreciation of the problems of developing countries and the need to redress the continuing imbalance
in trade, between the Community and India.
India noted with interest the rapid progress of detente in
Europe and, more particularly, the bold and imaginative initiatives of Chancellor Brandt in concluding the Moscow and Warsaw Treaties. These moves were followed by the 4-Power
Agreements on Berlin, and agreements between the two Germanys
regulating the movement of civilian traffic and goods. They also
concluded a General Traffic Treaty between them.
While extending diplomatic recognition to the German Democratic Republic India- maintained close and constant consultations with FRG in the matter and also made it clear that its
decision was without prejudice to any future decision of the
two German States to seek reunification through peaceful means.
As anticipated by India, the two German States reached agreement on a "Basic Treaty" on 8 November 1972. Significantly,
on 19 November 1972, the West German electorate overwhelmingly endorsed Chancellor Brandt's eastern initiatives and his
policy of good-neighbourliness. This augurs well for the future
of peace and detente in Europe.
India's relations with France are constantly expanding and
both are collaborating in new areas of science and technology.
<pg41>
India's political rapport with France continued to be excellent.
The leaders of the two countries continued to maintain contacts
on important issues of mutual concern. There was some uncertainty over the French attitude towards a Commercial Cooperation Agreement between the EEC and India. This problem,
however, is on the way to a satisfactory solution as the Council of Ministers of the EEC have now agreed in principle that
negotiations with India should commence.
The annual Indo-French bilateral consultations were held in
New Delhi on 5 and 6 December. Mr. Andre, Bettencourt,
Minister-Delegate to the Foreign Minister of France, led his

country's delegation. The Indian delegation was led by the
Minister of External Affairs. The Deputy Minister for External
Affairs was deputy leader of our delegation. The, participation
of Ministers at these bilateral talks was a measure of the importance the two countries attached to promoting closer understanding and cooperation between India and France. The talks were
friendly and they covered international issues and a wide spectrum of Indo-French bilateral relations. A foundation was laid
for greater cooperation between the two countries in the sphere
of science and technology, and for increased trade.
During his State visit to Yugoslavia in July, on his way
back the President stopped over in Cyprus and had useful
exchange of views with Archbishop Makarios and other Cypriots leaders. The Presidenet's brief visit underlined India's
continued support to the efforts of the Cypriots for a solution of
their problems in a spirit of cooperation and conciliation and
without any outside interference.
There was a strong undercurrent of realism in Indo-British
relations in recent months, and relations had indeed never been
better. India's Minister of External Affairs had talks with Sir
Alec Douglas-Home in London, and the British unequivocally
supported the Simla Agreement and India's efforts to normalize
relations in the sub-continent. They also favoured settlement
of India's 'problems with Pakistan through bilateral negotiations
and without any outside interference.
Other important visitors from Britain included Mr. Geoffrey
Rippon (British Minister for EEC Affairs), Mr. Richard Wood
(Minister for Overseas Development), Lord Hailsham (Lord
Chancellor) and Mr. Anthony Royle (Parliamentary Under-Sec<pg42>
retary of State in the British Foreign and Commonwealth Office),
and 12 Members of the, British Parliament, eight of whom were
accompanied by their wives.
With Mr. Geoffrey Rippon India discussed the possible adverse effects of Britain's entry into the Common Market on IndoBritish trade relations, During the talks emphasis was laid
on the need to preserve, to the extent possible, the historic
Indo-UK Trade Agreement of 1939. India also sought British
help in the satisfactory conclusion of a Commercial Cooperation
Agreement with the Common Market. Mr. Rippon's response
was generally favourable, 'and he agreed that certain provisions
of the Indo-UK Trade Agreement of 1939, which did not impinge on the British responsibilities under the EEC treaty, could
be retained and would serve a useful purpose.

At the invitation of the, Minister of External Affairs, the
Foreign Minister of Spain, Don Gretorio Lopez Bravo, accompanied by Mrs. Lopez Bravo, paid an official visit to India from
13 to 19 December 1972. This was the first ever visit of a
Spanish Foreign Minister to India. The exchange of views between the two Foreign Ministers on various matters of mutual
interest brought out the essential similarity of the approach of
the two countries on many international issues and of their
overwhelming desire for peace and detente. Both Foreign
Ministers were keen to develop further Indo-Spanish economic
relations. In this connection, the Foreign Minister of Spain
offered possibilities of trade expansion and economic collaboration particularly in new and sophisticated branches of industry
and this offer was warmly welcomed by India's Minister of External Affairs. The two Foreign Ministers also looked into the
prospects of cooperation in the cultural and scientific fields between the two countries, and agreed that during the next two
years efforts should be made to bring about closer cultural cooperation and exchanges between Spain and India. In this connection, they agreed on a programme of exchanges for the next
two years. During his visit, the Foreign Minister of Spain also
signed a Trade Agreement with India's Minister of Foreign
Trade which provides for a new framework for increased trade
and commercial exchanges between the two countries.
In the presence of the two Foreign Ministers, letters were
exchanged between Shri H. N. Sethna, Secretary of India's Atomic Energy Department, and H.E. Mr. Guillermo Nadal, Am<pg43>
bassador of Spain in India, extending the Indo-Spanish Agreement for the peaceful uses of atomic energy for a further period
of five. years.
THE SOVIET UNION & EASTERN EUROPE
The Soviet Union
India's friendly relations with the Soviet Union continued to
develop satisfactorily in all fields in the spirit of the Indo-Soviet
Treaty of Peace, Friendship and Cooperation signed in August
1971.
The various articles of the Treaty provided the guidelines for
the promotion of bilateral relations between India and the
U.S.S.R. during 1972. The exchange of views held with the
Soviet Union, during the visits of the Minister of External Affairs
from 3 to 5 April 1972 and the Foreign Secretary from 5 to
10 September 1972 and also during President Podgrony's stopover at Calcutta on 18 June 1972 revealed close similarity or
identity of views in regard to the problems discussed, including

the situation in the Indian sub-continent. The Soviet Union
took a consistent and principled stand in regard to the developments in the sub-continent and supported India's initiatives in
seeking to normalise relations with Pakistan.
The Soviet Union warmly welcomed the Simla Agreement
and fully endorsed India's conviction that the problems relating
to the Indian sub-continent could and should be resolved bilaterally and through peaceful means amongst the countries concerned, without interference from outside. There was appreciation in the U.S.S.R. of the repeated efforts made by India
to secure the implementation of the Simla Agreement.
The deepening of mutual understanding between the two
countries also led to increased cooperation in the United Nations and other international forums.
The development of Indo-Soviet relations during 1972 was
not limited to the consolidation of the deep understanding reached during the events of the preceding year.
(i) In May 1972 an Agreement was reached between the
Academy of Sciences of the U.S.S.R. and the Indian Space Re<pg44>
search Organisation of the Government of India for furthering
Indo-Soviet cooperation in the exploration and use of outer space
for peaceful purposes. It envisaged the launching in 1974 of a
satellite, wholly designed and manufactured in India, with the
help of a Soviet rocket-carrier from Soviet territory.
(ii) The decision taken by India and the U.S.S.R. during the
Prime Minister's visit to Moscow in September 1971 was given
practical shape by the conclusion of an Agreement to set up an
inter-govermental Indo-Soviet Joint Commission for Economic,
Scientific: and Technological Cooperation. The Agreement was
signed on 19 September 1972, in Moscow by Shri D. P. Dhar,
Minister of Planning and Mr S. A. Skachkov, Chairman of the
State Committee of the U.S.S.R., Council of Minister for Foreign
Economic Relations, on behalf of India and the U.S.S.R. respectively. Working groups of the two sides discussed in November 1972 the further possibilities for economic and technical cooperation in the vital sector of Indian industry like power generation, ferrous and non-ferrous metallurgy, petro-chemicals and
fertilizers. The practical steps needed to activate the supply of
Soviet equipment, machinery and technology to supplement the
indigenous effort being made by India for the rapid expansion
of capacity as well as utilisation of installed capacity in the
sectors mentioned above also featured in these discussions.
(iii) The other major step taken by the two countries was

the signing of an Agreement on 2 October 1972 on cooperation in the fields of Applied Science and Technology, during
tion in fields of Applied Science and Technology during
the visit of Shri C. Subramaniam, Minister of Industrial Development and Science and Technology, to Moscow. This Agreement provided a more rational, coordinated and industry-orientated basis to the programme of scientific and technological exchanges between the two countries. As in the case of the economic development programmes, the Soviet Union showed sympathetic understanding of some of the problems faced in certain
fields and conveyed its readiness to cooperate, with Indian scientific and technological organisations to remove these difficulties.
(iv) The Indo-Soviet Cultural Exchange Programme for a
period of two years was signed in New Delhi in April 1972.
(v) Another positive aspect of Indo-Soviet relations was the
progressively expanding trade between the two countries. A
<pg45>
protocol was signed on 25 November 1972 by Shri L. N. Mishra,
Minister of Foreign Trade and Mr. I. T. Grishin, the Soviet
Deputy Minister of Foreign Trade, in New Delhi envisaging a
turn over of Rs. 410 crores in Indo-Soviet trade for the year
1973. While the volume of trade was significant it was noteworthy that over the years, India's exports to the Soviet Union
had been greatly diversified and the quantum of Indian exports
of non-traditional goods had steadily increased. Further. the
Soviet Union would supply important industrial raw materials in
addition to machinery and equipment, which would be of help
in India's industrial and agricultural programmes.
On the occasion of the 50th anniversary of the foundation
of the U.S.S.R., the Central Committee of the Communist Party
of the Soviet Union, the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the
U.S.S.R., and the Council of Ministers of the U.S.S.R., jointly
extended an invitation for an official delegation from India to
visit Moscow. The Vice President, Shri G. S. Pathak, accompanied by the Minister of External Affairs visited Moscow from
19 to 22 December 1972, to, participate in the celebrations.
In the course of his speech on the occasion, Mr. L.I. Brezhnev, General Secretary of the C.P.S.U. Central Committee
stated : "The friendship between Soviet Union and India, one
of the biggest peace-loving countries on our planet, is exercising
a strong positive influence on the international situation as a
whole. By now, the Soviet Union and India have considerable
experience of fruitful cooperation. Now that our relations are
based on the Treaty of Peace, Friendship and Cooperation we
feel that they will become closer still".

The Vice, President in his address referred to the, full sympathy and understanding of India's position and principled support extended to her by the U.S.S.R. in her efforts to achieve a
durable peace in the spirit of the Simla Agreement, and expressed
his confidence that cooperation between the Soviet Union and
India, as with other countries which are working for a better
future, will continue to strengthen to the mutual benefit of all
concerned.
The President and the Prime Minister also sent congratulatory messages to the President and the Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the USSR on this important occasion. At a
function organised on 30 December 1972 in New Delhi the
4-1187EA/72
<pg46>
Minister of Communications. Shri H. N. Bahuguna, released a
special postage stamp to commemorate the event.
At the invitation of the Government of India, Madame V. V.
Nikolaeva-Tereshkova, Chairman of the Soviet Women's Committee and the world's only lady cosmonaut visited India from 25
January to 3 February 1973 and was given an enthusiastic welcome everywhere she went.
An event of considerable importance during the year was
the visit to the Soviet Union by President Nixon from 22 to 30
May 1972. At the end of the visit, the Soviet Union and the
U.S.A. reached decisions on a wide range of questions not only
of importance to the two countries concerned, but also of importance towards the consolidation of peace. The Government
of India welcomed these developments while expressing the
hope that these would not be at the expense of other countries.
The Soviet Union, belonging as she does geographically to,
both Europe. and Asia, showed an increasing interest in the evolution of an Asian collective security system, side by side with
the. development of detente in Europe. A number of pronouncements by Soviet leaders during the course of the year, clarified
that they did not conceive of collective security in the form of
" military blocs and groupings" but rather founded on principles such as renunciation of the use of force, respect for sovereignty and inviolability of frontiers, non-interference in internal affairs and the development of economic and other cooperation between states on the basis of full equality and mutual
benefit. The Government of India considered that it was for
countries in the region to discuss various proposals in this regard
further and to evolve, in consultation with each other, ways and
means to safeguard their independence and sovereignty and to
strengthen cooperation amongst themselves in all fields.
Poland

The Minister of External Affairs, Sardar Swaran Singh,
visited Poland from 6 to 9 July 1972, at the invitation of the
Polish Foreign Minister. The visit was noteworthy for its cordiality and frankness. Views on bilateral issues as well as on
outstanding world problems were exchanged. It was agreed,
during the visit, to develop and strengthen further the close
and friendly cooperation already existing between India and Poland in all fields.
<pg47>
During the above mentioned visit, agreement was reached
for the mutual abolition of visa fees between India and Poland.
This arrangement came into operation from 1 August 1972, and
was expected to encourage the flow of visitors between the two
countries.
The affairs of the International Commission for Supervision
and Control in Vietnam led to close consultations between the
countries. There was a remarkable coincidence of viewpoints
with regard to the actions taken by the Saigon Government in
relation to the functioning of the ICSC in Viet Nam, and on
other administrative matters.
In September 1972 Shri Raj Bahadur, Minister of Parliamentary Affairs, Shipping and Transport paid a visit to Poland
at the invitation of the Polish Minister of Shipping. Fruitful
talks regarding the development of shipping between the two
countries were held. To help service the increased trade and
shipping between the two countries, the Shipping Corporation
of India has opened an office in Gdansk.
In December, a high powered Polish Parliamentary Delegation, led by Mr. Edward Babiuch, Secretary of the Central
Committee of the Polish United Workers Party and member of
the Politburo visited India. at the invitation of the Speaker of
the Lok Sabha.
An-Indo-Polish Cultural Exchange Program for the years
1970-73 was signed in February. This provided for exchanges
in the cultural, educational, scientific and technological fields.
On the invitation of the Prime Minister of India, the Prime
Minister of the People's Republic of Poland, H.E. Mr. Piotr
Jaroszewicz, accompanied by Madame Jaroszewicz, visited
India from 10 to 18 January 1973. The Polish Prime Minster's
delegation included Mr. Tadeusz Olechowski, Minister of Foreign
Trade; Mr. Jozef Okuniewski, Minister of Agriculture; Mr. Jerzy
Olssewski, Minister of Chemical Industry; Mr. Jozef Pinkowski,
First Deputy Chairman of the Planning Commission; Mr. Henryk
Kisiel, Deputy Chairman of the Planning Commission and other
senior officials from Poland.

The discussions between the Prime, Ministers of India and
Poland covered bilateral matters as well as international problems of mutual interest. These discussions revealed the identify or closeness of the positions of the two sides on all issues
<pg48>
discussed. Both the Prime Ministers expressed their satisfaction
at the positive development of Indo-Polish relations and reaffirmed their determination to expand further their cooperation, in all
fields. A Joint Declaration of Friendship and Cooperation between India and the Polish People's Republic was issued at the
conclusion of the visit.
As a result of discussions held during the visit between representatives of the Planning Commissions of India and Poland,
a Protocol was signed by Dr. Henryk Kisiel, Deputy Chairman of the Planning Commission of Poland and Shri S. Mohan
Kumaramangalam, Minister of Steel and Mines of India, on. a
long-term programme of economic, scientific and technical cooperation.
A Trade Protocol for the period 1973-75 was also signed
by the Foreign Trade Ministers of India and Poland in the presence of the two Prime Ministers. In terms of this Protocol,
the trade turn over between India and Poland during 1973 will
be of the order of Rs. 130.8 crores, and progressively increase
in the ensuing years.
Czechoslovakia
The most outstanding event in Indo-Czechoslovak relations
during the year was the visit of the Prime Minister, Shrimati
Indira Gandhi, to Czechoslovakia, from 17 to 20 June 1972 at
the invitation of the Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the
Czechoslovak Socialist Republic. There was complete understanding on all bilateral questions which emerged during the
talks. The visit gave a new stimulus to the further expansion
of relations between the two countries.
During the visit it was agreed to further expand and diversify bilateral relations and mutual cooperation in all fields, including planning and to hold- regular political consultations. It
was decided to conclude agreements for legal assistance, prevention of double taxation and scientific and technical cooperation.
In the international field both sides welcomed the emergence
of the independent state of Bangladesh and the creation of a
climate of detente and relaxation of tension in Europe.
The Prime Minister's visit was followed by a goodwill visit
in July from the Indian Parliament, led by the Speaker of the
Lok Sabha, Dr. G. S. Dhillon. The year also marked the 25th
<pg49>

anniversary of the establishment of diplomatic relations between
India and Czechoslovakia.
The Simla Agreement and events on the sub-continent were
closely followed by Czechoslovakia and India's policy of peace
and cooperation in the area was greatly praised.
Trade between the two countries had been steadly growing
and the Trade Plan for 1973, concluded in October in New
Delhi, visualised a further 30% growth taking the two-way trade
to Rs. 130 crores. India's exports will soon exceed Rs. 70
crores and include many new items of engineering and manufactured goods.
India participated for the first time, in the 1972 Brno Consumer Goods Fair with great success.
A delegation led by H.E. Mr, Zdnek Sedivy, Deputy Chairman of the planning Commission of Czechoslovakia, visited
India from 7 to 17 January 1973 at the invitation of Shri Mohan
Dharia, Minister of State for Planning. During. the visit, discussions took place on die exchange of experience in Planning
and on the scope for expanding economic, commercial, industrial, technical and scientific cooperation in future. Both sides
agreed on the need for continuous cooperation in the field of
planning, and the need to harness the growing capabilities and
requirements of the two countries for the long-term mutual benefit.
Yugoslavia
Yugoslavia adopted a very constructive approach to the
problems of the Indian sub-continent. The Simla Agreement
was welcomed by Yugoslavia and President Tito expressed the
hope that it would contribute to the establishment of durable
peace in the sub-continent.
Indo-Yugoslav relations continued to be cordial and friendly :
(i) The President, Shri V. V. Giri paid a four-day state visit
to Yugoslavia from 5 to 8 July 1972. He was accorded, an
affectionate welcome by the, Government and the people of Yugoslavia.
(ii) A Parliamentary Delegation headed by Mijalko Todorovic, President of the Federal Assembly, visited India in April
1972.
<pg50>
(iii) In July 1972, annual bilateral talks were held in Belgrade between the representatives of the Foreign Offices of the:
two counties; there, was a frank and friendly exchange of views

during these discussions which disclosed a closeness or identity
of views on matters discussed.
The Governments of India and Yugoslavia had agreed some
time earlier that, as from 1 January 1973, the rupee trade, arrangement between the two countries would changeover to convertible,
currency. It is to be hoped that after the transition period, the
uncertainties which prevailed during 1972 would disappear and
there would be improved trade possibilities between the two
countries.
Hungary
At the invitation of the Chairman of the Council of Ministers of Hungarian People's Republic, the Prime Minister,
Shrimati Indira Gandhi visited Hungary from 20 to 23
June 1972. The visit was very successful and the discussions,
covered both bilateral as well as international questions of common concern.
It was agreed, during the visit, that steps should be taken
to set up an intergovernmental commission on economic and
technical cooperation with a view to expand the mutually beneficial relations in these fields. On, important questions concerning the international situation, the positions of the two governments were identical or very close. The Prime Minister of Hungary appreciated India's contribution to the solution of the crisis in the sub-continent, and agreed that the establishment of the.
People's Republic of Bangladesh is an important contribution to
peace and security of the Indian sub-continent and of South
East Asia.
As a result of the cooperation between the two countries,
it was expected that trade and economic relations between them
will register further significant progress during 1973.
Rumania
The visit of Mr. Georghe Macovescu, Rumanian First Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs, to India in July 1972 brought
closer understanding between the two countries. The desire-of
Rumania to develop and strengthen her bilateral relations with
India was reciprocated by India in equal measure.
<pg51>
Mr. Ion Patan, Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign Trade
Minister of Rumania visited India from 4 to 8 December 1972
in connection with ASIA '72 at the invitation of the Minister
of Foreign Trade of India Shri L.. N. Mishra. It was agreed,
in principle, during the visit to set up an Indo-Rumanian Joint
Commission for economic, technical and scientific cooperation.
In the field of trade it was expected that the turn over would
increase by 16% to Rs. 760 million in 1973. Working groups

have been created to study the possibilities of long term arrangements for export of iron ore and for the import of fertilizers.
The Minister for Petroleum and Chemicals, Shri H. R. Gokhale visited Rumania from to 14 January 1973 on an invitation from the Rumanian Government. During the visit the
further possibility for expanding cooperation between the two.
countries in the field of oil exploration was discussed.
Bulgaria.
Relations with Bulgaria, which had been strengthened in all
fields-political, economic and cultural-particularly since the
setting up of a resident Embassy in Sofia, were further improved.
Prof. S. Nurul Hasan, Minister of Education, Social Welfare
and Culture visited Bulgaria on 3 November 1972. Shri S. K.
Banerji, Secretary (East) accompanied by Joint Secretary (East)
visited Sofia in June to hold bilateral exchange of views with the
Bulgarian Foreign Office. Bulgaria had shown full understanding and appreciation of India's position on various international
issues, particularly pertaining to the sub-continent.
Economic relations, as shown by the improved turnover
between the two countries, were further expanded. India participated in the 28th International Trade Fair at Plovdiv, where
Indian exporters did business worth Rs. 30 million including a
number of non-traditional items. A delegation of the Council
of Scientific and Industrial Research, led by Dr. Y. Nayudamma, Director-General of C.S.I.R. signed the second Protocol on Scientific and Technical Collaboration between the two
countries in Sofia, providing for greater collaboration in this
area. Two Bulgarian delegations, led by the respective, Deputy
Ministers, came to India in April 1972 to discuss plans for
technical collaboration in machine building and light industry
respectively.
<pg52>
On the cultural side, a larger number of visits between the
two countries was provided for in the Cultural and Scientific
Exchange Programme signed in New Delhi in early 1972.
German Democratic Republic
In the light of the successful development of relations in
all fields between India and the G.D.R., and consistent with
their desire to further expand and strengthen the friendly and
mutually beneficial relations existing between the two countries,
the Government of India and the Government of the German
Democratic Republic decided to establish diplomatic relations
with each other and to raise the status of their respective Missions in New Delhi and Berlin to the level of Embassies with

effect from 8 October 1972.
In the simultaneous announcement which was made, both
the governments expressed the confidence that the establishment
of diplomatic relations between India and the German Democratic Republic not only met the basic national interests of the
two countries, but also made a positive contribution to the consolidaion of international peace and security.
The decision of the Government of India to accord recognition to the German Democratic Republic was received with
satisfaction not only in India and G.D.R. but also in other
countries.
The G.D.R. Ambassador to India was accredited on 30 October, and the Ambassador of India to G.D.R., on 8 December
1972.
The G.D.R. which during the entire period of the turmoil
in the subcontinent, had shown a correct appraisal of the realities of the sub-continent, warmly welcomed the Simla Agreement. The G.D.R. continued to subscribe to the Indian view
that the problems of the sub-continent should be settled among
the countries concerned without outside interference.
Trade, economic and cultural relations between India and
G.D.R. made satisfactory progress. Shri C. Subramaniam
Minister for Industrial Development and Science and Technology
visited G.D.R. from 17 to 21 June 1972. A supplementary
protocol on scientific and technical cooperation between the two
countries was signed during his visit.
<pg53>
The trade plan for 1973, drawn up in November 1972 provided for a turn over of Rs. 69 crores.
H.E. Mr. Klaus Gysi, Minister of Culture of the, German
Democratic Republic visited India from 15 to 23 January 1973
at the invitation of the Minister of Education and Social Welfare. During the visit, a Cultural Agreement was signed.
ASIA '72
All the socialist countries of Eastern Europe, with the exception of Albania, participated in ASIA '72 in a big way and
sent high; powered delegations during the course of the Fair. This
was a measure of their interest in developing further their economic and trade relations with India by strengthening bilateral
cooperation in all fields.
25TH ANNIVERSARY OF INDEPENDENCE
The 25th Anniversary of India's independence was celebrated

in the socialist countries of Eastern Europe with enthusiasm. In
most of these countries, with official sponsorship and support,
programmes including exhibitions, public lectures, meetings, radio and T.V. features were organised. There were appreciative
comments on the achievements made by India since independence and her positive contribution to international peace and
cooperation.
INDIA
USA BANGLADESH PAKISTAN SWEDEN DENMARK RUSSIA GERMANY FRANCE YUGOSLAVIA
CYPRUS UNITED KINGDOM MALI SPAIN CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC POLAND VIETNAM
NORWAY SLOVAKIA PERU HUNGARY BULGARIA ALBANIA
Jun 13, 1972

The Americas
CHAPTER VII
THE AMERICAS
The United States
Indo-U.S. relations continued to be influenced by the events
which occurred in the sub-continent during the year 1971. Although
both Governments expressed their readiness to enter into, a dialogue to improve relations, the absence of any concrete, action
towards this objective kept the relationship between the two, countries somewhat at a low ebb.
It has been the policy of the Government of India to develop
friendly relations with all countries on the basis of equality, reciprocity and mutual respect. In pursuit of this policy, India endeavoured to normalise relations with the United States and reestablish the friendly relations that existed between the two countries for several years As the Prime Minister wrote in an article
published in the Foreign Affairs Quarterly of October 1972 :
"We do not, believe in permanent estrangement.... We are
ready to join in any serious effort to arrive at a deeper
appreciation of each other's point of view and to improve
relations. A great power must take into account the existence not only of countries with comparable power but of
the multitude of others who are no longer willing to be
pawns on a global chess-board."
The two Governments maintained, continuous contacts through

their respective Embassies and Foreign Offices. In July 1972,
Mr. John B. Connally visited India as a Special Representative of
President Nixon and had useful discussions with the Prime Minister,
the Minister of External Affairs and the Finance Minister. These
discussions covered a variety of subjects of interest to the two
countries-both in the bilateral and international spheres. In
October, the Minister of External Affairs had a meeting with the
Secretary of State, Mr. William Rogers in New York. There
were contacts at other levels also.
Senator Charles Mathias (Republican) Maryland, visited
India as the guest of the Government of India from Jan 24, 1973
to 3 February 1973. While in Delhi he was received by the
President, Prime Minister, the Hon'ble Speaker, Minister of
<pg54>
<pg55>
External Affairs, Planning Minister and the Foreign Secretary.
Senator Mathias' discussions with Indian leaders were cordial
and friendly, and before departing, the Senator expressed satisfaction at the result of his visit.
A principal obstacle to improvement in Indo-US relations
has been the question of supply of arms to Pakistan by the United
States. In November 1971 the United States Government
announced a complete embargo on the supply of military equipment to Pakistan. Since then, United States spokesmen had
been frequently stating that the question of resumption of arms
supply remained "under review". On 14 March 1973 the United
States Government announced the lifting of embargo on the
supply of Arms to Pakistan. The Government of India expressed
their grave concern on this decision of the United States Government and conveyed their strong feeling to that Government
through diplomatic channels. This action of the United States
Government was strongly criticised by all sections of opinion in
the Parliament. In response to a calling attention notice the
Minister of External Affairs observed, that the supply 'of arms by
the United States to Pakistan will be a grave impediment in the
way of normalisation of the situation in the sub-conitnent and will
jeopardise peace in this region. It will not only be a threat to
the security of India, but will also have a negative effect on the
prospects of normalising and strengthening Indo-US relations.
On Vietnam, the two Governments continued to have different
views, India opposed the bombing of Vietnam and called for the
withdrawal of all foreign forces to enable the Vietnamese People
to decide their own destiny without foreign interference. India
welcomed the initiatives taken by President Nixon in developing
closer contacts with the U.S.S.R. and the Peoples Republic of
China. India also expressed the hope that these initiatives would
not be at the cost of interests of third countries or lead to any
interference in their affairs.

India and the United States share many common ideals and
although they do not always hold the, same view on some issues,
there are no problems between them which cannot be resolved to
mutual benefit. The Government of India desires to normalise and
strengthen their relations with the United States of America in
the light of new realities on the subcontinent and on the basis of
equality reciprocity and mutual interests. As the External
Affairs Minister stated in the Rajya Sabha on 30 November,
there was no reason why relations between the United States and
India should not only be normalised but become friendly and
<pg56>
cooperative. The Government of India have. every reason to
believe that the United States of America will encourage the
new trends towards peace on the sub-continent and the new
policy of bilateralism enshrined in the Simla Agreement.
Flights by military aircraft of other countries have been allowed
since before the Independence after examining such requests. In
the case of U.S. MAC (Military Airlift Command) flights, facilities
for such flights were regulated by an Agreement between the
Governments of India and the, U.S.A. These flights usually carried Diplomatic Bags, supplies for the U.S. Diplomatic Mission,
certain categories of U.S. duty personnel, etc.
Under the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations, 1961,
there is no obligation on the receiving State to permit the carriage
of goods, mail and personnel, connected with. the foreign Diplomatic Missions by military aircraft.
Using its right to regulate the flights of military aircraft over
its territory strictly in accordance, with international custom, the
Government of India decided in October 1972 to disallow facilities
to military aircraft of the United States and. other countries' to
bring goods, mail, personnel, etc., for their Diplomatic Missions
hi India., Accordingly, the 1949 Agreement between the Governments of India and the U.S.A. was terminated. As in other cases,
permission for U.S. military aircraft flights is given after considering all aspects of each individual flight. The Government does
not normally allow, as a matter of policy, flights by foreign military
aircraft over Indian territory' except in very special cases, which
are considered on their merits. This rule is applicable to all
foreign military aircraft and not only to those of any particular
country.
Canada
Relations with Canada continued to be friendly and cooperative-both in the bilateral sphere and in international forums,
As in the past, the two most important areas in this relationship
were economic cooperation and cooperation in the field of Atomic
Energy. Having already assisted India in the construction of
Trombay Reactor, Canada is presently providing know-bow. design

and consultancy service for the Rajasthan Atomic Power Project
(R.A.P.P.) at Kota, the first reactor of which became, critical on
11 August 1972. Canadian economic assistance has been of
considerable value to India-both in quantity and quality.
<pg57>
Mr. Lester Pearson, former Prime Minister of Canada, visited
India in March 1972 in order to attend the Board meeting of the
Canadian International Development Research Centre, of, which
he was the Chairman. The Speaker of the Lok Sabha led a Parliamentary delegation to Canada in October, at the invitation of the
Canadian branch of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association.
South America
India's relations with Latin American countries further developed during the year. Since all the countries in this region belong
to the category of developing nations, they have an identity of
interests with India, both in the political and in the; economic
sphere. There is a growing awareness about Asia in many Latin
American countries. India received the co-operation of Latin
American countries in international forums and at the United
Nations. 15 South American countries were associated with the
Conference, of the Foreign Ministers of Non-aligned countries held
in Georgetown (Guyana) in August 1972. Five of them, namely
Chile, Cuba, Guyana, Jamaica, and Trinidad & Tobago participated as members while Argentina, Barbados, Bolivia, Brazil, Columbia,, Ecuador, Mexico, Peru, Uruguay and Venezuela Participated
as observers, on the occasion of this Conference, a bronze
sculpture of the late Prime Minister, Shri Jawaharlal Nehru, was
presented to the Government of Guyana at the latter's requested
for, installation in the city of Georgetown together with the busts
of three other leaders of non-alignment.
In response to an invitation from the Latin American InterParliamentary Conference, Shri Erasmo de Sequeira, Member of
Parliament, was nominated as an Observer to attend the session
of the Latin American Inter-Parliamentary Conference held in
Guatemala from 6 to 9 December 1972. A similar invitation
had been accepted last year for the first time.
Several Latin American and Caribbean countries were among
the first to accept the realities of the changed situation in the subcontinent and readily accorded recognition to Bangladesh.
With a view to increasing India's contacts with Latin American
countries, new Resident Missions were opened at Ambassadors'
level in Colombia and Panama. Our Mission in Caracas
(Venezuela) was upgraded from the level of Resident Charge d'
Affaires to that of a Resident Ambassador. Diplomatic relations
were established with yet another country i.e. Guatemala. The
Government of Guyana have decided to open a resident Mission
in New Delhi shortly, Cuba raised the level of its Mission here

from resident CDA to Resident Ambassador.
<pg58>
In the course of the year, India received the following important visitors from this region:
(i) Mr. Mohamed Kasim, Minister of Communications,
Government of Guyana, who held fruitful discussions
on economic matters with Government officials and
private entrepreneurs;
(ii) Sir Hugh Wooding. ex-Chief Justice and Chairman of
the Constitution Commission of Trinidad & Tobago.
He held discussions on Constitutional matters and
election procedures in order to utilize India's, experience in drafting a new Constitution. for Trinidad &
Tobago;
(iii) Mr. Carpio-Castillo, a Deputy of the Venezuelan
Parliament, visited India to, present copy of the Resolution passed by the Venezuelan Parliament on the
occasion of the 25th Anniversary of India's
Independence;
(iv) Senator Aniceto Rodrigues, visited India as a guest
of the Government and held useful discussions with
the Prime Minister and other Ministers.
(v) Madame Consuelo Gonzales de Velasco, wife of
the Peruvian President, accompanied by her
daughter, Mrs. Maria Elena Velasco de Pinto, and
Mrs. Zoila de Jimenez de Lucio, wife of the Minister
of Commerce and Industry of Peru, visited India,
from 24 January to 1 February 1973. They called
on the President, Vice-president Prime Minister and
the Minister of External Affairs and witnessed the
Republic Day celebrations.
During the course of the year. a concerted effort was made
by India to promote economic and commercial relations with the
Latin American countries. The response from the Latin American
countries was very encouraging. A delegation led by the Chairman
of the Projects & Equipment Corporation visited several Latin
American countries as consequence of which not only ware
contacts established with many countries but also an agreement
was concluded with Peru for the purchase of 54,000 tons of
copper. This effort was followed by further exchange of visits
from both. sides. A major hurdle in the development of trade
contacts with Latin American countries has been the lack of
regular shipping service. Discussions have been held with several
Latin American countries to, overcome this problem. There are
good prospects on starting a shipping service in the near future.

USA
INDIA MALI PAKISTAN VIETNAM CHINA CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC AUSTRIA CANADA
GUYANA CHILE CUBA JAMAICA ARGENTINA BOLIVIA BRAZIL ECUADOR MEXICO PERU
URUGUAY VENEZUELA GUATEMALA BANGLADESH COLOMBIA PANAMA
Jan 24, 1973

United Nations And International Conferences
CHAPTER VIII
UNITED NATIONS AND INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCES
A number of important issues were considered by the UN
General Assembly in 1972 which dealt with an agenda of 100
items. Decisions were taken, among others, in regard to matters
such as the strengthening of international 'Security, Disarmament
the declaration of the Indian Ocean as a Zone of Peace, the
Middle-east, questions relating to colonialism and apartheid, the
proposed Law of the Sea Conference and the follow-up of the
Third UNCTAD conference. New items of interest were the
question of International Terrorism, Non-use of force and permanent prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons and the strengthening of the United Nations.
An important subject of particular significance, which received
considerable attention, was the question of admission of Bangladesh into the United Nations. Even though Bangladesh has not
yet been able to take its rightful place in the Organization, the
expression by the General Assembly, as a whole, of the desire
that it will be admitted to membership at an early date was a
clear manifestation of the will of the international community in
this regard.
At the same time, the General Assembly also took positive
note of the Simla Agreement. Efforts being made in search of
durable peace in the sub-continent were widely welcomed in the
United Nations. The general impression among members of the
U.N. was that the situation in the subcontinent was improving
despite various difficulties. Indian representatives endeavoured
to present the correct picture. It was impressed on the world
community that a solution of the pending problems of the, subcontinent would be facilitated to the extent that Pakistan was
ready to accept and recognize the realities of the new situation.
India took its seat as a member of the Security Council with

effect from Jan 01, 1972. During the year 1972, India participated actively in the various issues that were discussed at the
Security Council. These included the questions of Southern
Rhodesia, Cyprus, Namibia and Portuguese Territories, the situation in the Middle East and the admission of Bangladesh to the
United Nations.
<pg59>
<pg60>
The 26th UN General Assembly adopted a resolution, which
was cosponsored by a large number of countries including India,
inviting the Security Council to consider the request of the O.A.U.
that the Security Council hold meetings in an African capital early
in 1972 to discuss measures to be, taken to implement various
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions on Decolonisation, Apartheid and Racial Discrimination in Africa. Following
a subsequent Security Council decision in January 1972 to that
effect, the Council met in Addis Ababa from 28, January to 4
February 1972. The Council held 13 meetings during this period
and adopted four resolutions-two on Namibia and one each on
Apartheid and on African Territories under Portuguese Administration. A resolution on Southern Rhodesia was vetoed by U.K.
All these resolutions had the full support of India.
The Resolutions on Apartheid condemned the Government of
South Africa for continuing its policies of Apartheid and recognised the legitimacy of the struggle of the oppressed people of
South Africa, in pursuance of their human and political rights
as set forth in the UN Charter and the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights. It also called upon all states to observe strictly
the Organization's embargo against South Africa.
The Resolution on the question of territories under Portuguese administration, reaffirmed the inalienable rights of the
people of Angola, Mozambique, and Guinea (Bissau) to selfdetermination and independence and recognised the legitimacy
of their struggle to achieve that right. It also called upon all
states to refrain from offering the Portuguese Government any
assistance to enable it to continue its repression of the people of
the territories under its administration and to take all necessary
measures to prevent the sale and supply of arms and military
equipment to the Portuguese Government for that purpose.
The first Resolution on Namibia invited the Secretary-General,
in consultation and close cooperation with a group of Security
Council members made up of the representatives of Argentina,
Somalia and Yugoslavia, to initiate contacts with all parties concerned, with a view to enabling the people of Namibia to exercise
their right to self-determination and independence. The Resolution also called upon the Government of South Africa to cooperate
fully with the Secretary-General in its implementation. The
second Resolution on Namibia condemned the repressive

measures against African labourers in Namibia and called upon
South Africa to end these measures immediately and to withdraw
<pg61>
immediately its police and military forces as well as its civilian
personnel from the territory of Namibia.
In accordance with the decision of the Security Council, the
UN Secretary-General established contact with the South African
Government. On 1 August 1972, the Security Council approved
the proposal of the Secretary-General for the appointment of a
representative to assist him in this regard. Mr. Escher visited
South Africa and Namibia in this capacity from 8 October to 3
November 1972, and submitted his report to the Secretary-General
on 14 November 1972, In December 1972, the Security Council
adopted a resolution inviting the Secretary-General to continue
his efforts to enable the people of Namibia, freely and with strict
regard to the Principles of human equality, to exercise their right
to self-determination and independence, in accordance with the
UN Charter. India consistently supported the right of the people
of Namibia to self-determination and independence, and supportedthe: initiative of the Secretary-General in the hope that it wilt
further this aim.
Bangladesh, which was admitted to a number of Specialized
Agencies of the UN System and other international organizations,
applied to the Security Council for admission into the UN on
8 August 1972. The Admissions Committee, to which the application was referred by the Security Council, reported that 11
members had supported the application, one member (Guinea)
was opposed and that three members (Sudan, Somalia and
China) did not participate in the deliberations of the Committee.
China introduced a resolution in the Security Council seeking
postponement of the consideration of the question of admission of
Bangladesh into the UN. pending full implementation of last year's
resolutions adopted by the General Assembly and the Security
Council calling for troop withdrawals and release of POWs by all
concerned. Only three members of the Security Council (China,
Sudan and Guinea) voted, in favour of the resolution.
India, USSR, UK and Yugoslavia tabled another resolution,
calling for the admission of Bangladesh into the UN. An. amendment proposed by Guinea, Sudan and Somalia, seeking to make
the admission of Bangladesh conditional on the implementation of
the provisions of the Geneva Conventions relating to the release
and resolution of POWs and civilian internees, was not carried.
The resolution itself obtained 11 votes in favour, one against
(China), with three abstaining (Guinea, Somalia and Sudan).
Because of the Chinese veto, the draft resolution was defeated.
<pg62>
At the behest of Yugoslavia, a new item was, meanwhile,

inscribed on the Agenda of the 27th UN General Assembly
entitled: "Admission of New Members", to facilitate consideration
of the question of admission of 'Bangladesh to the UN. Notwithstanding the determined efforts made by Pakistan and China to
avoid discussion of this item, the General Assembly eventually
adopted two resolutions. Both the resolutions were adopted
without a vote, and the, President of the Assembly made a statement proposing such adoption by consensus.
The first resolution was a 23-power resolution initiated by
Yugoslavia which, "considering that Bangladesh is eligible for
membership of the United Nations"... "expresses the desire that
Bangladesh will be admitted to the UN at an early date". The
second resolution, cosponsored by sixteen delegations, on the
initiative of Argentina, was a compromise Proposal designed to
avoid acrimonious debate on the Yugoslav resolution, as well as
to avoid far-reaching amendments by Pakistan and some other
delegations. This resolution referred in its preambular paragraphs
to the United Nations Charter and Security Council resolution
307 of 21 December 1971, and "note with satisfaction the steps
taken so far to facilitate the restoration of conditions of normalcy
in the Asian subcontinent, notably the Simla Agreement". In
another preambular paragraph, it considered "that the solution of
all outstanding problems including the, return of military and civilian personnel to their respective countries, is important for the
establishment of a climate of peace and tranquility in the area".
It expressed "the hope that all parties will refrain from any act
which could jeopardise prospects of a settlement" and "the desire
that the parties concerned will make all possible efforts in a spirit
of cooperation and mutual respect to reach a fair settlement of
issues still pending" between them. The resolution also "calls for
the return of prisoners of war in accordance with the Geneva
Conventions of 1949 and the relevant provisions of Security
Council resolution 307". Pakistan's efforts to introduce into this
resolution a link with the admission of Bangladesh and thus to
impose conditions for such admission were of no avail. The
resolution did not even refer to the question of admission of
Bangladesh.
In his statement, the President said that the consensus of the
Assembly was in favour of the admission of Bangladesh and that
the Assembly was also in favour of the implementation of the
Security Council resolution. He added that the admission of
Bangladesh should be viewed along with the overall solution of
<pg63>
the existing political, legal and humanitarian problems and that
it was essential to view the "simultaneous adoption of these two
resolutions as constituting an interdependence between these two
viewpoints". He went on to say that "A peaceful solution on the
Sub-continent should be promoted; in this context, the Simla
Agreement is to be welcomed".

In explaining the Indian position on the two resolutions, the
Permanent Representative of India welcomed the President's reference to the; desire of the parties concerned to make all possible
efforts, in cooperation and with mutual respect, to reach a settleMont on the issues that, are still pending. He also welcomed the
reference to the Simla Agreement in the second resolution. On
the question of prisoners of war, our Permanent Representative
referred to the discussion during the Simla Summit when the position regarding their surrender to the joint command and the need
for the association of Bangladesh in the matter had been fully
explained to Pakistan. He quoted paragraph 6 of the Simla
Agreement which referred to further discussions between the representatives of the two sides for establishment of durable peace
and normalisation of relations including repatriation of prisoners
of war and civilian internees. He added that this solemn agreement was ratified by the Parliaments of the two countries. He
referred to this background and wondered why Pakistan had still
not taken any step towards recognition of Bangladesh-a vital
step which would facilitate the opening of discussions for the
solution of the problem of prisoners of war.
Our Permanent Representative also pointed out that the
reference to interdependence made by the President was to be
seen as indicating that as long as Bangladesh was kept out of
the United Nations and as long as Pakistan refused to recognise
Bangladesh, the solution of the pending problems would be
difficult, if not impossible.
A Conference of Foreign Ministers of non-aligned countries
was held in Georgetown (Guyana) in August 1972, pursuant
to a decision of the Foreign Ministers, who met in New York in
September last year, to hold such a conference before the 27th
UN General Assembly. Similar ministerial meetings in the past
had been held for the purpose of preparing for a Summit, or
were of a consultative nature. However, the Georgetown Conference, apart from considering details of cooperation and coordination amongst non-aligned countries at the UN General
Assembly, undertook a substantive review of the international
situation and of trends in the international scene, with particular
<pg64>
reference to the role of non-alignment. The Conference also
dealt, in some depth, with the question of economic cooperation
amongst the non-aligned countries.
The Georgetown Conference showed clearly that intertest in
the non-aligned movement had greatly increased. There were
fifty-eight participants and a number of countries, liberation
movements and other organisations were present as observers or
guests. More Latin American countries than ever before attended the Conference. Bahrain and the United Arab Emirates
were admitted as full members, and Oman was admitted as an
Observer. The, delegation of the Provisional Revolutionary

Government of South Vietnam, which had previously attended
non-aligned meetings as Observer, was admitted as a full member. The delegation of Prince Sihanouk was invited to take the
seat of Cambodia, which had been kept vacant since the Summit
Conference of Lusaka in 1970.
The decision in respect of the Provisional Revolutionary
Government of South Vietnam led to walkout by the delegations
of Indonesia, Laos and Malaysia. They explained, however,
that this represented a withdrawal only from the present Conference and not from the non-aligned movement itself, nor from
participation in future 'meetings of the non-aligned.
The role of India in regard to the contentions issue of representation raised at the Conference was one of moderation with
a view to assisting the Chairman to achieve a consensus, if not
unanimity. India accepted the consensus announced by the
Chairman in regard to the Provisional Revolutionary Government of South Vietnam in a spirit of harmony, emphasising
points that united the Non-aligned Group rather than those that
divided it, and made a statement to that effect. In regard to the
filling of the seat of Cambodia, we cautioned against the danger
of taking precipitate action to seat emigre governments.
It was decided at the Georgetown Conference that a Summit
Conference of non-aligned countries would be held in 1973 in
Algiers in early September before the UN General Assembly.
Afghanistan announced its willingness to host any preparatory
meeting, that might be held for that purpose.
The documents adopted by the Conference included a general declaration entitled the "Georgetown Declaration", which
examined recent trends in the international scene with particular
reference to the role of non-aligned countries. A statement on
<pg65>
International, Security, as also several resolutions on specific
subjects such as Decolonisation, Middle East and Indo-China
were adopted. In addition, a document on Economic Cooperation amongst non-aligned countries was adopted by the Conference.
Pursuant to the decisions taken by the Georgetown Conference, the non-aligned countries held continuing consultations at
the UN, with a view to cooperation and coordination amongst
themselves on important agenda items as well as preparation of
draft resolutions, whenever possible, representing areas of agreement among them. For this purpose, smaller contacts groups
were set up and India was active in all of them.
One of the important items for discussion in the Non-aligned
Group at the UN was that relating to the implementation of the
Declaration of the Indian Ocean as a Zone of Peace adopted

by the General Assembly at its 26th session in 1971. The
resolution, adopted at the 27th session,. which was cosponsored
mostly by non-aligned countries, included a decision to establish
an ad hoc committee to study the implications of the proposal,
with special reference to the practical measures that may be
taken in furtherance of the objectives of the resolution, having
due regard to the security interests of the littoral and hinterland
states of the Indian Ocean. The resolution was adopted by 95
votes in favour with none against. Thirty-three countries, including the four Permanent Members' of the Security Council
other than 'China, abstained on the resolution. The Committee
appointed, in pursuance of the resolution included India. The
Committee will report to the 28th session of the General
Assembly in 1973.
The non-aligned countries cooperated closely in regard to
the discussion on the implementation of the Declaration on the
Strengthening of International Security, adopted by the UNGA
at its 25th session in 1970. This year also, a resolution cosponsored by a large number of non-aligned countries was
adopted by the UN General Assembly. The resolution inter alia
expressed the hope that the present favourable trends in bilateral, regional and multilateral relations would continue, and that
efforts to that end would be pursued and intensified thus furthering the strengthening of international security in accordance
with the purposes and principles of the Charter.
A new item was placed on the Agenda of the Un General
Assembly, at the request of the USSR, relating to non-use of
<pg66>
force in international relations and the permanent prohibition of
the use of nuclear weapons. The non-aligned countries were intimately involved in the consideration of this item, and assisted in
the formulation of the resolution, as finally adopted by the UN
General Assembly with 74, votes in favour. The only countries
to vote against the resolution were Portugal, South Africa,
Albania and China. Most western countries abstained. The
resolution included a solemn declaration on behalf of the Statesmembers of the organisation for the renunciation of the use or
threat of force in all its forms and manifestations in international relations, in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations, and the permanent prohibition of the use of nuclear
weapons. The resolution also recommended that the Security
Council should take, as soon as possible, appropriate measures
for the full implementation of this Declaration.
The situation in the Middle East continued to engage the
serious attention of the UN General Assembly. The draft
resolution presented by non-aligned and other countries, adopted
by the 27th UN General Assembly with 86 votes to 7, with 31
abstentions, deplored the non-compliance by Israel with General
Assembly Resolution 2799 (XXVI), which in particular called

upon Israel to respond favourably to the peace initiative of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General to the Middle
East. The resolution also declared that the acquisition of territories by force was inadmissible, and re-affirmed that the establishment of a just and lasting peace in the Middle East should
include the withdrawal of Israeli armed forces from territories
occupied in the last conflict, and the right of every state in the
area to live in peace within secure and recognised boundaries
free from threats or acts of force. Through this resolution, the
General. Assembly also expressed its full support for the efforts
of the Secretary-General and his Special Representative.
As in the previous sessions, the General Assembly debated
at length the questions of colonialism and apartheid. Comprehensive resolutions on various aspects of these problems were
adopted, including recommendations in respect of particular
colonial territories and in respect of the several aspects of
apartheid. The mandate of the Special Committee on Colonialism and the Special Committee on Apartheid were renewed for
the forthcoming year. The contribution of India to these deliberations was in keeping with its well-known and consistent
stand on the questions of colonialism and apartheid.
<pg67>
The General Assembly gave detailed consideration to the
results achieved a the Third United Nations- Conference on
Trade and Development, held earlier in the year in Santiago
(Chile). It took note of the Report of the UNCTAD and of
the Trade and Development Board, and inter alia welcomed the
resolutions adopted at UNCTAD III on multilateral trade
negotiations and on the international monetary situation. It reaffirmed that developing countries should participate fully,
effectively and continuously in all stages of the multilateral trade
negotiations and in the decision making process of the Internationay Monetary System and its reform to ensure that full,
consideration is given to their special interests. In particular,
it also endorsed the recommendation of UNCTAD III that problems in the monetary, trade and finance spheres should be
resolved in a coordinated manner, taking into account their interdependence, with the full participation of the developed and
developing countries. The General Assembly also made recommendations to the Trade and Development Board in regard to
the review and appraisal of the International Development
Strategy.
The UN General Assembly paid particular attention to the
recommendations of UNCTAD III in regard to the need for a
Code of Conduct for Liner Conferences, by which commercial
interests in the shipping field would be regulated. The establishment of such a Code would assist in preventing powerful international cartels from unilaterally fixing ocean freight rates that
could harm the trade of the developing countries. India has
fully supported the need for such a Code. The 27th UNGA

resolved to set up committee of 48 members to evolve such a
Code on the basis of the draft Code which was formulated at the
third session of UNCTAD. The adoption of this resolution was
considered a significant victory for the developing countries in
this field.
During the year, the Conference of the Committee on Disarmanent (CCD) held two Sessions, the first from 29 February
to 27 April and the second from 20 June to 7 September 1972.
A total of 40 formal plenary meetings with records and 6 informal meetings, without records were held during the two sessions.
At these meetings, members expressed views and suggestions on
the various aspects of the questions relating to arms control and
disarmament.
In addition to the plenary meetings, members of the Committee met frequently for informal multi-lateral consultations on
<pg68>
disarmament matters. The Group of Twelve of the CCD, of
which India is a member, held 19 meetings.
The Committee held before it a number of subjects which
were referred to it by the UN General Assembly. It was also
guided by the provisional agenda which lists the categories of
measures to be considered by that body.
Besides oral statements, a number of formal proposals including a draft convention on `Chemical Weapons' and working
papers were presented by members either individually or jointly
with other members to assist the Committee in the examination
and analysis of possible disarmanent measures. Although members expressed their views on a number of issues which they
considered relevant and important, a great deal of attention was
devoted to :
(1) The prohibition of Chemical Weapons;
(2) The question of a Treaty banning underground
Nuclear Weapons Tests;
(3) The convening of a World- Disarmament Conference; and
(4) The organization and procedures of the CCD.
However, no agreement was reached, on any specific measure.
At the conclusion of the session, a report on its work was
submitted to the UN General Assembly.
Significant among the disarmament matters considered by the
General Assembly was the question of convening a world dis-

armament conference. The non-aligned countries played a
notable part in the consultations which eventually led to a decision by the Assembly to establish a Special Committee consisting of 35 member-states to examine Al the views and suggestions
expressed by Governments and to present, on the basis of consensus, a report to the general Assembly at its 28th Session.
In pursuance of this decision, the President of the General
Assembly has appointed 31 Member States including India to
serve on the Special Committee. The Soviet Union is the only
nuclear-weapon State which has so far agreed to serve on the
Special Committee. Seats have been reserved for the other
four nuclear-weapon states, which wish to become members of the special Committee in the future.
<pg69>
On the question of chemical and biological weapons, the
General Assembly reaffirmed its hope for the widest possible
adherence to the Convention on biological and toxin weapons
and called for continued negotiations, as a matter of high priority, with a view to reaching an early agreement on the prohibition of chemical weapons.
In regard to the suspension of nuclear and thermonuclear
tests, the General Assembly adopted three resolutions, in which
the Assembly stressed the urgency of halting all atmospheric
testing of nuclear weapons in the Pacific or anywhere else in the
world, called upon all Governments conducting underground
nuclear weapon tests to undertake unilateral or negotiated measures for the suspension or reduction of such testing, reiterated
its condemnation of all nuclear weapon tests, and urged the
nuclear-weapon States to halt all nuclear weapon tests not later
than 5 August 1973.
The Ministry continued to assist the Department of Atomic
Energy and the Department of Space by doing liaison work in
respect of the international aspects of their activities. Our
Ambassador in Vienna is a Governor on the Board of Governors of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA).
India continued to play active part in the work of the United
Nations Committees/Conferences concerned with the progressive
development of international law.
The Indian representatives of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL) an its Working Groups actively participated in its work. The Reports of the
Working Group on shipping legislation was presented to the
UNCITRAL in April 1972 by Dr. Nagendra Singh in his capacity as the Chairman of the Working Group. On the suggestion
of the, Indian delegation, the Commission decided to request the
UNCTAD Secretariat to submit a study on the economic and
commercial aspects of carriage of live animals. The Working
Group at its meeting held in Geneva from 25 September to 6

October 1972 considered the basic principles in the Brussels
Convention relating to the allocation of risks between the carrier
and the cargo, owner and arbitration clauses in bills of lading.
In, the field of international sale of goods a draft Convention on
Prescription was, finally approved by UNCITRAL at its fifth
session held in April-May 1972. A Working Group on Negotiable Instrument was also set up at the fifth session of
UNCITRAL.
<pg70>
The General Assembly instructed the Committee on Peaceful
Uses of the Seabed and the Ocean Floor beyond the Limits of
National Jurisdiction to do the preparatory work, for the Conference on the Law of the Sea to be held in 1973. The enlarged Seabed Committee, consisting of 91 members including
China, held two sessions in February-March 1972 and JulyAugust 1972 in New York and Geneva, respectively. The
Indian representatives actively participated in the work of the UN
Seabed Committee.
At the invitation of the Government of India, the AsianAfrican Legal Consultative Committee held its fourteenth annual
session in New Delhi from 10 to 18 January 1973. The session
was attended by 19 member countries and 35 other observers
representing countries from Latin America, North America and
Europe. and international organisations. The session was
inaugurated by the Minister of External Affairs on 11th January
1973. The principal subject for discussion was the Law of the
Sea and the Seabed. The Indian delegation proposed a set of'
draft articles on the establishment of an exclusive fishery zone
outside the! limits of territorial waters, to protect the fishery
interests of the coastal states. The outer limit of this zone will
be settled by negotiation. The proposal received overwhelming
support from the members of the Committee. Reservations
were made by Japan.
On 18 August 1972, the International Court of Justice
delivered its Judgement in the Appeal relating to, the Jurisdiction of the ICAO Council (India v. Pakistan). By 13 votes to
3, the Court rejected Pakistan's contention that the International
Court of Justice had no jurisdiction to entertain India's Appeal.
By 14 votes to 2, the Court also held that the ICAO Council was
competent to entertain Pakistan's Application and Complaint.
The Court did not express any view on the substance of India's
contentions. It is now left to the ICAO Council to deal with
the merits of India's contentions including the question of ICAO
Council's jurisdiction to deal with these cases.
The Government of India submitted its Counter-Memorial to
the ICAO Council on 28 August 1972. On 18 October 1972
the Council of ICAO sought views of the Government of India
on the question whether further proceedings relating to the cases
should be tabled during the 77th session of the Council which

was scheduled to be held from 13 November 1972 or during
the 78th session which was scheduled to be held towards the end
<pg71>
of February 1973. Meanwhile, the Government of Pakistan
conveyed their willingness to hold bilateral negotiations regarding overflights case. The Government of India made a positvie
response to this proposal. Accordingly both the countries have
informed the Council not to take up the subject at its current
session.
A Bill to give effect to the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic
Relations 1961 and to provide for matters connected therewith
was passed by both Houses of Parliament during the year. The
assent of the President to this Bill was given on 29 August 1972.
This Act deals with matters like immunity of a diplomatic
mission and its members from local jurisdiction, their exemption
from dues and taxes, the manner in which the immunity of a
diplomatic agent may be recognised and allowed, the evidentiary
value of a foreign office certificate, and other related matters.
During 1972, India concluded 122 treaties and agreements,
a list of which is enclosed as Appendix 111. Special mention
may be made of the following Agreements concluded during the
year :
1. Treaty of Friendship, Cooperation and Peace between
the Republic of India and the People's Republic of
Bangladesh (March 1972).
2. Agreement on bilateral relations between the Government of India and the Government of Pakistan (The
Simla Agreement, 2 July 1972).
The UNESCO General Conference was held in Paris this
year. The Indian Delegation was led by Shri I. K. Gujral,
Minister of State for Information and Broadcasting. Shri G.
Parthasarathy, Vice-Chancellor of the Jawaharlal Nehru University, was elected to the Executive Board of the UNESCO, in
place of the retiring member from India, Dr. Prem Kirpal. An
event of special importance was the admission of Bangladesh to
UNESCO.
Pursuant to the decision of the 26th UN General Assembly,
an ad hoc Committee on Cooperation between the United
Nations Development Programme and the United Nations Industrial Development Organisation was set up this year, Shri
V. C. Trivedi, then Ambassador of India in Vienna (Austria),
was elected its Chairman. The Committee which met in New
York in March 1972, made several concrete suggestions; these
<pg72>

relate inter alia to the continued provision of financial resources
from the UNDP to UNIDO in the field of Special Industrial
Services and, the establishment of a channel of regular communication between the two Organizations at an appropriate level.
During the year Shri. B. B. Lal, Secretary, Ministry of Industrial
Development, 'was included by the UN Secretary-General in a
high level group of experts from various geographical regions
constituted with a view to achieving better orientation of UNIDO
towards meeting the needs of developing countries.
A significant success was achieved by India in the election
of Dr. Nagendra Singh, former Secretary to the President and
Chief Election Commissioner, as Judge of the International
Court of Justice. Dr. Nagendra Singh's term at the Court will
be nine years, commencing from February 1973. India is thus
once again represented on this important world body after a
lapse of over 20 years.
At the United Nations Economic and Social Council in May
1972, India was elected to the Commission on the Status of
of Women, the Committee on Natural Resources, the Committee on Science and Technology, the Committee on Review
and Appraisal and the Governing Council of the United Nations
Development Programme. Earlier, Shri Bali Ram Bhagat, M.P.
was elected to the sub-Commission on the Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities, obtaining the highest
votes among the five candidates elected from Asia.
The election of Commodore D. C. Kapoor, former Chief
Hydrographer to the Indian Navy, as one of the three Directors
of the International Hydrographic Bureau, was significant since
this was the first time that a national of a developing country
was elected to this post.
Following wide-spread public awakening to the problem
posed by the deterioration in the human environment, the United
Nations, sponsored a Conference on the subject at Stockholm
from 5 to 16 June 1972. The Conference, though not attended
by many of the socialist countries of Europe including the
USSR, drew a good deal of world attention. India's interest in
the subject was demonstrated by the participation of three Ministers of the Government in the Conference and the inspiring
address Made to it by the Prime Minister who was on an official
visit to Sweden at the time.
After extensive deliberations on numerous aspects of the
environment the Conference adopted a Declaration on the
<pg73>
Human Environment which lays down guidelines for the activities of nations in this field. An Action Plan was adopted to
ensure that suitable measures are taken not only to arrest thedeterioration in the quality of the environment, but also to pro-

tect and enhance it.
The Conference decided to set up a Governing Council for
Environmental Programmes as well as an Environment Secretariat which would be the institutions to carry forward the work
begun at the Conference.
An important decision by the Conference was the adoption
of a Resolution to explore the possibility of setting up a fund'
for the betterment of Human Settlements. This was the direct
outcome of very strenuous efforts made by the Indian Delegation.
The Conference also decided to set up separately a Fund.
for the environment, which would be of the size of US $ 1007
million over a five-year period.
The question of the location of the Headquarters of the
Environment Secretariat came up at the 27th session of the UN
General Assembly. India had announced its candidature initially
but decided to withdraw in favour of Kenya so that the interests
of the developing countries would not be harmed by a divisive
competition amongst them. The General Assembly has now
taken a decision to locate the Environment Secretariat at Nairobi,
Kenya.
In response to an invitation from the Government of India,
the Secretary-General of the United Nations, Dr. Kurt Waldheim,
accompanied by Mrs. Waldheim, visited India from 3 to 7
February 1973. The Secretary-General met the President, the
Prime Minister and the Minister of External Affairs. The talks
covered current world issues of mutual interest as well as the
situation in the Indian sub-continent. India's determination to
seek a settlement of all differences through direct talks among
the parties on the basis of sovereign equality without outside
interference was reiterated. The Secretary-General appreciated
the progress made so far in the implementation of the Simla
Agreement. He also took note of our view that further progress
would be facilitated by early recognition of Bangladesh by
Pakistan.
During his stay in New Delhi, the Secretary-General inaugurated the "One Asia" Assembly. He also addressed the opening
<pg74>
meeting of the Third Session of the United Nations Committee
on Natural Resources. India played host to this meeting which
lasted two weeks, under the Chairmanship of the Minister for
Irrigation & Power, Dr. K. L. Rao and took important decisions
of particular interest to the developing countries in the fields of
Water, Energy and Minerals exploration and exploitation.

INDIA
USA BANGLADESH PAKISTAN CYPRUS NAMIBIA ETHIOPIA UNITED KINGDOM SOUTH AFRICA
ANGOLA GUINEA GUINEA-BISSAU MOZAMBIQUE ARGENTINA MALI SOMALIA YUGOSLAVIA
SUDAN CHINA SWITZERLAND CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC PERU GUYANA BAHRAIN
UNITED ARAB EMIRATES OMAN VIETNAM CAMBODIA ZAMBIA INDONESIA LAOS MALAYSIA
ALGERIA AFGHANISTAN PORTUGAL ALBANIA ISRAEL CHILE AUSTRIA BELGIUM JAPAN
FRANCE SWEDEN KENYA LATVIA
Jan 01, 1972

Technical and economic co-operation
CHAPTER IX
TECHNICAL AND ECONOMIC CO-OPERATION
The Economic Division of this Ministry was set up a decade
ago to promote joint politico-economic thinking among the many
Ministries of the Government of India concerned with the projection of India's economic interests and image abroad, and to get
Indian Missions to take an increasing interest in furthering India's
trade and economic interests abroad.
Significant changes have taken place in the industrial economy
of India. More and more industries are looking outward and
seeking to develop new markets for their products, consumer as
well as capital goods. Much of this export-oriented activity is
directed towards the developing countries in this region to get
together and pool their resources with a view to meeting their
developmental, needs. This is part of the new integrated strategy
of development of the countries to which India fully subscribes.
There is an increasing demand on the part of these countries,
particularly in Africa and Asia, for Indian participation in developmental activities. These developments have added a new
dimension to the functions of the Economic Division.
Broadly speaking, the Economic Division during this year
was most concerned with the following major matters :
I. Promotion of closer external economic and commercial relations : bilateral agreements, coordination of
action and in particular the inter-governmental Joint
Commissions;
II. Working of the technical assistance programme
(ITEC) which is particularly suited to India's possibilities of utilising to the maximum our state of tech-

nical advancement within our somewhat restricted
resources;
III. Support for economic cooperation at the regional and
multi-lateral level.
Starting with the Indo-Czech Joint Committee in 1966, India
now has established high-level Joint Commissions with Ceylon,
Afghanistan, Iran, Poland, USSR and Sweden. These Commissions serve a useful purpose by transcending bilateral agreements
<pg75>
<pg76>
with a given country and providing a sort of supreme review body
or an overall `umbrella' to over-see, accelerate and coordinate
the activities of the various existing bilateral agreements besides
identifying, from its vantage point, additional fields of cooperation in, keeping, with the changing needs of industrial and commercial developments.
In January 1972, at New Delhi, Shri Kumaramangalam, the
Minister of Steel and Mines, exchanged Letters with Mr., Jan
Mitrega, Vice-Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the Polish
People's Republic, establishing an Indo-Polish Commission for
Economic, Trade, 'Scientific and Technical Cooperation. Working groups have been set up for mining and commercial
exchanges which will meet in Delhi in March. 1973, to prepare
the agenda for the first meeting of the Indo-Polish Joint Commission which is expected to be held in May 1973 in Warsaw.
In September 1972 in Moscow, Shri D. P. Dhar, Minister of
Planning, signed an agreement with Mr, S. A. Skachkov, Chairman of the State Committee for Foreign Economic Relations,
establishing the Indo-Soviet Joint Commission on Economic,
Scientific and Technical Cooperation, Mr. V. A. Sergeev, Deputy
Chairman of the State Committee for Foreign Relations and
several experts visited India in January 1973 to prepare the
ground for holding the first meeting of the Indo-Soviet Joint
Commission, which took place from Feb 8@, 197317 February, 1973. The
Soviet team was led by Mr. S. A. Skachkov, Chairman of the
State Committee for Foreign Economic Relations, and Shri
D. P. Dhar, Minister for Planning, led the Indian team. A Protocol was concluded. In November 1972 in New Delhi, Shri
Swaran Singh, Minister for External Affairs, exchanged Letters
with Mr. Krister Wickman, Foreign Minister of Sweden, establishing the Indo-Swedish Joint Commission for Economic, Industrial, Technical and Scientific Cooperation. This Joint Commission was the first of its kind with a country in Western Europe
and was hoped that the accent would be on the transfer of
technology. Working-Groups of the Indo-Czech Joint Committee
at the technical level on industrial and trade cooperation and
science and technology met in Delhi. A working group on planning was held in January 1973.

Under the Indian Technical and Economic Cooperation programme (ITEC) India has been providing technical assistance
to the developing countries, particularly in Africa and Asia, on
a more or less constant basis. The budget allocation for assistance
under ITEC rose from Rs. 4.46 lakhs in 1964-65 to Rs. 105
<pg77>
lakhs in 1972-73. In order to avoid its limited resources being
thinly spread over a large number of countries, we have
attempted to render the ITEC more effective by resorting to the
principle of selectivity at all levels in the, choice of projects and
in the nature of deployment. The ITEC has been particularly
based. on the assumption that in the neighbouring countries political goodwill for India as well as a basic economic and
commercial interdependence has to be maintained at a steady
level; that countries which have large expatriate Indian populations or emigrant Indian population have a legitimate claim on
India's capacity to help, and lastly that the countries with whom
we have either developed significant relations or which have considerable development potential are of great importance. The
largest beneficiaries of our assistance have been Afghanistan,
Mauritius, Malaysia, Fiji, Ethiopia, the People's Democratic
Republic of Yemen, Ceylon, Somalia and Tanzania.
The provision of training facilities is an important aspect of
the ITEC Programme. There are about 120 trainees from overseas undergoing training in India at present out of which about
50 trainees were accepted for training during the current year.
The following table indicates some of the trainees in India during
the year :
(i) Angola.-38 trainees; students for training in the
English language, and further training in medicine
and technical studies.
(ii) Brazil.-Two trainees in Agriculture.
(iii) Cambodia.--One trainee in Archaeology.
(iv) Cyprus.-One trainee at the Indian Standards
Institution, New Delhi. Another trainee has been
admitted for training in the Metric System in the
Institute of Weights and Measures at Patna for the
Session commencing 1 April 1973.
(v) Egypt.-Thirty-four trainees; in the various Central
Training Institutes for Instructors in Bombay, Calcutta, Madras and Hyderabad. One trainee is undergoing a 15-week course at the Indian -Standards
Institution, New Delhi.
(vi) Fiji.-Four trainees in the fields of small scale indus-

try, social studies, agriculture and public administration.
(vii) Guyana.-Three trainees in leather industry.
6-1187MofEA/72
<pg78>
(viii) Iran.-Six trainees in the field of small scale industries attended an eight week training programme.
(ix) Iraq.--An official from Iraq for training in dairy
administration. There are four trainees in Water
Resources.
(x) Jordan.-One trainee at the Indian Standards Institution, New Delhi.
(xi) Laos.-Two trainees in Forestry.
(xii) Malaysia.-Nine trainees; one in medicine and eight
in vocational training.
(xiii) Senegal.--One trainee; a student of the Film Institute, Poona, who has been in India since 1970.
(xiv) Sri Lanka.-One trainee in VIP Security.
(xv) Sudan.-Nine trainees; in various fields such as railways, sugar technology and satellite communication.
One trainee is undergoing a course at the Indian
Standards Institution, New Delhi.
(xiv) Venezuela.-One trainee.
(xvii) Zambia.-Ten trainees.
From among the trainees accepted during the current year for
training in India in the various technical fields in Indian institutions, most have already arrived, though a few are expected to
join shortly. The breakdown is roughly as follows : Angola (15),
Zambia (10), Iran (6), Egypt, Guyana, Iraq and Mauritius (3
each), Fiji (2), Afghanistan, Aden, Cyprus, Jordan, Philippines,
Singapore, Sri Lanka, Sudan and Tonga (1 each).
The following proposals for acceptance of trainees in future
are under consideration :
(a) Afghanistan : At the second meeting of the IndoAfghan Joint Commission held in Kabul in April
1972, it was decided that training programmes in
India for Afghan personnel should be taken up as
a matter of priority, so that Afghan counterparts

might rapidly take over the functions now being performed by Indian and other foreign experts. It is
expected that Afghan nominees in the fields of mining, irrigation, power generation, health and national
archives would be imparted training over the next
<pg79>
2 years. Our total expenditure on the deputation of
experts and the training of Afghan nominees during
the next two or three years is estimated to be around
Rs. 50 lakhs.
(b) Iraq.-A proposal for the training of two Iraqis in
the Sugar Research Institute. Subsequent to Indian
Agricultural Delegation's visit to Iraq, proposals for
providing training facilities in agriculture to a large
number of Iraqis.
(c) Iran-5 trainees in the field of small scale industries
are expected.
(d) Laos-4 Forestry trainees are expected and two
experts for a study tour.
(e) Maldives.-During the visit of the Maldivian Minister of Finance in April 1972, the discussions covered
the provision of training facilities in navigation,
engineering and wireless communication for Maldivians in India. A proposal for 10 trainees from
the Maldives in these areas and for 30 trainees in
teacher training.
(f) Sri Lanka.-A proposal to accommodate 11 more
trainees from Sri Lanka, in mica, cardboard and handmade paper industry and 4 trainees in police work.
(g) Zanzibar.-During the visit of the Vice President of
Zanzibar in February 1973, the Government of
India have offered scholarships for Zanzibar trainees
in the various technical training institutions in India.
Nigeria.-As a result of delegation from Nigeria consisting
of representatives of the Minister of Mines and Power led by the
Chairman of the Nigerian Oil Corporation, Nigeria requested for
facilities in India for the training of their engineers, geologists and
technicians in the field of oil exploration, refining and the fertilisers industry. Arrangements for a special training course are being
made at the Institute of Petroleum Exploration, Dehra Dun. In
the field of steel, the Nigerians requested training facilities for
their technicians and the Hindustan Steel Limited agreed to train
twenty-four Nigerian technicians in batches of six each.
<pg80>

An equally important aspect of the ITEC Programme is the
Indian experts drawn from a variety of disciplines who are
deputed abroad to assist in foreign development programmes.
Approximately 150 experts have been deputed abroad out of
which 70 were sent in the current year. There are several other
proposals for deputation of experts under consideration at present. Examples of the deputationists abroad are as follows :(i) Afghanistan : Sixty-eight Indian experts are on deputation to Afghanistan in fields of Health, Education, Agriculture, Irrigation and Power and in
Industry.
(ii) Cyprus : An expert was sent for a period of six
months (from 15 January 1972 to 15 July 1972)
to assist the Government of Cyprus in the changeover to the metric system. Cyprus has requested
the services of the same expert again, who will be
proceeding to Cyprus shortly, for one year.
(iii) Economic Commission for Africa: The services of
two experts have been loaned to the ECA to work on
a project entitled "Africa's Trade with East Asian
countries".
(iv) Ethiopia : Two lady doctors who have returned to
India are being replaced.
(v) Four experts; two scientists, a Managing Director for
Suva Cooperative Association Ltd., and a Professor
of Economics for the South Pacific University, Suva,
who will also act as Economic Adviser to the Government of Fiji.
(vi) Ghana : Six technicians have been selected to set
up the machinery for, and help plan, the Centre
for the Small Scale Industrial Centre near Accra.
(vii) Guinea : Four teams of technical experts in the
spheres of railways, industry, mining and irrigation
visited Guinea in December '72 January '73 to carry
out technical studies and prepare reports for the
Guinean Government.
(viii) Indonesia : Four experts, two teachers and two handloom experts.
(ix) Iran : An officer of the State Bank of India was
deputed to advise on financing & management of
<pg81>
small scale industries. The team for small scale industries left in January 1973.

(x) Kenya : A two-member team was deputed to advise
the Government in rural development.
(xi) Libya : Three experts on cottage, small scale and
medium scale industries.
(xii) Maldives : Three teachers.
(xiii) Malaysia : Five experts oil vocational training.
(xiv) Mauritius : Nineteen experts mostly engineers and
architects.
(xv) Morocco : Three teachers.
(xvi) Oman : One Entomologist.
(xvii) People's Democratic Republic of Yemen : Eleven
exports, mostly doctors and teachers.
(xviii) Somalia : Eighteen experts mostly doctors/legal
experts, stenographers and teachers.
(xix) Sri Lanka : One expert in Forestry.
(xx) Upper Volta : A request by the Government for
replacement of the telecommunication engineer who
has been repatriated on medical grounds is being
processed. A Financial Adviser has also been deputed.
(xxi) Yemen Arab Republic : One expert has been deputed.
(xxii) Zambia : The deputation of an adviser to set up an
import-export agency is being processed. A financial
adviser for this Agency is also being deputed.
(xxiii) Tonga: An Indian expert conducted a technoeconomic survey of small scale industries in Tonga.
Copies of the report prepared by the expert were
presented to the Government of Tonga in
September 1972.
(xxiv) Tanzania : A seven member team comprising experts
in small scale and village industry visited Tanzania.
both the mainland and Zanzibar. The team's report
on Zanzibar has already been presented to the
Government of Zanzibar and has been accepted by
them.
<pg82>
The following proposals for deputation of additional experts

are under consideration :(i) Afghanistan: At the second meeting of the IndoAfghan Joint Commission in April 1972, it was
decided to augment the number of deputation of
Indian experts in the fields of planning, mining, irrigation, power, public works, industrial management,
education, financial administration and national archives.
(ii) Cyprus : A proposal to send the same expert from
the Directorate of Weights and Measures to Cyprus
for a period of one year, at the request of the Government of Cyprus.
(iii) Fiji : Several requests for deputationists are being
examined.
(iv) Guyana : Proposal to send one expert.
(v) Iran : A proposal to send five railways experts.
(vi) Iraq : An Indian Agricultural Delegation which
visited Iraq has proposed the deputation of several
Indian experts to Iraq.
(vii) Maldives : A proposal to send two experts, one in
fisheries and one technician for operating cardiograms.
(viii) Mauritius : Proposals to send twenty-four more experts.
(ix) Oman : A proposal to send a soil scientist. There is
a proposal to depute a team to advise the Government of Oman in the setting up of small industry.
There is also a proposal for the deputation of six
lady doctors.
(x) People's Democratic Republic of Yemen : A proposal to depute 6 doctors and 6 teachers in replacement.
(xi) Somalia : A proposal to send three teachers and
one doctor.
(xii) Sri Lanka : A proposal to send five or six experts
in transport and in the mica, cardboard and handmade industry and a team of air-safety experts.
<pg83>
(xiii) Yemen Arab Republic : A proposal to send three
experts in fields of Law, Taxation and Cigarette

production.
(xiv) Abu Dhabi : At their request two experts, one in
general planning and another in statistics have been
offered for deputation.
(xv) Gulf States : A proposal is under consideration to
depute a team of 10 experts led by N.I.D.C. to the
Gulf States of Oman, Qatar, United Arab Emirates,
Bahrein and Kuwait to prepare a techno-economic
survey of all these states.
(xvi) Laos : Experts are likely to be deputed in forestry
and fisheries and for feasibility studies for a cotton
yarn spinning mill.
(xvii) Qatar : A proposal to depute two experts for the
assessment of ground water resources of that
country is under consideration.
(xviii) Zanzibar : As a result of the discussions held during
the visit of the Vice-President of Tanzania it is proposed to depute a number of experts upto a limit of
20 to Zanzibar in various fields such as small scale
industries and agriculture.
The ITEC having familiarised the developing countries with
the availability and quality of Indian expertise, many have shown
great interest in direct recruitment of experts from India. Recruitment teams from Zambia, Nigeria, Kenya, Uganda, Libya,
Iraq Fiji and Iran visited India and selected experts in diverse
fields i.e. medicine, civil aviation, engineering, accountancy, etc.
There are several hundred Indian experts serving abroad thus
recruited on direct terms by foreign governments. All requests,
even for direct recruitment by foreign governments are channelised
through Economic Division of the Ministry. The selecting teams
are assisted in the presentation of panels of names for interview
and in the selection process.
Under the ITEC the Government of India also gifted capital
goods, equipment and machinery besides medical stores, books
etc. Examples of such donations are given below :(i) Afghanistan.-One of the major projects completed
in the year was the Institute of Child Health, Kabul,
a 100-bed children's hospital constructed at the cost
<pg84>
of Rs. 1 crore. On 12 July 1972 during President
Giri's visit, the Institute was formally inaugurated
by the King of Afghanistan. The Institute will be
run with the help of medical and nursing staff from
India during the next two years. It is also proposed

to supply agricultural implements, laboratory equipment, vehicles, insecticides and pesticides worth Rs.
11 lakhs during the next few months for the agricultural research centres. In view of the severe
drought conditions in Afghanistan, a decision was
recently taken to donate 12 irrigation pump sets,
worth Rs. 7.5 lakhs, early in the new year. Work
on an Industrial Estate near Kabul which will cost
over Rs. 25 lakhs has begun.
(ii) Cambodia.-An additional grant of Rs. 167,420/has been made to the Multinational Prck Thnot Irrigation Project.
(iii) Ghana.-Almost all the items of machinery for the
Small Scale Industrial Centre near Accra worth
Rs. 3.5 lakhs, which were being presented under
the ITEC programme were despatched.
(iv) Laos.-Books worth Rs. 1,500 on forestry were presented. Two Sediment Testing Laboratories were
presented to Laos through our Ambassador at a total
cost of Rs. 35,000. There is a proposal under consideration for gifting of vegetable seeds worth
Rs. 35,000/-.
(v) People's Democratic Republic of Yemen : We gifted
to the Government of PDRY scientific instruments,
insecticides and pesticides. A quantity of spraying
equipment to be presented to the PDRY is ready for
shipment.
(vi) Yemeni Arab Republic.-- A gift of pump sets to
Y.A.R. is under progress.
(vii) D.R.V.N.-Wheat and maize seeds worth
Rs. 1,86,000 were gifted to the Government of
Democratic Republic of Viet Nam.
(viii) Fiji.-We have committed to gift laboratory equipment worth Rs. 50.000/- to the South Pacific
University, Suva (Fiji) over and above our earlier
donation of Rs. 2,85,000/-.
<pg85>
(ix) Iraq.-It is proposed to gift agricultural machinery
and oil seeds to Iraq. The machinery is to be
donated by the manufacturers of Punjab and the
seeds by the Punjab Agricultural University.
(x) Oman.--It is proposed to donate to the Government of Oman laboratory equipment to the value of
Rs. 50,000/-.

(xi) Zanzibar.--It has been decided to donate equipment
and machinery required for the Common Facility
Centre including a supporting Engineering Workshop, for the proposed Industrial Estate at Zanzibar.
The value is likely to be around Rs. 10 lakhs.
Indian experts, functioning under the budget for the ITEC,
carried out a number of feasibility studies and techno-economic
surveys abroad. In Ceylon the feasibility reports prepared by
Indian experts for setting up of industries in glass, refractories,
graphite, rubber goods and mica are under examination by the
two Governments. Concrete proposals, based on these reports,
will now be prepared for joint consideration. A feasibility study
was conducted in Laos for the establishment of an industrial
estate in Vientiene. If Afghanistan, feasibility studies by Indian experts for the actual industries to be located in the Industrial Estate for small scale industries near Kabul are now in
progress. An expert of NIDC recently visited Sudan for preliminary studies in connection with the preparation of a feasibility study in the establishment of a scrap melting plant. An
officer of the Department of Labour and Employment submitted
to the Government of Mauritius a report on the Industrial
Technical Training Institute. Experts from Water and Power
Development Consultancy Services (India) Ltd. (WAPCOS)
conducted under ITEC at a cost of Rs. 8.5 lakhs, a feasibility
study of the Ban Mak Nao Lift Irrigation Project in Laos. The
report of the team is expected to be ready by end of March 1973.
In meetings held with the Chief Minister of Negri Sembilan
(Malaysia) on 10 January 1973, it was decided that a TechnoEconomic Survey and a Technical Training Institute Survey of
Negri Sembilan may be conducted to find out the potentialities
of economic cooperation.
Apart from the above activities, the Economic Division also
provided 25 scholarships under ITEC in specific international
courses conducted by the Indian Institute of Foreign Trade, the
Small Industries Extension Training Institute, Hyderabad, the
<pg86>
Water Resources Training Centre, University of Roorkee and the
Institute of Secretariat Management and Training.
While India consistently supported promotion of cooperation at the regional level to deal with common problems of
economic development, the other possible approach of cooperation through sub-regional groups was considered less important.
This was because regional cooperation, in a sense, placed the
resources of the region itself at the disposal of individual countries. Sub-regional groups on the other hand tended, it was felt,
to have limited utility if they became both inward looking and
restrictive.

Generally the Asian region has lagged behind others in matters of regional cooperation and only recently has there been
a move within the ECAFE for concerted regional action.
(1) Under the aegis of the ECAFE action was initiated
on a number of projects in the field of industry,
shipping, port development, an Asian railway network, Asian highway and related sub-regional network, regional telecommunication network, development of regional tourism and development of water
resources.
(2) A feasibility study was presented to the Inter-governmental Committee on the Establishment of an
Asian Reserve Bank which met in Bangkok in August
1972. The Committee considered that an Asian
Reserve Bank was a feasible project and developed,
towards that purpose, a draft Agreement, which
forms part of the report unanimously adopted by the
Committee.
(3) India derived satisfaction from the understandings
reached on a number of important commodities with
the other producers in the developing countries of'
Asia; cooperation with Ceylon to stabilise export
earnings from tea; cooperation in the shape of the
Asian pepper community with Indonesia and Malaysia, and the coconut community with the Philippines and Sri Lanka. At the 20th Session of the
ECAFE, held in Bangkok in March 1972, India's
Foreign Trade Minister, Mr. L. N. Mishra, said that
<pg87>
an effective solution to the commodity problem could
constitute a positive step in finding solution to the
problems of the least-developed among the developing countries.
The underlying assumption behind these programmes was
that several of the basic problems of the developing world, such
as mass poverty, unemployment, insufficient industrial infrastructures, transport and shipping facility etc. can be resolved by
the cooperation of the countries of the region.
INDIA
USA AFGHANISTAN IRAN POLAND SWEDEN RUSSIA ETHIOPIA FIJI MALAYSIA MAURITIUS
MALI SOMALIA TANZANIA YEMEN ANGOLA BRAZIL CAMBODIA CYPRUS EGYPT GUYANA
IRAQ JORDAN LAOS SENEGAL SRI LANKA SUDAN VENEZUELA ZAMBIA PHILIPPINES
REPUBLIC OF SINGAPORE TONGA LATVIA MALDIVES CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC NIGER
NIGERIA GHANA GUINEA INDONESIA KENYA LIBYA MOROCCO OMAN UNITED ARAB
EMIRATES QATAR KUWAIT UGANDA

Feb 8@, 1973

External Publicity
CHAPTER X
EXTERNAL PUBLICITY
The External Publicity Division of the Ministry continued to
publicise and explain India's foreign policy and to project a
correct and objective image of India abroad. This purpose was
achieved by :
(i) regular briefing of the Press and other media representatives, both Indian and foreign, and by maintaining
continuous contact with them;
(ii) formulation of external publicity policies and guidelines including control and supervision of Publicity
Posts abroad; and
(iii) mobilising official and public support for India
through the use of all means of communications.
The war between India and Pakistan in December 1971 and
the emergence of Bangladesh as a sovereign independent country
brought about far-reaching changes in the political patterns in
the subcontinent and in the attitude of some powerful countries
towards this region. As a result of the sustained efforts made
by the External Publicity Division, there was a more sympathetic
and better understanding of India's foreign policy and the developments at home. It was a matter of some satisfaction that
during the year under review India received coverage in the
world press, which could be characterised, by and large. as fair
and favourable.
In directing and sustaining efforts of our Missions abroad
and in explaining the Government's policies, the External Publicity Division worked in close coordination with all the Divisions
of the Ministry and with other concerned Ministries in the Government of India. A close working rapport was maintained
in particular with the All India Radio. specially with its External
Services Division; with the Press Information Bureau; the Photo
Division; the Films Division of the Ministry of Information and
Broadcasting and the Commercial Publicity Wing of the Ministry
of Foreign Trade. The Secretaries' Committee on External
Publicity gave the necessary directives and guidelines in this
context

<pg89>
The Head of the External Publicity Division, as the Official
spokesman, briefed Indian and Foreign Press correspondents in'
Delhi. He was available to the Press every day and also held'
special briefing sessions once a week when the Parliament wasnot in session. During the Parliament session, journalists were
welcome to see him for background information.
During the period under review, logistic facilities were provided to 165 visiting foreign journalists, radio and TV teams from
various countries. These media men had come to India to,
cover the general development and industrial progress which had
taken place in India during the last 25 years. Local hospitality
was also extended to 75 foreign journalists.
Facilities were provided to 114 Indian journalists in connection with their visit to foreign countries mostly at the invitation,
of foreign governments.
During the year, 375 Press releases were issued on various..
subjects. Material from these releases is made use of by the
representatives of mass media, both Indian and foreign, besides,
the Transmission Unit of this Ministry and the A.I.R.
For quick transmission of news about developments at home,
the Ministry maintained a net work of teleprinter link with
66 Missions. It is our intention to expand this net-work in a,
phased manner. In addition, 35 of our major Missions were
also on a 2-way telex link with the Ministry. Two transmissions
per day were sent from Headquarters to Missions abroad which
were linked through teleprinter facilities. These news-casts were
sent to other Missions either by press cable or by diplomatic
bag. On the basis of the material contained in these news-casts,
our publicity Posts were able to issue daily, weekly or fortnightly
bulletins and news digests in English, French, Russian, Spanish,
Arabic and other languages.
The World Press Review bulletin was issued as a daily
service by the External Publicity Division. Based on telex
messages, cables and press clippings received from our Missions
abroad, it contained news, comments and editorial articles in the
foreign press of interest to India.
The Production Unit of the Division maintained a continuous
flow of material to the Missions abroad. 26 pamphlets were
produced during the year 1972. The production and distribution
of the regular publications of the Ministry, namely, Foreign
Affairs Record (monthly), Indian and Foreign Review (fort<pg90>
nightly) and, (its French language version Currier De L'Inde
fortnightly) was continued. Foreign language versions of the

following pamphlets were produced for distribution through our
Missions abroad :
(i) India-(for school children) in Spanish.
(ii) Bangladesh-A Brutal Birth in French.
In addition, 35,000 copies of `India' (for school children)
in English were produced and distributed by this Division. The
second volume of "Bangladesh Documents" was published recently. These two volumes containing authentic texts of important
statements and documents on Bangladesh were welcomed by the
Press and research scholars. Copies of 115 newspapers and
journals were supplied to our Missions on a regular basis.
During the year under review, 93 documentary films were
produced, out of which 68 were approved for external publicity.
2192 prints of documentary films (including 10 prints of colour
documentaries to 50 selected Missions) were supplied to our
Missions during the period under review. The Films Division
completed the production of the colour films "Bhutan" and
"Observance of Muslim Festivals in India" sponsored by this
Ministry. Four more documentary films as well as compilation
films on the state visits to India by the Spanish Foreign Minister
and the President of the Republic of Zaire are in various stages
of production by the Films Division.
The Division also supplied to Indian Missions documentaries
and Indian News Reviews, produced by the Films Division, on
Bangladesh. A set of 23 films was presented to the Government
of Bangladesh. Two films "Visit of Bangladesh Foreign
Minister to Delhi" and "Visit of Bangladesh Prime Minister to
Delhi" were produced and presented to the Bangladesh Government. A similar film on the visit of the President of Bangladsh
to India is under preparation. The Films Division special documentary "Transcendence" was supplied to selected Missions in
connection with Sri Aurobindo centenary celebrations.
One new print of the film "Pather Panchali", in English
and four prints each of the feature films 'Ashirwad' and 'Satyakam' with sub-titles in Arabic, English, French and Spanish were
sent to our Missions.
113 gramophone records were supplied to our Missions.
16 mm Mm projectors were also supplied to our Missions in
Ulan Bator, Djakarta, Sofia, Canberra, Accra and Basrah.
<pg91>
500 photographs on various subjects, 11 sketches, 179 books,
70 tourist posters, 16 charts, 5 posters on prohibition and
17 children's paintings were sent to our Missions abroad for
participation in exhibitions and display purposes.

Libraries attached to our major Missions were supplied with
selected books on Indian history, culture and developments.
These libraries were also supplied with important Indian newspapers, magazines and audio-visual equipment.
Under the cultural exchange programme, selected books were
presented to several universities through our Missions. A donation was made to the Mahatma Gandhi Memorial Trust in
Burma. Prizes for foreign winners of Shankar's International
Children Painting Competition were sent to our Missions abroad.
For the third time, we participated in the "That Luang Festival"
in Laos for which required exhibits were sent to our Missions in
Vientiane.
In July 1972, an Independence Anniversary Unit was created
in the External Publicity Division in connection with the work
relating to the celebration of India's 25th Independence Jayanti
in foreign countries, Among the items allocated by the National
Committee to the Ministry of External Affairs were the following :(i) Bringing out a special prestigious publication for distribution on global basis;
(ii) Invitation to 50 foreign media men to visit India;
(iii) Holding of Reception and Cultural Week by Indian
Missions;
(iv) Holding of Photographic Exhibition by Indian
Missions;
(v) Purchase of selected Indian feature films for supply
to Indian Missions;
(vi) Holding of an exhibition of contemporary Indian
painting in U.S.A.;
(vii) Commissioning of special feature articles for publication in foreign newspapers and magazines; and
(viii) Distribution of special publications, charts, scrolls,
commemorative coins through our Missions abroad.
<pg92>
As directed by the National Committee, the anniversary celebrations have been spread over one year (Aug 15, 1972
to 14 August 1973). Part of the programme was carried out
during the year and it is hoped that the remaining items will
be implemented by August 1973. Reports received indicated
that many countries had taken interest in the 25th independence
Jayanti celebrations. The Foreign press also gave good coverage
to functions organised by our Missions.

INDIA
USA PAKISTAN BANGLADESH RUSSIA BHUTAN ZAIRE AUSTRALIA BULGARIA GHANA
INDONESIA MONGOLIA BURMA LAOS CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC
Aug 15, 1972

Cultural Relations
CHAPTER XI
CULTURAL RELATIONS
Promotion of cultural relations with foreign countries is an
important aspect of India's foreign policy and definite steps have
been taken to strengthen our relations with other countries in
this field.
Among the large number of distinguished scholars, writers
and artists from foreign countries who visited India on the
invitation of the Indian Council for Cultural Relations or were
looked after by the Council during their visit were : Prof. O.
Bassir of the University of Ibadan, Nigeria; Prof. Hajime
Nakamura of Japan; Prof. H. Soebadio and Dr. I. B. O. Punyatmadiya of Indonesia, Mr. R. E. Cliquer, sculpteur Royale of
Belgium; Prof. Ungku Aziz, Vice-Chancellor, University of
Malaya; Prof. L. H. Goma, Vice-Chancellor, University of
Zambia, Dr. J. R. Francisco, Vice-President, Mindanao State
University, Philippines; Dr. Huda, Educationist from Bangladesh,
Mr. Jiri Meisner, Secretary-General of Association for International Relations from Czechoslovakia; Dr. R. Palsson, DirectorGeneral of Antiquities from Sweden; Madame F. Giroud, writer
from France; a 9 member delegation of Iraqi Baath Socialist
Party led by Mr. Shibly Al-Ayasami; and a 5 member delegation
from the Arab Republic of Egypt led by H. E. Dr. M. T.
Oweida.
Indian scholars, writers and artists were sent abroad on
goodwill-cum-lecture tours. These included Shri Habib Tanvir,
M. P. to Afghanistan; Shri Shankar Pillai to Hungary, shri
Romesh Thapar to Indonesia and Singapore; Shri A. C.
Sheorey to Denmark. Sweden and Rumania: Prof. M. S. Rajan
to Fiji: Prof. V. S. Naravane to Malaysia and Thailand; and
Shri Udar Pinto to U.S.A.
Delegations of performing artists were sent to neighbouring

countries such as Afghanistan, Bhutan, Nepal, Sri Lanka and
Thailand on different occasions, including the Indian Independence Day, Republic Day, Silver Jubilee celebrations of Indian
independence and state visits of Indian dignitaries. A cultural
delegation was also sent to Bangladesh.
Exhibitions of Indian art and handicrafts were sent abroad
for display in several countries, among them being an exhibition
<pg93>
7-1187MofEA/72
<pg94>
of graphics by leading Indian artists to Poland and Federal
Republic of Germany; an exhibition of photographs on India by
Sunil Janah to Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia and Rumania; two
exhibitions of Indian handicrafts---one to Iran and the other
to Hungary and Federal Republic of Germany; and an exhibition
of reproductions of Indian art from the Ajanta period to modern
times to Guyana, Surinam, Trinidad and Tobago, Mexico and
Venezuela.
Indian books and art objects were presented through our
Missions abroad to libraries and educational institutions in over
60 countries.
As a part of the programme of the Council for Cultural Relations of publication of books and periodicals on various aspects
of Indian life, the Council brought out the first issues of its
French and Spanish quarterly journals, viz. RENCONTRE AVEC
L'INDE and PAPELLES DE LA INDIA, respectively. The
Council is already publishing a quarterly journal in English entitled INDIAN HORIZONS and a quarterly in Arabic entitled
THAQAFAT-UL-HIND as well as a bimonthly in English
called CULTURAL NEWS FROM INDIA.
In connection with the Essay Competitions organised by
Indian Missions in over 30 countries on subjects relating to
India, the Council sent Indian books and handicrafts for presentation to the winners of the competitions.
The Jawaharlal Nehru Award for International Understanding is administered by the Council. The Award for the year
1969 was presented by the President, Shri V. V. Giri, to Mother
Teresa, founder of the Missionaries of Charity, at a special ceremony held on Nov 15, 1972 at New Delhi.
The Gandhi Foundation Lecture for 1972, jointly sponsored
by the Council for Cultural Relations and the University of
London, was delivered by Dr. Yogesh Atal of the Indian Council
of Social Science Research at the London School of Oriental and

African Studies. The Azad Memorial Lecture for 1972 was
delivered by Dr. Ales Bebler of Yugoslavia at New Delhi. In
addition, the Council organised a large number of lectures by
foreign visitors at different places in India.
The welfare of foreign students in India continued to engage
the Council's attention. Four Summer Camps and six Studytours in different parts of the country were organised for the benefit of foreign students. 14 Orientation Courses were arranged in
different parts of the country for the newly arrived foreign stu<pg95>
dents as well as for Indian students going abroad. Arrangements
for receiving students on first arrival in India and for helping them
with accommodation, travel, home hospitality, etc., were
strengthened. The number of Foreign Students Advisers appointed by the Council in collaboration with Universities and
other institutions of higher learning now stands at 32.
Under the Orientation programme for Indian and foreign
scholars. two Orientation Courses were organised by the Council
for Indian scholars and officers before their departure for teaching or training assignments abroad. Four Professors of Indian
history and philosophy from the Republic of Korea, two professors of Indology from the Netherlands and one scholar of
Indian philosophy from Indonesia came to India on study tour
under the orientation programme.
In addition to the existing Chairs of Indian Studies in Iran,
Laos, Poland, Rumania, Singapore, Trinidad and Tobago, and
Yugoslavia, the Council has set up during 1972-73 Chairs and/
or Centres of Indian Studies in universities in Afghanistan,
Bulgaria, Indonesia, Lebanon, Mexico, Senegal and Thailand.
The I.C.C.R. is collaborating with Jawaharlal Nehru University and the National Council of Educational Research and
Training in a pilot project for producing suitable reading material
on India in different foreign languages for school Children and
university students in other countries.
The Council further expanded its activities by opening Indian
Cultural Centres abroad in order to promote greater awareness
and appreciation of our cultural heritage and of our achievements in social, economic, scientific and cultural fields since independence. Indian Cultural Centres have already been opened in
Suva, Fiji, in San Francisco, U.S.A. and in Georgetown, Guyana.
The possibility of opening similar Centres in other countries is
being considered.
The I.C.C.R. has an important role to play in the implementation of the various decisions taken by the Central Committee
regarding cultural activities of foreign Missions/Organisations.

Under the framework instituted by the Government of India,
the I.C.C.R. is associated with the running of cultural centres of
foreign diplomatic Missions in places where they have no diplomatic/consular presence, and those of autonomous cultural organisations depending on foreign governments for financial assistance and other support.
<pg96>
Our Missions abroad celebrated the Birth Centenary of Sri
Aurobindo by holding special Services and Commemoration
meetings. National Committees were established in France. West
Germany, Canada, Argentina, Brazil, Switzerland, etc., for
celebrating the Centenary in an appropriate manner.
125 deluxe and 250 library editions of Sri Aurobindo's Works
received from the Ministry of Education, were sent to our Missions abroad for use in Mission libraries and for presentation to
Heads of State/High Dignitaries/Libraries in foreign countries.
Sri Aurobindo's Works were presented to the Heads of State in
Swaziland and Brazil, to Ministers in Lesotho, Sudan, Brazil
Syria, Malawi and Port of Spain (Trinidad Supreme Head of the
Budhist order in Cambodia, and to universities and educational
institutions in other countries.
Our Missions were supplied, in addition, with copies of a
long playing record on Sri Aurobindo. Photo albums and literature published by Sri Aurobindo Ashram, Pondicherry, were
also sent to our Missions abroad for use and display in a suitable
manner during the Celebrations organised in the countries concerned. A short film entitled "Transcendence", although produced towards the end of the Centenary Year, was also distributed to certain Missions, which had shown keen desire to exhibit
it.
From the reports so far received from our Missions abroad
about the Celebrations organised by them, it appears that the
Celebrations have met with a popular response and have resulted
in creating an awareness of the philosophy of Sri Aurobindo in
foreign countries.
The Nomination Scheme, under which the Ministry has been
assisting, for the past several years, self-financing students from
developing countries in Africa and Asia to secure admission to
medical and engineering colleges in India, was continued during
the year. In 1972, the Ministry arranged in medical and engineering colleges the admission of a total of 266 such foreign students against 207 in 1971, 81 of these were admitted to medical
colleges and 185 to engineering colleges. There were 49 students
from Africa, 63 from West Asia, 70 from South East Asia, 29
from Sri Lanka, 46 from Nepal and 8 from other countries.
There is increasing demand from foreign students to avail of
the facilities offered by the Government of India for Medical and

Engineering courses. However, in view of the limited number
of reserved seats at our disposal, a large number of students who
are otherwise well qualified cannot get admission to such courses.
INDIA
NIGER NIGERIA JAPAN INDONESIA BELGIUM ZAMBIA BANGLADESH PHILIPPINES NORWAY
SLOVAKIA SWEDEN FRANCE IRAQ EGYPT AFGHANISTAN HUNGARY ITALY REPUBLIC OF
SINGAPORE DENMARK FIJI MALAYSIA THAILAND USA BHUTAN NEPAL SRI LANKA POLAND
GERMANY BULGARIA IRAN GUYANA MEXICO TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO VENEZUELA UNITED
KINGDOM YUGOSLAVIA KOREA THE NETHERLANDS LAOS LEBANON SENEGAL ARGENTINA
BRAZIL CANADA SWITZERLAND LESOTHO SUDAN SWAZILAND MALAWI SPAIN SYRIA
CAMBODIA
Nov 15, 1972

Protocol Matters
CHAPTER XII
PROTOCOL MATTERS
During the year 1972-73, following the establishment of diplomatic relations with the People's Republic of Bangladesh, His
Excellency Dr. Azizun Rahman Mallick presented his credentials
as the first Ambassador of Bangladesh on Mar 13, 1972.
Later, with the entry of Bangladesh into the Commonwealth of
Nations, His Excellency Dr. A. R. Mallick. was re-designated as
High Commissioner for Bangladesh in India.
Diplomatic relations were established with Oman and the
United Arab Emirates. Mr. Sayyed Abbas Ali Said became
Charge d'Affaires a.i. of the Embassy of Oman from 24 June
1972, His Excellency Mr. Mohammad Issa Al-Ali presented his
credentials as the first Ambassador of the United Arab Emirates
on 27 July 1972.
The first Ambassador of the Republic of Cuba N. E. Mr.
Angel Ferras Moreno presented his Letter of Credence to the
President or 11 August 1972.
The Consulate General of the German Democratic Republic
was upgraded to Embassy level and His Excellency Mr. Herbert
Fischer presented his credentials as the first Ambassador of the
German Democratic Republic on 31 October 1972.
The Office of the Government of Abu Dhabi in Bombay was

redesignated as the Consulate General of the United Arab
Emirates in Bombay. Mr. Hamad Theeban Al-Mansoori took
charge as the Consul-General of the United Arab Emirates w.e.f.
19 November 1972.
Following the upgrading of the Consulate General of the
Democratic Republic of Vietnam to Embassy level, His Excellency Mr. Chu Van Bien presented his credentials as the first
Ambassador of the DRVN on 26 November 1972.
Following the decision to establish diplomatic relations between India and Gautemala, His Excellency Mr. F. Antonio
Gandara has been appointed as the first concurrent Ambassador
of Gautemala to India, with headquarters at Tokyo.
Mr. Rahman Baccus Gajraj who was appointed as the first
resident High Commissioner for Guyana to India, presented his
letter of Commission on 22 January 1973.
The Government of the State of Qatar open-ad their first
resident Mission in New Delhi on 29 January 1973, with the
arrival of Mr. Mohammad Abdul Rahman Al-Kholaifi as the
first resident Charge d'Affaires.
<pg97>
BANGLADESH
INDIA OMAN UNITED ARAB EMIRATES CUBA USA VIETNAM JAPAN GUYANA QATAR
Mar 13, 1972

Passport, Visa and Consular Services
CHAPTER XIII
PASSPORT, VISA AND CONSULAR SERVICES
With an eye on the convenience of the public, in partial relaxation of Section 6 of the Passports Act, 1967, it was decided to,
grant temporary passport facilities to persons against whom proceedings were reported to be pending in a criminal court in India,
provided they were in a position to produce a court order permitting them to depart from India, or exempting them from personal appearance in the court concerned. The validity of such
passports is restricted to the period specified in the court order;
or to a period of six months, if no period is specified by the

court. In order to prevent the ends of justice being subverted,
however, it has been stipulated that the under-trial concerned
should give an undertaking in writing that he would appear before the court at any time. during the validity of the passport so
granted, if required by the court.
The work relating to a whole-sale revision of the Passport
Rules, 1967, initiated last year, was completed and a revised set
of Rules, As corrected upto Jan 15, 1972, was issued to all
concerned in India and abroad.
Further, the procedure for the processing of passport applications by Passport Issuing Authorities was streamlined.
Thereafter, detailed instructions were issued to all passport offices
in this regard, with the two-fold object of ensuring the careful
scrutiny, and the expeditious disposal, of the applications.
Consequent on the emergence of Bangladesh, special travel
documents were introduced to facilitate travel between India and
that country. Initially, a special "Certificate of Travel between
India and Bangladesh", was introduced with effect from 25
January 1972. Subsequently, it was replaced by a regular IndiaBangladesh passport, as from 1 September 1972.
On the occasion of the visit of the Minister of External
Affairs to Poland an agreement was signed with the Polish Government abolishing visa fees, on a reciprocal basis, with effect
from 1 August 1972. Since then, the visas on Polish passports
and travel documents and Indian passports and travel documents
are granted gratis by the respective Governments. This measure
was taken to further strengthen the existing friendly relations
<pg98>
<pg99>
between the two countries. (Poland is the seventeenth country
with which India has signed such an agreement.)
The number of passport applications carried over from the
previous year, and those received during 1972, by the Passport
Authorities in India, was 1,85,042. Against this, 1,61,625 passports were issued. Only about .04% of the total applications for
passports received were rejected. Less than 19,250 applications
were awaiting disposal at the end of 1972, pending completion
of certain formalities or enquiries.
In 1972, 5,036 official passports and 679 diplomatic passports were issued. The number of such passports serviced during this period was 2,970. Official and diplomatic visas were
issued to 3,393 foreigners in 1972.
As a result of unprecedented affluence in recent years in the
Gulf countries (mainly Kuwait, Muscat, Bahrain, and Dubai),

the demand there for Indian domestic staff, e.g. maid servants,
cooks and ayahs, has been growing rapidly. Unscrupulous touts
and `agents' in India have reportedly, been clandestinely exploiting
this situation by luring needy and susceptible Indian women to
the area, with exaggerated promises of lucrative jobs and attractive living conditions there. With a view to curbing any surreptitious outflow of Indian women in this manner, inter alia, all the
State Governments have been requested to tighten up security
arrangement at all possible exit points. Additionally, they
have been requested to give extensive publicity, particularly
among the uneducated and the poorer sections of the society, to
the hazards to which women leaving India illegally are inevitably
exposed abroad.
The Protectors of Emigrants at air and sea ports in India, in
pursuance of the Indian Emigration Act, 1922, offered assistance
to, and registered the departure of 1,609 skilled workers (including domestic servants, during 1972.
In 1972, the Regional Passport Offices in India received
Rs. 55,24,656 as fees for rendering passport services.
The Central Passport & Emigration Organisation, is a subordinate establishment of the Ministry of External Affairs, It comprises seven Regional Passport and Emigration Offices located at
Bombay, Calcutta, Delhi, Madras, Lucknow, Ahmedabad and
Chandigarh. These offices are entrusted with the work of granting
passports, and rendering miscellaneous services relating to passports, to Indian nationals. The offices at Madras, Bombay,
<pg100>
Calcutta and Delhi also attend to emigration work and officers of
appropriate rank in these offices function as Protectors of Emigrants, for carrying out the duties assigned to them, under the
Indian Emigration Act, 1922. Two emigration sub-offices in
the Madras region, each under the charge of a Protector of Emigrants, are also located at Nagapattinam and Mandapam.
The total sanctioned strength of the Central Passport and
Emigration Organisation is : Regional Passport Officers 7;
Assistant Passport Officers 6; Public Relations Officers 9;
Superintendents 18; Non-gazetted office staff 301; and Class IV
staff 114. The recruitment to the different grades of the Central
Passport & Emigration Organisation is regulated by separate
rules, specially applicable to this Organisation.
The Regional Passport & Emigration Office, Delhi, was inspected by the Internal Staff Inspection Unit of this Ministry in
May 1972. On the basis of its study of the volume of work
handled in that office, the Unit recommended the creation of an
additional post of Public Relations Officer in that office. It was,
however, not possible to implement the recommendation in view
of the continuing ban on the creation of new posts.

Around the middle of the year, the Regional Passport Offices
at Ahmedabad and Chandigarh had to face a sudden and heavy
increase in applications for passports, valid for travel to Canada,
quite opt of proportion to their sanctioned staff. In the case of
Chandigarh, for instance, during the period July-October 1972
the Regional Passport Office there had to deal with an average of
more than 4,000 applications per month, as against its overall
average of 1,339 applications per month in 1971. This unprecedented rush was largely attributable to a widespread apprehension among the applicants that after the Canadian elections,
due in October, the new Government in the country would make
its immigration policy more stringent. As no new posts could
be created, the situation was expeditiously resolved by promptly
deputing extra hands from other Regional Passport Offices. Additionally, the existing staff at Chandigarh and Ahmedabad were
asked to work outside office hours and on holidays; and it was
gratifying to note that they rose admirably to the occasion.
The Consular Section is responsible for tendering every possible help, including financial assistance, to Indian nationals
stranded abroad. During the period under review, it dealt with
29 cases of deportation, 96 cases of arrest and 303 cases of repatriation of destitute Indian nationals in foreign countries. It
<pg101>
authenticated 3369 judicial and commercial documents required
for use abroad, dealt with 34 cases of properties of the deceased
Indians, and processed several requests for "No obligation to
return to India" certificates required by Indian nationals in the
USA/Canada, who wanted to settle down in those countries. India
has reciprocal arrangements with some foreign countries in respect
of service of summons in civil cases, examination of witnesses on
commission in criminal matters, enforcement of maintenance
orders, etc. The Consular Section looks after this work also and
strives for concluding such arrangements with other foreign countries. Besides, it performs consular and quasi-consular functions
on behalf of the Governments of Jamaica, Malta and Malawi, who
do not have their resident Missions in India.
INDIA
USA CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC BANGLADESH POLAND MALI BAHRAIN KUWAIT OMAN
CANADA JAMAICA MALAWI MALTA
Jan 15, 1972

Administration And Organisation

CHAPTER XIV
ADMINISTRATION AND ORGANISATION
Sardar Swaran Singh was the Minister of External Affairs
throughout the year, Shri Surendra Pal Singh, Deputy Minister,
took over as Minister of State on Feb 05, 1973.
There were many changes at the level of senior officers during
the year. Shri T. N. Kaul relinquished, charge of the post of
Foreign Secretary, on retirement on 4 December 1972 and Shri
Kewal Singh assumed charge of this post from that date. Shri
S. K. Banerjee relinquished charge of the post of Secretary (East)
on 1 November 1972 and Shri V. C. Trivedi took over from the
same date. Shri J, K. Atal, who took over as Officer on Special
Duty on 21 December 1971 on return from Islamabad, retired
on 17 November 1972. Shri P. N. Menon relinquished charge
of the post of Secretary (West) on 1 March 1972 consequent upon
his appointment as Ambassador to Belgrade (Yugoslavia) and
Shri Avtar Singh, Additional Secretary (Admn.) assumed charge
as Secretary (West) from that date. Shri B. K. Sanyal on transfer
from Algiers took over as Additional Secretary on 12 June 1972.
On transfer from Tehran Shri M. A. Rahman took over as Additional Secretary on 3 February 1972. Shri Surendra Sinh Alirajpur took over as Joint Secretary (Admn.) on 1 September 1972.
India has 112 resident Missions (excluding Trade Missions
under the Ministry of Foreign Trade and 4 Special Officers in
Sikkim, Bhutan, New York and Geneva) with a total staff strength
of 560 officers and 2609 staff members including locally recruited
staff. These Missions together with concurrent accreditation carry
Indian representation to 182 capitals and cities. A list of Indian
Missions/Posts opened in 1972-73 is given in Appendix V.
Consequent upon Bangladesh becoming a member of the
Commonwealth in April 1972 our Mission in Dacca was raised
to the level of a High Commission. An Assistant High Commission was also opened in Chittagong (Bangladesh). It has been
decided to open another Assistant High Commission in Raishahi.
A Mission in Panama and another in Bogota (Colombia) at
Embassy level were opened and they started functioning in
February 1973. The Mission in Caracas (Venezeula) was upgraded from the level of resident Charge d'Affaires to that of
<pg102>
<pg103>
resident Ambassador. Consulate General Berlin (GDR) was:
raised to Embassy level.
The normal expenditure of the Ministry during 1972-73 is

estimated to be of the order of Rs. 5475.94 lakhs, details of which,,
are given below:Rupees in Lakhs
(a) External Affairs
Headquarters
Missions/Posts abroad

295.56
1254.87

Other Items
Contribution to United Nations and Commonwealth
Sectt.
217.25
Central Passport & Emigration organisations
28.50
Other Miscellaneous items
1272.03
TOTAL : (a)

3068.21

(b) Other Revenue Expenditure
Subsidies and Aid
Subsidy to Sikkim
407.75
Subsidy to Bhutan
1024.50
Aid to Nepal
789.63
Aid to other Developing countries in Asia and Africa 80.00
Other Items
External Affairs (Hostel)
I.C.M. Directorate (Nepal)
Grants-in-Aid Contributions etc.
TOTAL (b)
TOTAL (a+b)

1.95
13.39
85.51
2402.73
5470.94

In addition to above, an expenditure of Rs. 118 crores is anticipated on account of assistance to Bangladesh to enable it to
meet shortage of essential commodities and to rehabilitate its,
shattered economy.
Details of sub-head wise expenditure on Headquarters, Missions/Posts abroad on External Publicity are given in Appendix
IV.
<pg104>
The expenditure of Rs. 12.55 crores on our Missions/Posts
abroad is quite small compared to the total expenditure of about
Rs. 268 crores incurred on Administration Services from the
Central Revenue; it works out to 0.5 per cent of the Government's
total disbursements from revenue.
India plays an important role in international affairs and

requires wide representation abroad for promotion of her political
and economic interests. Indian Missions have minimum staff
and aye run at low cost compared to Missions of most other countries. The staffing patterns and expenditure on Missions are kept
under constant review to ensure utmost economy. Economy
measures instituted in 1971-72 in pursuance of the Prime Minister's
directive to economise to maximum extent possible in Non-Plan
expenditure continued to be operative during the, year.
During the year, the Foreign Service Inspectors carried out
inspection of Indian Missions in 16 stations viz., Dacca, Mocow,
Helsinki, Stockholm, Warsaw, Budapest, Belgrade, Vienna,
Geneva, Berne, London, Dublin, The Hague, Bonn, Brussels and
Rome and made a number of recommendations regarding staffing
patterns, rationalisation of work, foreign allowances etc. with
accent on economy consistent with efficiency.
The Ministry already had direct Teleprinter/Telex Links with
26 Indian Missions/Posts abroad and similar links were established
during the year with 20 more Missions/Posts abroad.
The IFS Committee (Pillai Committee) envisaged expansion
of the IFS Cadre to about 550 over a period of 10 years. But
this target has not been reached, the present strength being only
512. During 1972-73, two officers were working in the Department of Economic Affairs, Ministry of Finance, while 5 officers
were in the Ministry of Foreign Trade. One Officer was on the
senior Instructing Staff of the National Defence College and two
among the officer Trainees, and two officers were on deputation
to the Cabinet Secretariat, It was not possible to depute more
IFS Officers to work in other Ministries/Departments of the
Government of India due to shortage of officers in the Cadre.
Merit continued to be the criteria for promotions to Selection
Grades of the Indian Foreign Service and from IFS(B) to IFS(A)
so that it may provide an incentive for efficient performance. However, promotions in lower grades is on the basis of seniority-cummerit. The proposal to set up a Directorate of Training in the
<pg105>
Ministry has not made much progress because of ecoonmic, considerations, shortage of personnel and accommodation etc. However, training programmes are being operated by the concerned
Personnel Sections in the Ministry.
The Welfare Unit in the Ministry looks after the general welfare of all the officials serving at headquarters and in Missions.
abroad. But it has not been possible so far to tackle satisfactorily
major difficulties such as children's education, accommodation etc.
of the officials posted in India.
All efforts to increase the progressive use of Hindi in the official work of this Ministry as well as in Indian Missions abroad

continued as before. instructions issued by the Ministry of Home
Affairs for the use of Hindi were fully implemented and the results
have been satisfactory. The Official Language Implementation
Committee of this Ministry kept a watch over the implementation
of the instructions and various ways and means of increasing the
use of Hindi were suggested. All members of staff can use Hindi
in their official work and they will not be required to provide an
English translation of their noting and drafting done in Hindi. In
order to facilitate the use of Hindi further, a standard EnglishHindi dictionary has been supplied, in addition to a set of "help
literature" in Hindi already provided, to all Sections/Indian Missions/Regional Passport Offices. During the year, the treaties and
agreements concluded with USSR, Bangladesh and Bhutan were
signed in Hindi also. In order to help all the Ministries to prepare
drafts of International Treaties and Agreements in Hindi, a booklet containing the terminology used in this field has ben compiled
in a dictionary and it is now under print. Arrangements are
being made for the vetting of International Treaties and Agreements drafted in Hindi by various Ministries and Departments of
the Government of India. Hindi books were sent to our Missions
for setting up Hindi libraries, which are included under the framework of the "Scheme of propagation of Hindi abroad". Hindi
officers are being sent for our Missions in Fiji and Mauritius.
Financial and other assistance in the form of Hindi books etc. is
also being extended to volunteer Hindi organisations of various
countries.
PAKISTAN
YUGOSLAVIA ALGERIA IRAN INDIA BHUTAN SWITZERLAND USA CENTRAL AFRICAN
REPUBLIC BANGLADESH COLOMBIA PANAMA VENEZUELA GERMANY NEPAL AUSTRIA
FINLAND HUNGARY POLAND SWEDEN BELGIUM IRELAND UNITED KINGDOM ITALY FIJI
MAURITIUS
Feb 05, 1973

Appendix I International Conferences, Congresses, Seminars
APPENDIX I
International Conferences, Congresses, Seminars etc. in which India
participated in 1972-73.*
A. ABROAD
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------Sl.

Conference etc, participated

Nature of

Foreign

No.

participation

exchange
component.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------1. Cassava Programme Review Conference, Colombia, Jan 10, 1972 -12 January,
1972.

Official

Expenditure
met bg I.D.R.C.
Colombia.

2. Meeting of Experts on Occupational
Cancer held by I.O.O., Geneva, 10 to
21 January, 1972.

Do.

Nil

3. Regional Seminar on Population aspect
of Social Development, Bangkok, 11
-20 January, 1972.

Do.

Nil

4. Consultative and Technical Workshop
for Regional Project for Employment
Promotion, Bangkok, 17-18 January,
1972.

Do.

Nil

5. Haj delegation, Saudi Arabia, 18 Jan.

Do.

Rs.,

Do.

Rs.

7. Thirteenth Session of Asian African
Legal Consultative Committee, Lagos,
19-26 Jan., 1972

Do.

Rs.

8. 16th Session of UNESCO Expert Meeting on Cultural Development, Paris,
24 Jan., to 29 April 1972.

Do.

Nil

26,500/-

to 11 Feb. 1972.
6. Meeting of the UNCITRAL Working

4,000.00

Group on International Sale of Goods,
Geneva, 17-28 Jan., 1972.
15,333.90

9. Security Council Meeting, Addis Ababa,
Do.
Nil.
28 January to 4 February, 1972.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------*This List is not exhaustive
<pg106>
<pg107>
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
------------------------------------------------------------------------------

10. Meeting of the UNCITRAL Working
Group on International Shipping
Legislation, Geneva, 31 January to
11 February 1972.
11. Second Session of the U.N. Committee

Official

Rs. 11,350.00

Do.

Rs. 14,639.50

12. First Meeting of the Preparatory Committee of non-aligned countries,
Guyana 13-22 February 1972

Do.

Rs. 2,500.00

13. First Meeting of the Preparatory Committee of Non-aligned countries,
Georgetown, 17 February to 19 Feb.
1972.

Do.

Nil.

14. XIII Conference of the Permanent Commission on official Foot & Mouth
Diseases, France, 22-26 Feb. 72.

Do.

Rs. 1,741.67

15. U.N. Sea Bed Committee Meeting, New
York 28 February to 31 March 1972.

Do.

Nil.

on Natural Resources Nairobi, 31
Jan. to 11 Feb. 1972.

16. Sessions of the Governing Body of I.L.O.,
o
n

Do.

Geneva from 29-2-72 to 3-3-72

Rs.

1,200.00

*Expenditure

*28-5-72 to 3-6-72

this

28-6-72 to 29-6-72 and
13-11-72 to 17-11-72.

meeting

included in
Exptt. to 57th
Session of
I.L.O. Conference.

17. Seminar Survey IV on feasibility studies
for Asian Telecommunication net
work followed by all Regional Net
Work Party, Bangkok, March, 72.

Do.

18. 3rd Annual Meeting of Coordinated
Research Programme on Rice Ferti-

Do.

-

Expenditure
met by F.A.O.

lization, Korea, 20-24 March 1972.
19. Working Group of Plant Genetic ReDo.
Do.
sources, U.S.A., 20-25 March, 1972.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg108>
------------------------------------------------------------------------------

1
2
3
4
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------20. Meeting of the Joint Inter-Governmental
11,272.00

Official

Rs.

Committee to examine UNDP UNIDO Cooperation, New York.
27-31 March, 1972.
21. Second Meeting of Indo-Afghan Joint
15,100.00

Do.

Rs.

Commission, Afghanistan, 31 March
to 6 April 1972.
22. Meeting of Financial Experts of the
171.98

Do.

(pound)

Do.

All

Commonwealth Telecommunications
Council and 10th Meeting of the
Group of Deputies of the C.T.C.
London April 72.
23. Advanced Training in the field of Moveexpenditur
e
ment of Salt in relation to movement

met by F.A.O.

of water to U.S.A. under F.A.O.
Andre Meyar Fellowship, USA, April
-December 1972.
24. 3rd Session of the Panel of Experts on
2,181.00

Do.

Rs.

Do.

Rs.

Establishment of an International
University, Paris 5-8 April 1972.
25. Interim Study Group meetings of the
4,085.00
CCIR (International Radio Consultative Committee), (Study Groups
1,3,5,6, & 8 and Study Group CIV),
Geneva, 5-21 April 1972.
26. 7th Session of F.A.O. Committee on
2,096.00

Do.

Rs.

Fisheries, Italy, 6-13 April 1972.
27. 28th Session of the U.N. Commission
19,293.0
0
Human Rights New York, 6 March
to 7 April 1972.

Do.

Rs.

28. Conference on Spices, U.K. 10-26

Do.

Rs. 168.40

April 1972.
29. 3rd Meeting of FAO Technical Adviexpenditu
re
sory Committee of the Consultative
F.A.O
.
Group on International Agricltural
Research, Italy, 10-13 April 1972.

Do.

All
met by

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg109>
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------30. Intergovernmental Meeting for preparing a draft Convention on Ocean
Dumping. Reykjavik (Iceland), 10-15 April 1972.

Do.

8,745.00
(Kroner)

31. 11th Session of the Legal Sub-Committee of the Committee on Peaceful
Use of Outer space, Geneva, 10 April
to 5 May 1972.

Do.

Rs. 8,002.54

32. Fifth Session of UNCITRAL, New
York, 10 April to 5 May 1972.

Do.

Rs. 21,790.00

33. United Nations Conference on

Do.

Rs. 2,12,964.26

Do.

All expenditure

Trade

& Development, 3rd Session, Santiago, 13 April to 25 May, 1972.
34. UNDP (SF) Project-Desert Locust as a
Survey Team Afghanistan, 14 April
to 19 June 1972.

met by FAO.

35. 1st Session of FAO Committee on Agriculture, Italy, 17-22 April 1972.

Do.

Rs.

2,096.00

36. Annual Meeting of the Board of Trustees
IRRI and Xth Anniversary Celebration of IRRI, Phillippines, 19-21
April 1972.

Do.

Expenditure
met by FAO.

37. Anniversary Celebration of the IRRI,

Do.

Expenditure

Phillippines, 20-21 April 1972.

met by IRRI
Manila.

38. 4th Conference of the General Federation of Iraqi Women, Iraq. 22-28
April 1972.

Do.

Rs.

39. Programme Review Panel of the CIM-

Do.

All expenditure

MYT, Mexico, 23-28 April 1972.

1,000.00

met by CIMMYT, Mexico.

40. 9th Session of the Inland Transport
Committee of International Labour
Organisation, Geneva, 24 April to
3 May 1972.

Do.

Expenditure
met by ILO.

41. Indo-Pakistan talks, Pakistan 25-30
Do.
Rs. 3,800.00
April 72.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------8-1187 EA/72

<pg110>

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------42. Inter Governmental Conferences on
Cultural Policies in Asia-consultation
on preparation of papers for Bangkok, 27-29 April 1972.
43. Annual Session of the Executive Council
or the Universal Postal Union, Berne,
in May 1972.

Do.

Official

44. 24th Session of the U.N. International
Law Commission Geneva, 2 May to
7 July 1972.

Do.

45. FAO/SIDA International Training

Do.

Course on Marine Pollution in relations to Protection of living resources,
Sweden, 2 May to 3 June 1972.

Nil.

Rs.

7,755.36

-

All expenditure
met by FAO/
SIDA.

46. Second Session of the Conference of
Govt. Experts on the reaffirmation
and Development of International
Humanitarian Law applicable in
Armed Conflicts, Geneva, 3 May3 June 1972.

Do.

Rs. 18,410.00

47. 1st Session of FAO Committee on

Do.

Rs. 1,606.21

Forestry, Italy, 8-13 May 1972.
48. (i) 16th Session of the Inter governmental Group on Rice, Italy, 15-19
May 1972 (ii) 16th Session of the
Inter-Governmental Group on Rice
and Session or Sub-Group on Rice
Grading and Standardisation, Italy,
10-19 May 1972.
49. XLth General Conference of the Office
of the International EPizootics Committee, Paris 19-20 May 1972.
50. 51st Session of the UNIDROIT Governing Council Rome, 21-31 May 1972.

Do.

Do.

Do.

Rs. 3,959.00

Rs. 248.12

Rs. 1,738.00

51. Second Meeting of the Preparatory
Do.
Rs. 2,900.00
Committee of non-aligned countries,
Malayasia, 21-29 May 1972.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg111>
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------52. Agricultural Project Course, USA 22

Do.

May-21 July 72.

All expenditure
met by IBRD.

53. 2nd meeting of the Preparatory Committee of the Non-aligned Countries,
Kuala Lumpur, 23-26 May 72.

Do.

-

54. First General Assembly of the Committee for International Coordination
for National Research in Demography, Belgrade, 29-31 May 1972.

Do.

Nil.

55. FAO-8th Session of the Commission
expenditure.

Do.

for Controlling the Desert Locust in
Eastern Region of its distribution
Area in South East Asia & Its Executive Committee Meeting Iran 30 May
-6 June 1972.

All
met by FAO/
SIDA.

56. Interpol Conference on Heads of Radio
Station June 1972.

Do.

Rs. 7,007.0

57. 9th meeting of the Commonwealth Tele-

Do.

(pound)

219.78
communication Council London,
June/July 1972.
58. 4th FAO/SIDA Training Course on Ce-

Official

real Seed Production, Control and

Expenditure
met by FAO/

Distribution, Sweden, 1 June to
to 30 Sept. 1972.

SIDA.

59. Symposium at INEP, Zanneas and
expenditur
e
Research Coordinations Meeting at

Do.

All
met by ANEA

Vienna, 5-30 June 1972.
&

Yugoslavia
IAEA.

60. International Winter Wheat conference,

Do.

Turkey 5-10 June 1972.

Expenditure
met by Us
agriculture
Research
Service Turkey.

61. FAO/IAEA Seven Weak International
expenditur
e
Training Course on the use of

Do.

All
met by FAO/

isotopes and Radiation in Forestry
IAEA.
Research, Finland, 5 June-21 July,
1972.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg112>
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------62. Regional Meeting of the Commonwealth Association Sri Lanka, 6-8
June 1972.
Veteri-

Do.

All expenditure
met by IRRI
& Commonwealth

nary Association.
63. Meeting of international Standards
Organisation TC-55, Timber and
its Sub-Committee, Norway, 7-16
June, 1972.

Do.

Rs. 5,492.63

64. Annual Session of ILC of ILO (57th
Session), Geneva, 7-27 June 1972.

Do.

Rs. 86,038.77

65. Project on People to People basis in
Bangladesh 9-18 June 1972.

Do.

Rs. 962.00

66. Symposium on changes in Rice Farming, Phillippines 10-14 June 1972.

Do.

Expenditure
met by IRRI
Manila.

67. 5th FAO/DANISH international Dairy
Education Centre, Denmark, 12 June
to 8 July 1972.

Do.

Expenditure
met by FAO.

68. 5th FAO/SIDA Course on Audio-Visual
Aids for Forestry Instructors in
Asia & Far East, U.K. 12 June to 26
July 1972.

Do.

Do.

69. Study Tour to observe programmes of
Land Reform, Philippines, Malaysia
and Japan, 15 June-6 July 1972.

Do.

Do.

70. UN Seminar on Human Rights and
Science & Technology, Vienna 19
June to 1 July 1972.

Do.

Rs. 8,957.00

71. 20th Session of the Protein Advisory
Group France, 19-23 June 1972.

Do.

Expenditure
met by FAO.

72. Symposium on the Future of the SEA,
Den Helder, 26-27 June 1972.

Do.

-

73. First Session of the Committee on ReDo.
Rs. 1,558.00
view and Appraisal of ECOSOC,
Geneva, 26-29 June 1972.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg113>
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------74. Pacem in Meribus-III, Malta, 27 June

Official

to 3 July 1972.
75. Joint Meeting of the Committee on
Programme and Coordination and
the Administrative Committee on
Coordination, Geneva, 28 June to
1 July 1972.

Do.

Rs. 8,843.00

76. Meeting of the Executive and Finance
Committee of the Boards of Trustees
of IRRI, Philippines, 29-30 June
1972.

Do.

All expenditure
by IRRI.

77. Interim Meetings of Study Groups
2,4,9,10,11 and Study Group G.M.I.
T.T. of International Radion Consultative Committee (C.C.I.R.),
Geneva, July 1972.

Do.

Sw. Fc. 282

78. 10th anniversary of Algeria's Independence and goodwill visit, Algiers,
2-8 July 1972.

Do.

Rs. 4,100.00

79. International Peace Academy Helsinki, 2-21 July 1972.

Do.

80. 53rd Session of ECOSOC, Geneva,
3-28 July 1972.

Do.

Rs. 21,058.00

81. FAO/IAEA Study Tour on the use of
of Isotopes and Radiation in Genetics
and Plant Breading, USSR, 3 July to
11 August 1972.

Do.

Expenditure
met by FAO/
IAEA.

82. 64th Session of the International Wheat
Council, Tokyo, 5-12 July 1972.

Do.

Rs. 8,592.27

83. Seminar on the Status of Women &
E.P. Istanbul, 11-24 July 1972.

Do.

Rs. 2,734.00

84. Afro-Asian Legal Consultative Committee (Sub-Committee on Law of the
Sea Meeting) Geneva, 12-15 July
1972.

Do.

-

-

85. 11th Session of Asian Statisticians'
Do.
Rs. 3,365.00
Conference, Manila, 14-27 July 1972.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg114>
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
------------------------------------------------------------------------------

86. International Potato Symposium on
Key Problems and Potential for
Greater use of Potatoes in the Dev.
World-Peru, USA, UK and Netherlands, 17-31 July 1972.

Do.

87. UN Sea Bed Committee, Geneva, 17
July to 18 August 1972.

Do.

88. ILO Asian Symposium on Labour and
Population Policies, Kuala Lumpur,
24 July to 3 August 1972.

Do.

89. 5th International Sunflower Conference,
France 25-29 July 1972.

Do.

90. FAO Technical Advisory Committee to
the Consultation Group on International Agricultural Research in
Conjunction with the International
Centre's Week, USA, 31 July to 4
August, 1972.

Do.

91. Third Meeting of the Preparatory Committee of the Non-Aligned countries,
Georgetown, 3-5 August 1972.

Official

Rs. 5,488.18

Nil.

Rs. 2,779.00
Expenditure
met by the
Organiser.

-

92. Seminar on Agricultural Policy and
Agricultural Education, Bangladesh,
5-8 August 1972.

Do.

Rs. 678.00

93. Meeting of Foreign Ministres of Non-

Do.

Rs. 20,100.00

aligned
countries, Guyana, 5-15
August 1972.
94. FAO/SIDA Seminar on Forestry Development Planning for near East,
Asia and Far East, U.K. (Bredford)
7 August-15 September 1972.

Do.

95. Special Session of the U.N. Population
Commission, New York, 7-15 Aug.
1972.

Do.

Expenditure
met by FAO

Rs. 3,133.17

96. Conference of Foreign Ministers of
Do.
Non-aligned countries, Georgetown,
8-12 August 1972.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg115>
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

-97. Release of Vessel Ceremony (ii) FisheExpenditur
e
ries, Fair & to hold discussions
NOR-

Do.
met by

with NORAD authorities, Norway,
12 August to 20 September 1972.
98. Indo-Soviet Shipping
2,710.71

Service Team,

AD.
Do.

Rs.

USSR, 13-22 August 1972.
99. FAO/NORAD Symposium on ProExpenditure

Do.

duction and Transport of Wood
FAO

met by

Chips, Norway, 13 August to 8 Sept.
1972.
100. 7th International Congress on Archives,
1,400.0
0
USSR, 19-29 August 1972.

Do.

Rs.

101. Joint meeting of Planners and Statisticians, Alma Ata, 21 August to 9 Sept.
1972.

Do.

Nil.

102. Symposium on changes in Food Habits,
Manila, 22 to 28 August 1972.

Do.

Nil.

103. 40th Conference of the Cuban TechnoExpenditure

Do.

logists Association, Cuba, 28 August

met by Cuban

to 2 September 1972.
Techno-

Sugar
logist's

As-

sociation.
104. Third World Congress for Rural Socio-

Do.

Expenditure

logy held at Baton Rouge, Louisina

met by Ford

(USA) 21-26 August 1972.

Foundation.

105. FAO/DANIDA Training Course on

Do.

Expenditure

Quality Aspects in the Handling &

met by FAO/

Storage of Fish, Denmark, 21 Aug.
-3 November 1972.

DANIDA.

106. ECAFE's Joint Meeting of Planners
Expenditure

Official

and Statisticians, USSR, 25 August to
ECAF
E
2 September 1972.

met by

107. A special Envoy of the Minister of
Do.
Rs.
1,500
.00
External Affairs to Uganda, 25 August
to 2 September 1972.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg116>
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
5
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------108. 41st Session of the General Assembly,
Frankfurt in September
1972.

Do.

109. 27th Session of the UN General Assembly, New York, September to December 1972.

Do.

110. FAO/DANIDA Post Graduate Course
expenditure

Do.

in Animal Science, Denmark, 1 Sep.
72 to 30 June 1973.

Rs. 1,887.09

-

All
by FAO/
DANIDA.

111. FAO/DANIDA Course in Microbiology, Food Hygiene and Food Control,
Denmark, 1 September 72 to 30 June
1973.

Do.

112. 11th General Assembly & 12th Technical Meeting of IUCN, Canada, 916 September 1972.

Do.

113. Round Table Conference of the International Institute of Administrative
Sciences, Caracas, Venezula, 11-15
September 1972.

Do.

Expenditure
met by FAO/
DANIDA.
Rs. 7,937.80

1,052 .50
(Bolivars)
1500 Belgian
Francs.

114. 25th Meeting of the Bureau of the
International Social Security Association and the Symposium and Social
Security, Mexico, 11-15 September
1972.

Do.

Rs. 1,722.00

115. Meeting of the Fruits Vegetables and
and their deprived products Sub-Committee of Agricultural Food Products
Technical Commission of the ISO and
its Working Group meeting of Tech.
Division of ISO/TD 2-Ag. Hungary/
Switzerland and Paris, 13-29 Sept.
1972.

Do.

Rs. 3,708.69

116. Meeting of ISO/TC 120-Leather and
Do.
Rs. 1,375.65
Its Sab-Committees, Romania, 1822 September 1972.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg117>
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------117. 2nd World Conference on National
1,925
.00
Parks, Yellow Stone, USA, Canada
8-26 September 1972.

Do.

Rs.

118. Meeting of the Indo-Soviet A. Com1,800
.00
mission, USSR 19-23 Sept. 1972.

Do.

Rs.

119. 41st General Assembly Session of the
7,000
.00
International Criminal Police Organisation, Frankfurt, 19-26 September
1972.

Do.

Rs.

120. 1st Session of Joint FAO/WHO Com1,444
.50
mittee of Government Experts on the
Code of Principles concerning Milk
and Milk Products, Italy, 25-30
September 1972.
121. 4th Eastern Regional Organisation for
know

Official

Do.

Rs.

Not

n
Planning and Housing Conference, Seoul, September 1972.
122. Meeting of the UNICTRAL Working
7,360
.00
Group on International Shipping
Legislation, Geneva, 25 September to
6 October 1972.

Do.

Rs.

123. FAO/DANIDA Post Graduate Course
Expenditu
re
in Animal Physiology & Bio-ChemistF
AO
ry, Denmark, 1 October to 30 November, 1972.

Do.

124. 7th World Forestry Conference, Argen5,492
.81
tine, 4-18 October 1972.

Do.

Rs.

125. IUFRO Meeting of the Genetics Sub5,232
.85
ject Group & the Workshop on Applications on Quantitative Genetics in
Forestry, Japan 5-20 Obctober 1972.

Do.

Rs.

126. 56th Annual Session of International
3,336
.40
Federation, Japan, 9-13 Oct. 1972.

Do.

Rs.

met by

127. 23rd Session of the Executive Comittee
Do.
Rs.
4,463
.23
of the Programme of the United
Nations High Commissioner Refugees,
9 to 17 October 1972.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg118>
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------128. Inter-Regional Seminar on Methods of
Epidemology Surveillance of Communicable diseases, Kenya, 9-20
October 1972.

Do.

Expenditure
met by FAO

129. Seventh Session of UN Statistical Com-

Do.

Rs. 4,890.00

130. 15th Session of the FAO. CCP InterGovernmental Group of Grains, Italy,
24-26 October 1972.

Do.

Expenditure
met by FAO.

131. Meeting of Relationship between the

Do.

Rs. 1,500.00

Do.

Rs. 4,500.00

Do.

Rs. 10,284.00

Do.

Rs. 4,947.65

mission, Geneva, 13-24 October 1972

Multinational Corporations of Social
Policy of ILO, Geneva, 26 October to
3 November 1972.
132. Meeting on drafting a Convention on
Ocean Dumping, London 30 October
to 13 November 1972.
133. Second Asian Population Conference,
Tokyo, 1-13 November 1972.
134. Annual Meeting of the Consultative
Council of Postal studies of U.P.U.
Berne, in November 1972.
135. Commonwealth Telecommunications
Conference, Ottawa, November 1972.

Official

136. A special representative of the Foreign

Do.

Rs. 3,300.00

Minister to Uganda, 3-9 November
1972.
137. Meeting of National Accounts and
Development Planning in Low Income Countries, Paris, 13-17 Nov.
1972.

Do.

138. FAO Commission for Controlling the

Do.

Desert Locust in the Eastern Region

Nil

Expenditure
to be met by

Award of Longterm high-level ReFAO.
search Fellowships-U.I., Italy,
France & Ethiopia-16 November
1972. to July 1973.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg119>
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

-139. Seminar on "Employment Strategy in
Asia during the second Development
Decade", Bangkok, 17 November to
28 December 1972.

Do.

140. 3rd international Road Traffic Sympo-

Do.

Nil.

Rs. 1,030.00

sium organised by the ICPO-Interpol, 27-30 November 1972.
141. 65th Session of the International Wheat
Council, London, 27 November to
1st December 1972.

Do.

142. Asian Regional Seminar on Labour
Inspection in Relation to Employment
of Women and Protection of Children, Singapore, 28 November to 13
December 1972.

Do.

143. 5th Plenary Assembly of OCITT,
Geneva, December 1972.

Do.

144. Government representative to the ses-

Do.

Rs. 2,000.00

Do.

all

Nil.

-

sion of Latin American Parliament,
Guatemala, 3-9 December 1972.
145. Annual Meeting of Board of Trustees at
expenditu
re
IRRI, Philippines, 20-26 February

met by IRRI.

1972.
146. ISO Seminar on Freight Containers,

Do.

Rs. 1,109.00

Do.

Rs.

Paris, 1972.
147. 11th Session of the Railway Sub-Com13,029.00
mittee of the ECAFE and Third Working Party of Experts on Trans-Asian
Railways, Bangkok in 1972.
148. 19th Session of the ECAFE's Committee on Transport and Communication,
Bangkok in 1972.
149. Seminar-cum-Training on Evaluation

Official

Do.

-

Expenditure

of Transport Projects for high level
borne by
Transport making Officials, Bangkok
ECAFE
in 1972.
------------------------------------------------------------------------------

<pg120>
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------150. International Conference on Tall Buildings, at Lehigh University Bethlehem Pensylvania USA in 1972.

Do.

$416.38

151. Joint Seminar on International Railway Congress & Union of Railways
on "Sharing of Railway Knowledge".

Do.

152. UN Conference on Human Environment, Stockholm.

Do.

-

153. Meeting of Study Groups 11 and, III,

Do.

Sw. Fs. 676.45

Do.

Rs. 500.00

Rs. 13,973.00

of the International Telegraph and
Telephone Consultative Committee,
Geneva.
154. Administrative Council of the International Telecommunication Union27th Session, Geneva.
155. 189th Session of the Governning Body
of ILO and other meeting, Geneva,
from 8 February to 2 March 1973

Official

Rs. 8008/-

156. 23rd Session of the UN Commission for
Social Development, New York from
12 February to 2 March 1973

Do.

Rs. 10,548/-

157. 29th Session of the UN Commission on
Human Rights. Geneva, from 26
February

Do.

Rs. 30,300/-

(B) In India
1. 25th Congress of the International Abolitionist Federation, New Delhi. 4-7 October 1972.
2. FAO/UNDP Regional Seminar on Statistics of Agricultural Producer Prices in Asia and the Far East.
New Delhi. 5-15 September 1972.
3. 11th FAO Regional Conference for Asia and the Far
East New Delhi. 17-27 October 1972.

official
Do.

Do.

4. FAO/SIDA Course on the Management of Fishermen's Cooperative, Bombay. 1-26 March 1973.

Do.

5. Conference on the Adaption of Administration and

Do.

Institutions to changing Levels of Agricultural
Development, Hyderabad.-7-9 December 1972.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------INDIA
COLOMBIA SWITZERLAND SAUDI ARABIA FRANCE ETHIOPIA USA KENYA GUYANA
KOREA AFGHANISTAN UNITED KINGDOM ITALY ICELAND PHILIPPINES IRAQ MEXICO
PAKISTAN SWEDEN MALAYSIA YUGOSLAVIA IRAN AUSTRIA TURKEY FINLAND SRI
LANKA NORWAY BANGLADESH DENMARK JAPAN MALTA ALGERIA PERU CUBA UGANDA
CANADA CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC VENEZUELA HUNGARY OMAN ROMANIA REPUBLIC
OF SINGAPORE GUATEMALA
Jan 10, 1972

Appendix II INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATIONS

Jan 01, 1972
APPENDIX II
INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATIONS OF WHICH INDIA
BECAME A MEMBER/CEASED TO BE A MEMBER
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------Sl.
Name of the International Organisation
Ceased to a Member
No.
of which India became a Member.
of.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------1. International Court of Justice.
Dr. Nagendra Singh of India was elected
as a judge of the International Court
of Justice.
2. International Union of Railway Medical
Services. Brussels.
<pg121>
INDIA
USA BELGIUM
Jan 01, 1972

1. Welwyn Hall,
Research Association
Welwyn Hartfordshire
England.

Appendix III TREATIES/CONVENTIONS/AGREEMENTS/CONCLUDED OR RENEWED BY INDIA

APPENDIX III
TREATIES/CONVENTIONS/AGREEMENTS/CONCLUDED OR RENEWED BY INDIA WITH OTHER
COUNTRIES IN 1972
List of Treaties/Agreements as on Jan 25, 1973.**
*This List is not exhaustive
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------Sl.
Title of Convention/Treaty/
Date of SignaDate of
Date on
w
hich
Remarks
No.
Agreement.
ture
Ratification/ entered
into
Acceptance/
forc
e
Confirmation.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
5
6
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------MULTILATERAL:International Development Association
Credit No. 278-IN
1. Development Credit Agreement (Mysore
Agricultural Credit Project) between India
and the International Development Association.
7 January 1972.
-

-

-

Credit No. 278-IN
2. Project Agreement (Mysore Agricultural
Credit Project) between International
<pg122>
<pg123>
Development Association and Agricultural Refinance Corporation and Mysore
State Cooperative Land Development
Bank, Limited and Mysore State AgroIndustries Corporation, Ltd.
-

7 January 1972.

-

-

Credit No. 278-IN
3. Mysore Agreement (Mysore Agricultural
Credit Project) between the State of Mysore
and International Development Assocition.
7 January 1972.
-

-

-

-

-

Credit No. 279-IN
4. Development Credit Agreement (Gorakhpur
Expansion Project) between India and
International Development Association.
7 January 1972.
Credit No. 279-IN
5. Project Agreement (Gorakhpur Expansion
Project) between International Development
Association and Fertiliser Corporation
of India.
7 January 1972.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg124>
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
5
6
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------Credit No. 280-IN
6. Development Credit Agreement (Eleventh
Railway Project) between India and
International Development Association. 24 January 1972

-

-

-

29 March 1972.

-

-

-

8. Project Agreement (Maharashtra Agricultural Credit Project) between International
Development Association and Agricultural
Refinance Corporation and Maharashtra
State
Cooperative
Land Development
Bank Ltd.
29 March 1972.

-

-

-

Credit No. 293-IN
7. Development Credit Agreement (Maharashtra Agricultural Credit Project)
between India and International Development Association.
Credit No. 293-IN

Credit No. 293-IN
9. Maharashtra Agreement (Maharashtra
Agricultural Credit Project) between the
State of Maharashtra and International
Development Association
29 March 1972.
<pg125>

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

Credit No. 294-IN
10. Development Credit Agreement (Bihar Agricultural Markets Project) between India
and International Development Association.
29 March 1972.
Credit No. 294-IN
11. Project Agreement (Bihar Agricultural Markets Project) between International Development Association and Agricultural
Refinance Corporation and State Bank of
India.
29 March 1972.
Credit No. 294-IN
12. Bihar Agreement (Bihar Agricultural Markets
Project) between International Development Association and the State of Bihar. 29 March 1972.
Credit No. 312-IN
13. Development Credit Agreement (Population
Project) between India and International
Development Association.
14 June 1972.

-

-

-

Credit No. 312-IN
14. Mysore Agreement (Population Project)
between Kingdom of Sweden and the
State of Mysore and International
Development Association.
14 June 1972.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------1187 EA/72
<pg126>
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------1

2

3

4

5

6

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------Credit No. 312-IN
15. Uttar Pradesh

Agreement (Population

Project) between Kingdom of Sweden and
the State of Uttar Pradesh and International
Development Association.
14 June 1972.

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

Credit No. 312-IN
16. Development Grant Agreement (population
Project) between Kingdom of Sweden and
India.
14 June 1972.
Credit Mo. 312-IN
17. Joint Financing Agreement (Population
Project) between India and Kingdom of
Sweden and International Development
Association.
14 June 1972.
Credit No. 327-IN
18. Development Credit Agreement (Seventh
Industrial Imports Project) between
India and International Development
Association.
26 September 1972.
<pg127>
Credit No. 328-IN
19. Development Credit Agreement (Shipping
Project) between India and International
Development Association.
26 September 1972.
Credit No. 328-IN
20. Project Agreement (Shipping Project)
between International Development
Association and Shipping Development
Fund
Committee and the Shipping
Corporation of India Limited.
26 September 1972.
Credit No. 342-IN
21. Development Credit Agreement (Education
Project) between India and International
Development Association.
10 November 1972.
Credit No. 342-IN
22. Project Agreement (Education Project)
between International Development
Association and Assam Agricultural University and Rajendra Agricultural University of Bihar.
10 November 1972.

Credit No. 342-IN
23. Assam and Bihar Agreement (Education
Project) between the State of Assam and
the State of Bihar and International Development Association.
10 November 1972.

-

-

-

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg128>
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
5
6
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------BILATERAL :AUSTRALIA
24. Exchange of Letters regarding the grant of
Wheat to India as part of Australia's contribution for the year Mid-1971 to Mid1972 for the benefit of developing countries
under Food Aid Convention of the International Wheat Agreement.
24 March 1972.
-

-

24 March 1972.

-

9 October 1972.

AUSTRIA
25. Agreement on Capital Repayment 1972/73
between the Government of India and the
Austrian Federal Government.
9 October 1972
BANGLADESH
26. Exchange of Letters between the Secretary
to the Government of India (Mr. T. N.
Kaul) and H. E. Mr. H. R. Choudhury,
Head of the Bangladesh Mission, New
Delhi, regarding commodity grant of
Rs. 25 crores and foreign exchange loan
of (pound) 5 million.
17 January 1972.
27. Treaty of Friendship, Cooperation and
Peace between the Republic of India and the
People's Republic of Bangladesh.
19 March 1972.
<pg129>

-

-

-

19 Much 1972.

28. Trade Agreement between the Government
of India and the Government of Bangladesh.
28 March 1972.
1972
.
29. Agreement between the Government of
India and the Government of People's
Republic of Bangladesh for Financing
the supply of Five Lakh Tonnes of crude
oil to Bangladesh.
-

-

17 May 1972.

30. Credit Agreement between the Government of India and the Government of
the People's Republic of Bangladesh
upto an amount of sixty Million.
16 May 1972.
31. Credit Agreement between the Government
of India and the Government of the
peoples Republic of Bangladesh upto
an amount of Indian Rupees one hundred
million.
16 May 1972.
32. Protocol on Inland Water Transit and
Trade.
1 November 1972.
1972
.
-

28 March

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

1 November

BELGIUM
33. Agreement between the Government of
the Republic of India and the Government of the Kingdom of Belgium relating
to the granting of financial assistance by
the Government of the Kingdom of
Belgium to the. Government of the Republic
of India.
13 October 1972.
<pg130>

-

-

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------1

2

3

4

5

6

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------34. Exchange of Letters for the enforcement
of the above agreement.
13 October 1972.
35. Exchange of Letters for implementing the
provisions of Article 4 of the above Agree-

-

-

-

ment.

13 October 1972.

-

-

-

-

-

-

CANADA
36. Development Loan Agreement between the
Government of India and the Government
of Canada for fifty million Canadian
dollars (CS 50, 000,000) for the Purchase
of certain commodities and fertilizers 10 June. 1972
37. Exchange of Letters between the Governof India and the Government of Canada
for the grant of skimmed milk powder
worth two million dollars ($ 2 million)
under Food Aid Convention of 1971.
19 July 1972.
38. Exchange of Letters between the Government of India and the Government of
Canada concerning an additional loan of
seven hundred thousand Canadian dollars
by amending the existing agreement of
one million Canadian dollars of 12 August
1971.
2 August 1972.

-

19 August 1972.

-

-

-

-

<pg131>
39. Exchange of Letters between the Government of India and the Government of
Canada regarding an extension in the
terminal date of the loan from 30 September.
1972 to 31 March 1973 by amending the
existing agreement which was signed
on 2 September 1970.
22 August 1972.
40. Exchange of Letters between the Government of India and the Government of
Canada concerning the Canadian assistance
of rape seed rendered in connection with
the Food Aid Convention of 1971.
18 September 1972.
1972.
41. Memorandum of understanding between
the Government of India and the Government of Canada for Rakha Copper Mine
Feasibility Study.
23 November 1972
42. Exchange of letters between the Government
of India and the Government of Canada
for assistance in the amount of CS 1,900,000
for the purchase in Canada of certain fertilizer bulk handling equipment for the
Haldia Docks of Calcutta Port. (These
letters wilt form part of the agreement signed
on 12 August 1971 between India and

-

-

26 September

-

-

-

Canada concerning the development loan
in the amount of one million Canadian
dollars ($ 1,000.000) later amended by
exchange of letters dated 2 August, 1972
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg132>
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
5
6
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------to one million seven hundred thousand
Canadian dollars ($ 1,700,000) for the
purchase in Canada of certain fertilizer
bulk handling equipment for the port of
Kandla)
23 November 1972.
43. Loan Agreement for one million seven hundred and forty-two thousand Canadian
dollars ($ 1,742,000 .00) for the establishment of a satellite communications earth
station and also Memorandum of understanding concerning the establishment of
a Second Satellite Communications Earth
Station at Dehra Dun, Uttar Pradesh,
India.
30 December 1972.
-

-

-

-

-

-

24 April 1972.

DENMARK
44. Loan Agreement between the Government
of India and the Government of Denmark
for forty (40) million Danish Kroner for
the purposes of imports from Denmark
of such Danish capital goods, components
and spare parts as are to be used for the
economic development of India.
24 April 1972.
<pg133>
FRANCE
45. Financial Protocol between the Government
of India and the Government of France
for one hundred and fifty million francs
(150 million) for French goods and services. 20 March 1972.
1972
. 46. Protocol of the Indo-French Economic Com-

-

20 March

mission. (Meeting held in Paris from 22 to
24 March 1972).
-

24 March 1972.

47. Exchange of Letters to renew for a period
of one year beginning from 1 January
1972 to 31 December 1972, the provisions
contained in the letters exchanged on 19
October 1959 relating to appropriate
means to develop trade exchanges between
India and France and the provisions contained in the letters exchanged on 15
March 1964, extending the scope of the
Indo-French trade and economic cooperation.
24 March 1972.
-

-

-

-

-

48. Convention between the Indian Ministry of
Finance, (represented by Mr. D.N. Chatterjee, Ambassador of India in France)
and Credit National Limited, (Headquarters, 45, rue saint-Domonique-Paris
07, represented by Mr. Jean Saltes, President Director-General) for financing
expenses in France relative to the Construction of a Fast Breeder Test Reactor.
12 April 1972.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg134>
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
5
6
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------49. Convention between the Government of
India and BANQUE NATIONALE de
Paris and BANQUE FRANCAISE du
Commerce Exterieur for utilization of
Bank Credits.
18 April 1972.
50. Credit Agreement between the State Bank
of India of the first part, BANQUE
NATIONALE DE PARIS and BANQUE
FRANCAISE DU Commerce EXTERIEUR for the grant of FF 75,000,000 (seventy
five million French Francs).
18 April 1972.
51. Convention between the Government of
India and Banque Nationale de Paris for
a credit of 19,250,000 Francs for being
utilized for purchases in France for

-

-

-

-

construction of a fast breeder test reactor.
-

21 June 1972.

52. Credit Agreement between the State Bank
of India and the UNIQUE NATIONALE
DE PARIS for a loan of FF 35 million
for the financing of purchases in France
for construction of a fast breeder test reactor to be built in Madras.
3 November 1972.
-

-

-

-

-

<pg135>
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERAMNY
53. Loan Agreement between KREDITANSTALT FUR WIEDERAUFBAU and the
Government of India for DM 100 million
(one hundred million) (Commodities XIII).
54. Arbitration Agreement between KREDITANSTALT FUR WIEDERAUFBAU
and the Government of India to the above,
agreement.
-

29 March 1972.

-

-

29 March 1972.

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

55. Additional Loan Agreement between KREDITANSTALT FUR WIEDERAUFBAU
and the Government of India for DM
71,000,000 (Seventy one million) (Prolongation 1971/72).
29 March 1972.
56. Arbitration Agreement between KREDITANSTALT FUR WIEDERAUFBAU
and the Government of India to the above
agreement.
29 March 1972.
57. Loan Agreement between KREDITANSTALT FUR WIEDERAUFBAU and the
Government of India for DM 30 million
(thirty million) capital Goods III).
-

29 March 1972.

58. Arbitration Agreement between KREDITANSTALT FUR WIEDERAUFBAU and
the Government of India to the above
agreement.
29 March 1972.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg136>
------------------------------------------------------------------------------

----1
2
3
4
5
6
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------59. Loan Agreement between KREDITANSTALT FUR WIEDERAUFBAU and the
Government of India for DM 21,360,000
(twenty one million three hundred and
sixty thousand) (MICO-5 Expansion.)
-

22 June 1972.

60. Arbitration Agreement between KREDITANSTALT FUR WIEDERAUFBAU and
the Government of India to the above
agreement.
22 June 1972.
61. Project Agreement between KREDITANSTALT FUR WIEDERAUFBAU and the
motor Industries Co. Ltd., Bangalore
(India).
20 July 1972.
62. Arbitration Agreement between KREDITANSTALT FUR WIEDERAUFBAU and
Motor Industries Company Ltd., Bangalore (India.)
20 July 1972.
63. Loan Agreement between KREDITANSTALT and the National Small Industries
Corporation Ltd., New Delhi for DM
7,000,000 (seven million)
-

6 Sept. 1972.

64. Guarantee Agreement between KREDITANSTALT FUR WIEDERAUFBAU and
the National Small Industries Corporation
Ltd., New Delhi.
6 September 1972.
-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

<pg137>
65. Arbitration Agreement between KREDITANSTALT FUR WIEDERAUFBAU and
the National Small Industries Corporation
Ltd., New Delhi.
6 September 1972.
66. Loan Agreement between KREDITANSTALT FUR WIEDERAUFBAU and the
Industrial Finance Corporation of India
for DM 8,000,000.
15 September 1972.
67. Guarantee Agreement between KREDITAN-

STALT FUR WIEDERAUFBAU and
India to the Loan Agreement dated 15
September 1972.
-

15 September 1972.

68. Arbitration Agreement between KREDITANSTALT FUR WIEDERAUFBAU and
industrial Finance Corporation of India,
New Delhi to the Loan Agreement dated
15 September 1972.
15 September 1972
69. Loan Agreement between KREDITANSTALT FUR WIEDERAUFBAU and
India for DM 17,600,000 (Bihar Alloy
Steel, Ltd.)
-

15 September 1972.

-

-

-

-

-

-

70. Arbitration Agreement between KREDITANSTALT FUR WIEDERAUFBAU
and India to the loan agreement dated 15
September 1972.
15 September 1972.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg138>
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
5
6
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------71. Project Agreement between KREDITANSTALT FUR WIEDERAUFBAU and the
Bihar Alloy Steels Ltd.
15 September 1972.

-

-

-

72. Arbitration Agreement between KREDITANSTALT FUR WIEDERAUFBAU and
Bihar Alloy Steels Ltd. Ranchi to the
Project Agreement dated 15 September
1972.
15 September 1972.

-

-

-

73. Loan Agreement between KREDITANSTALT FUR WIEDERAUFBAU and the
INDUSTRIAL CREDIT AND INVESTMENT
CORPORATION OF INDIA LTD. for DM
5,000,000.30 September 1972.

-

-

-

74. Guarantee Agreement between KREDITANSTALT FUR WIEDERAUFBAU
and India to the Loan Agreement dated
30 September 1972.
30 September 1972.

-

-

-

75. Arbitration Agreement between KREDITANSTALT FUR WIEDERAUFBAU

and the INDUSTRIAL CREDIT AND
INVESTMENT CORPORATION OF INDIA LTD.
BOMBAY to the Loan Agreement dated
30 September 1972.
30 September 1972.
<pg139>

-

76. Loan Agreement between KREDITANSTALT FUR WIEDERAUFBAU and
India and Indian Petrochemicals Corporation Ltd., as Joint debtors for DM
4,000,000.12 December 1972.
77. Arbitration Agreement between KREDITANSTALT FUR WIEDERAUFBAU
and India and Indian Petrochemicals
Corporation Ltd., Jawaharnagar/Baroda
to the Loan Agreement dated 12 December
1972.
12 December 1972.
78. Agreement between the Government of
India and the Government Of the Federal
Republic of Germany concerning Financial Assistance, for DM 280,000,000.- 14 December 1972.
79. Exchange of Letters between the Government of India and the Government Of'
Federal Republic of Germany in respect of
debt service relief under the financial assistance agreement dated 14 December
1972.
14 December 1972.
-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

14 December 1972.

-

14 December 1972.

80. Exchange, of Letters between the Government of India and the Federal Republic
of Germany concerning Financial Assistance Agreement dated 14 December 1972
regarding projects of the Indian Interministerial Committee for Capital Goods.
14 December 1972.
- 14 Decembers
1972.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg140>
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
5
6
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------81. Loan Agreement between KREDITANS-

TALT FUR WIEDERAUFBAU and
India for DM 27,100,000.-(Tyre Plant
MRL.)
-

15 December 1972.

82. Arbitration Agreement between KREDITANSTALT FUR WIEDERAUFBAU and
India to the Loan Agreement dated 15
December 1972.
15 December 1972.
83. Project Agreement between KREDITANSTALT FUR WIEDERAUFBAU and Modi
Rubber Ltd. (India).
15 December 1972.
84. Arbitration Agreement between KREDITANSTALT FUR WIEDERAUFBAU
and Modi Rubber Ltd., Modinagar to
the Project Agreement dated 15 Dec.
1972.
15 December 1972.
85. Loan Agreement between KREDITANSTALT FUR WIEDERAUFBAU and
India for DM 80,000,000-(Commodities
XIV).
-

15 December 1972.

86. Arbitration Agreement between KREDITANSTALT FUR WIEDERAUFBAU
and India to the Loan Agreement dated
15 December 1972.
15 December 1972.
<pg141>
87. Loan Agreement between KREDITANSTALT FUR WIEDERIAUFBAU and
India for DM 30,000,000.-(Capital Goods
IV).
15 December 1972
88. Arbitration, Agreement between KREDITANSTALT FUR WIEDERAUFBAU
and India to the Loan Agreement dated
15 December 1972.
15 December 1972
-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

ITALY
89. Exchange of Letters between the Government of India and the Government of
Italy (known as later-governmental Agree.
ment) for the medium-term, Credit to a
maximum of 4 milliard, 593 million and
750 thousand lire.
26 July 1972
90. Financial Convention between the Govern.

ment of India and the following five Italian
medium term credit Institutions ISTITUTO
DI CREDITO PER LE IMPRESE DI
PUBLICA UTILITA (ICIPU).
EFIVANCA-Ento Finanziario Interbancario S.P.A.
Instituto Mobiliare Italiano (I.M.I.)
MEDIOBANCA-Banca di Credito Finanziario S.P.A.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------10-1187EA-72
<pg142>
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
5
6
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------INTERBANCA-Banca per Finanziamenti a Medio Termine S.P.A. for implementing the Inter-governmental agreement dated 26 July 1972.
28 July 1972
-

-

-

-

-

16 May

-

JAPAN
91. Loan Agreement between the ExportImport Bank of Japan and the Government
of India for fifteen Billion YEN (Y 15,000,
000,000) for non-project aid and sixteen
Billion YEN (Y16,000,000,000) for Project
aid.
1 February 1972
KUWAIT
92. Cultural Agreement between the Government of the Republic of India and the
Government of the State of Kuwait.
2 November 1970
-

1972

NEPAL
93. Agreement between the Government of
India and His Majesty's Government of
Nepal for the Establishment of Telephone
Exchange at Biratnagar, Janakpur and
Jhapa.
13 March 1972
<pg143>

-

13 March 1972

94. Exchange of Letters between the Government
of India and the Government of Nepal for
the development of PAROPKAR SHRI
PANCH. INDRA RAJYA LAXMI DEVI
Maternity and Child Welfare Centre.
13 March 1972
95. Exchange Of Letters between the Government
of India and the Government of Nepal for
the extension of Agreement for the Construction of Eastern Sector of East-West
Highway in Nepal.
10 May 1972
96. Exchange of Letters between the Government
of India and the Government of Nepal
regarding Geological assistance form 1
April 1966 to 30 September 1970.
10 May 1972
97. Exchange of Letters between the Government
of India and the Government of Nepal for
the disposal of surplus machinery following the completion of the Trisuli Hydel
Project amounting to Rs. 5,88,957.00
(Indian currency) to His Majesty's Government of Nepal.
10 May 1972
-

-

13 March 1972

-

1 April 1971

-

1 April 1966

-

10 May 1972

98. Agreement between the Government of
India and His Majesty's Government of
Nepal for setting up Industrial Estates
at Nepalganj and Dharan.
10 May 1972
10 may 1972
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg144>
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
5
6
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------99. Exchange of Letters between His Majesty's
Government of Nepal and the Government of India for the development of
Horticulture in Nepal (20 August, 1968)
Extension of the Agreement till 31-3-1973. 10 May 1972
100. Agreement between the Government of India
and His Majesty's Government of Nepal
for construction of BUTWAL-NEPAL
GANJ Sector of the MAHENDRA RAJ-

-

1 April 1971

MARG.
-

15 June 1972

101. Exchange of Letters between His Majesty's
Government of Nepal and the Government of India regarding setting up of
Carrier Trunk, Telephone Line between
Kathmandu and Raxaul and an Automatic Telephone Exchange at Birganj
(signed on 17 July 1967) extension of
Agreement till 31 March 1973.
6 December 1972
-

-

15 June 1972

-

1 April 1971

NETHERLANDS
102. Agreement between the Government of
India and De Nederlandse Investeringsbank
voor Ontwikkeling-slanden N.V., established at the Have, The Netherlands, for
the grant of long term loan amounting to
<pg145>
Hfi. 68,000,000.-(sixty-eight million
Netherlands guilders) as a contribution
to the foreign currency requirements of
India resulting from India's development
Plans.
-

19 July 1972

-

-

-

-

NORWAY
103. Exchange of Letters between the Government
of India and the Government of the Kingdom of Norway regarding amendment of
the Agreement on Grant of Fertiliser.
31 July 1972
104. Agreement on Technical Cooperation between the Government of the Republic of
India and the Government of the Kingdom
of Norway.
6 December 1972
-

105. Exchange of Letters between the Government of India and the Government of the
Kingdom of Norway regarding replacement
of the Norwegian experts by qualified
Indian nationals after reasonable period
of time.
6 December 1972
-

-

19 October 1972
(Provisionally)

-

-

106. Exchange of Letters between the Government of India and the Government of the
Kingdom of Norway regarding travel
expenses, training expenses and living
expenses etc. for fellowships.
6 December 1972
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

-----11-1187EA/72
<pg146>
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
5
6
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------PAKISTAN
107. Agreement on bilateral relations between
the Government of India and the Government of Pakistan.
2 July 1972
1972
-

28 July 1972

4 August

SWEDEN
108. Agreement between the Government of
India and the Government of Sweden
for supply of paper.
17 May 1972
109. Development Cooperation Agreement between the Government of India and the
Government of Sweden.
11 November 1972
197
2 110. Exchange of Letters between the Government of India and the Government of
Sweden regarding establishment of a
Joint Commission for Economic, Industrial,
Technical and Scientific Cooperation. 11 November 1972
1972
-

-

17 May 1972

-

11 November

-

11 November

UNITED KINGDOM
111. Exchange of Notes between the Government
of India and the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland regarding interest free loan not exceeding (pound) 12
<pg147>
million (twelve million pounds sterling)
for the purpose of assisting in financing
certain development capital investments.
17 March 1972.
112.

Exchange of Letters between the Govern-

-

-

ments of India and the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland
regarding the total sum of loan constituted
by an exchange of notes dated 17 March
1972 for division :(a) (pound)5 1/2 million for the purpose of the
Indian Capital Goods Committee,
(b) (pound)5 1/2 million for the purposes of
allocations to meet the foreign exchange
requirements for capital goods for
public sector programmes.

-

(c) (pound) 1 million to enable the National Small
Industries Corporation to import capital
goods for sale to firms in the small scale
sector of Indian Industry.
17 March 1972.

-

-

113. Exchange of Notes regarding the Amendment
to United Kingdom/India capital investment Loan Agreement, 1971.
17 April 1972.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------12-1187EA/72
<pg148>
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
5
6
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------114. Exchange of Notes between the Governments
of India and the Uniited Kingdom of
Gnat Britain and Northern Ireland
regarding United Kingdom/India Mixed
Project Loan 1972 (interest free) not exceeding
16,000,000 for the purpose of assisting in financing certain development
projects.
9 November 1972.
115. Exchange of Letters between the Governments of India and the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
regarding the Procedures to be adopted by our Government which will be as
arranged for the United Kingdom/India
Mixed Project Loan, 1968.
9 November 1972.
116. Exchange of Notes between the Governments of India' and the United Kingdom

-

-

-

-

of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
regarding an interest free loan not exceeding . 25,000,00 to enable the purchase
of certain goods and services in the
United Kingdom.
9 November 1972.
-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

117. Exchange of Letters between the Governments of India and the United Kingdom
<pg149>
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
regarding full range of maintenance
imports, components, commodities, capital
balancing items, minor items and related
services necessary to the economic development of India.
9 November 1972.
118. Exchange of Letters between the Governments of India and United Kingdom for
issue of import licences for
(pound) 1.5 million.
9 November 1972.
119. Exchange of Notes between the Governments
of India and the United Kingdom of
Great
Britain and Northern Ireland
regarding an interest free loan for a sum
not exceeding (pound) 8,000,000 for the purpose
of reimbursing the Government of India
for payments made to the Department of
Trade and Industry of the Government
of the united Kingdom during the period
1 April 1972 to 31 March 1973. (both
dates inclusive) in respect of Promissory
Notes of the Government of India purchased by the Department of Trade and
industry under the provisions of certain
credit agreements.
11 December 1972.
-

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
Credit Agreemet No. 386-G-214
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg150>
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
5
6
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------120. Credit Agreement between the Government
of India and
the Government of the

United States of America.
-

17 January 1972.

-

-

UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
121. Agreement between the Government of
the Republic of India and the Government
of the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics on setting up an Intergovernmental Indo-Soviet Commission on
Economic, Scientific and Technical Cooperation.
19 September 1972.
1972
. -

-

19 September

JOINT STATEMENT
PAKISTAN
122. Joint Statement issued on 29 August 1972
by the representatives of India and Pakistan after the talks held in New Delhi from
25 August to 29 August 1972 to review
the developments since the signing of the
Simla Agreement on 2 July 1972.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------INDIA
USA SWEDEN AUSTRALIA AUSTRIA BANGLADESH BELGIUM CANADA DENMARK
GERMANY ITALY CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC JAPAN KUWAIT NEPAL THE
NETHERLANDS NORWAY PAKISTAN IRELAND

FRANCE

Jan 25, 1973

Appendix IV EXPENDITURE ON HEADQUARTERS AND MISSIONS/POSTS

Jan 01, 1972
APPENDIX IV
EXPENDITURE ON HEADQUARTERS AND MISSIONS/POSTS
ABROAD DURING 1972-73.
The expenditure during 1972-73 on Headquarters of this Ministry is
of the order of Rs. 295.56 lakhs, a sum of Rs. 134.34 lakhs is towards Establishment Charges, a sum of Rs. 116.92 lakhs for publicity, cables, diplomatic
bag services etc., a sum of Rs. 36.41 lakhs for travelling expenses and the
balance of Rs. 7.89 lakhs for Interim Relief.

The expenditure on Missions/Posts including Special Missions in Thimpu
and Gangtok is Rs. 1,254.87 lakhs out of which a sum of Rs. 692.72 lakhs
is spent on Establishment Charges including Foreign and other compensatory
allowances, a sum of Rs. 71.74 lakhs on passages for transfers and Local
Tours, Rs. 34.62 lakhs for Publicity Contingencies and Rs. 455.79 lakhs
on Official and residential accomodation, P. & T. Charges and other office
contingencies. The average expenditure Per Mission comes to Rs. 11.20
lakhs.
The expenditure mentioned above (Viz., Rs. 1550.43 lakhs as per details
below) on Headquarters and Missions/Posts abroad includes expenditure
on External Publicity programme/activities. The breakup of this expenditure
is as under:(a) HEADQUARTERS:
la
khs)

(Rs. in

(i) Salaries (Officers 34, Staff 122).

9.04

(ii) Travelling Expenses

2.08

(iii) Publicity Contingent Charges

38.52
------49.64
-------

(b) MISSIONS/POSTS ABROAD:
(i) Salaries (Officers 54, Staff 343)
(ii) Foreign Allowance, Compensatory Allowance
(iii) Passages and Travelling Expenses

43.93
25.20
2.34

(iv) Publicity Contingencies

35.10

(v) Other Charges including rent of residential accommodation and other Office contingencies

13.62
------120.19
-------

TOTAL: EXTERNAL PUBLICITY

169.83
------<pg151>
<pg152>

The expenditure on External Publicity as detailed above comes to 9.13%
of the expenditure on Headquarters and Mission/Posts abroad.

(in lakhs

of Rupees)

---------------------------------------------------------------------------------EstablishTravelling
Other
Total
ment
Expenses
Charges
Charges
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------I. SECRETARIAT:
(a) Headquarters
(b) External Publicity Division

133.19

34.33

78.40

245.92

9.04

2.08

38.52

49.64

-----------------------------------------------------------142.23
36.41
116.92

295.56

-----------------------------------------------------------II. OVERSEAS ESTABLISHMENT:
(a) Missions/Posts
abroad
(b) Publicity Wings

623.59
69.13

69.40
2.34

441.69
48.72

1134.68
120.19

-----------------------------------------------------------692.72
71.74
490.41

1254.87

-----------------------------------------------------------GRAND TOTAL
834.95
108.15
607.33

1550.43

------------------------------------------------------------

Jan 01, 1972

Appendix V LIST OF INDIAN MISSION/POSTS

Jan 01, 1972
APPENDIX V

LIST OF INDIAN MISSION/POSTS OPENED IN THE YEAR
1972-73.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------S. No.
Country
Location
Remarks
--------------------------------------------------------------------------1. Colombia

Bogota

Embassy.

2. Panama

Panama City

Embassy.

3. Qatar

Doha

Embassy.

4. Bangladesh

Chittagong

Asstt. High Commission.

5. Malaysia

Penang

Asstt. High Commission.

6. Thailand

Chiengmai

Consulate.

<pg153>

INDIA
COLOMBIA PANAMA QATAR BANGLADESH MALAYSIA THAILAND
Jan 01, 1972


