1975-76

Contents
Jan 01, 1975
REPORT
1975-76
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS
NEW DELHI
CONTENTS
CHAPTER
Introduction
I.
India's Neighbours
II.
South East Asia
III. East Asia

PAGE
1
11
23
28

IV.
West Asia and North Africa
V.
Africa (South of the Sahara)
VI.
Europe
VII. The Americas
VIII. United Nations and International Conferences
IX.
Technical and Economic Co-operation
X.
External Publicity
XI.
Cultural Relations
XII.
Protocol Matters
XIII. Passport, Visa and Consular Services
XIV. Administration and Organisation

36
43
49
64
71
88
112
118
124
125
128

APPENDICES
NUMBER

PAGE

I.

International Conferences, Congresses, Seminars etc. in
which India participated in 1975-76

135

II.

International Organisations of which India became a
member or ceased to be a member during the year 1975-76.

177

III. Treaties/Conventions/Agreements concluded or renewed by
India with other countries in 1975.

179

IV.

Important Industrial/Construction Projects secured by Indian
Firms abroad on Turnkey Sub-Contracting basis

198

V.

Statement showing the number of Indian Experts deputed
to various countries under ITEC programme

201

VI.

Indian Joint Ventures abroad

204

VII. Countrywise distribution of reserved Medical and
neering seats during 1975-76

Engi-

VIII. Expenditure on Headquarters and Missions/Posts
during 1975-76

abroad

IX. List of Indian Missions/Posts opened in the year 1975-76

INDIA
USA
Jan 01, 1975

Introduction
Jan 01, 1975
INTRODUCTION
The year 1975 witnessed favourable trends in the progress
towards detente, decolonisation, the, strengthening of the solidarity of the non-aligned countries and efforts by the developing
and developed countries to grapple with the problems involved
in the creation of a new international economic order. These
favourable developments were, however, accompanied by the
continuing world-wide rivalry of the super powers which constantly hampered the process of detente and world cooperation.
The Helsinki Declaration on Security and Cooperation in
Europe signed by 35 countries reflected the desire of both the
United States and the Soviet Union to strengthen the process of
detente by seeking the cooperation of other European countries for strengthening peace and security in Europe. The recent
breakthrough in SALT and the announcement that a treaty on
limitation of strategic arms would soon be concluded was an

206

208
210

indication that the detente was slowly graduating from mere crisis
management to an unwritten code for maintaining world peace
and security. In South-East Asia the triumph of nationalist
forces in Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia brought to an end outside
military interference in the affairs of these countries. The decision of the Ministerial Council of the SEATO to phase out the
Organization over the next two years reflected an understanding
by the member states of its diminishing role towards promoting
peace and security in South-East Asia. The withdrawal by
Portugal from her remaining African territories marked another
step towards the end of western colonial rule in Africa. The
Paris Ministerial Conference on International Economic Cooperation in December 1975 attended by representatives of the
developing and industrialised countries displayed the concern and
resolve of the international community to tackle problems
<pg1>
relating to finance, resources and development. The non-aligned
conference at Lima stressed the need for solidarity among the
non-aligned countries and for a just anti equitable international
economic order.
Despite these positive developments, there still remained a
number of unresolved problems and factors that constituted
a threat to the world economic and political stability. China
viewed the detente between the United States and the Soviet
Union with distrust and suspicion. Further, the prevailing
spirit of detente and the realisation on the part of the Soviet
Union and the United States to avoid confrontation, did not
make these two major powers abandon their rivalry and efforts
to extend their sphere of influence in different parts of the
world. Their interest in the developments in Portugal and
Angola demonstrated that, despite their adherence to the spirit of
detente, they would strive to extend their influence in areas
where there was instability. This was further demonstrated by
the continuing super-power rivalry in sensitive areas like the
Indian Ocean causing concern to the littoral States. The continuing energy crisis and the gap between the rich and the poor
focussed attention on the need among the developed and the
developing nations of the world to find a consensus for cooperation to solve the economic problems that confronted and affected
all of them. The unresolved West Asian problem continued to
constitute a threat to peace. Although some progress was
made through Israel's bilateral agreements with Egypt and Syria
towards the maintenance of peace, a lasting solution had still to
be found for bringing about a final settlement. The civil conflict in Lebanon has created concern for peace, harmony and
good neighbourly relations. The stalemate in Cyprus posed a
danger to the unity and integrity of that country and a threat
to peace.
India viewed the changing international situation with hope
as well as concern. She welcomed the Helsinki Conference as

initiating a new era of cooperation and co-existence and hoped
<pg2>
that such spirit of cooperation among nations would extend
to other parts of the world where conflict and tension stilt
threatened peace and security. The triumph of the liberation
forces in Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos and the withdrawal of
United States forces provided the peoples of these countries an
opportunity to work for the reconstruction and development of
their homelands after years of war' While heralding the
emergence of Guinea (Bissau), Mozambique and Angola as
independent states, India deplored the civil strife in Angola and
hoped that Angola would be able to resolve her problems without foreign interference and a solution found safeguarding the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of the newly
independent state. In West Asia, Israel's agreements with Egypt
and Syria were a good beginning. but a final agreement of the
problem in the region could only be realised if Israel withdrew
from all occupied Arab territories and recognition was given
to the fair and just aspirations of the Palestinian people. India
expressed concern over the activities of the global powers to
extend their sphere of influence and reiterated in various international forums that the Indian Ocean area should be left as
a zone of peace free from great power rivalry. Along with other
non-aligned countries, which are also developing countries like
her, India continued to strive for a more rational distribution
of the world's resources on the basis of equality and justice. At
the meeting of the Commonwealth Heads of Government in
Jamaica and the conference of the Foreign Ministers of nonaligned countries in Lima, India stressed the need for cooperation among the Commonwealth countries and solidarity among
the non-aligned countries to further the cause of economic and
political cooperation and the evolution of a new international
economic order based on equality and justice. India took keen
and active interest in the Conference on International Economic
Cooperation attended by the represenatives of the developed
as well as the developing countries. It was India's hope that
the deliberations of the Commission set up by the Conference
would help towards solving economic and financial issues to the
mutual satisfaction of all nations.
<pg3>
Within the broad, framework of the policy of non-alignment
and peaceful co-existence, India developed friendly relations
with her neighbours as well as with other countries in different
parts of the world. There was, however, no change in relations
with China. China continued to misrepresent developments
within India and make critical comments on India's internal
affairs. Pakistan's attempts to misrepresent India's policies
through propaganda internally and externally constituted a setback to the normalisation of relations with that country as
provided for under the Simla Agreement. The official level
talks held with Pakistan in May 1975 on matters relating to

civil aviation did not result in any agreement. The successful
conclusion of trade talks in January 1976, however, marked a
small beginning and showed that there was scope for developing relations based on mutual benefit as a step towards promotion of trust and understanding. India continued to maintain
a positive approach to the idea of normalisation of relations with
Pakistan in order to help in bringing about stability and peace
in the sub-continent.
As regards her other neighbours, India's policy aimed at
developing close friendship on the basis of mutual trust, understanding and cooperation. The visit of the Minister of External Affairs to Afghanistan demonstrated the friendly ties between the two countries based on identity of views and growing
economic cooperation. Talks during the visit of the Nepalese
Foreign Minister in August 1975 and that of India's Minister
of External Affairs to Nepal in January 1976 showed the desire
of the two countries to further cooperation on the basis of realism, understanding and mutual benefit. The visit of the Minister of External Affairs to Bhutan reflected India's desire to
strengthen friendly ties and help that country in her development.
Exchanges took place with Sri Lanka to further economic cooperation with that country for mutual benefit as also to demarcate the maritime boundary between the two countries.
India persisted in maintaining friendly relations with Bangladesh, though the assassination of Sheikh Mujibur Rehman in
<pg4>
August 1975 and the consequent instability in that country, came
as a great shock and caused great anguish and concern. India
regarded these developments as an internal affair of Bangladesh
and strictly adhered to the principle of non-interference and
friendship. However, it is a matter of regret that baseless
allegations have, of late, been appearing in the Bangladesh
press about India's alleged attempts at interference. It is all
the more regrettable that these items should appear after the
agreement reached recently in Delhi with the high-level Bangladesh delegation on refraining from hostile propaganda. India
hopes that the situation in Bangladesh would stabilise and the
relations between the two countries would develop on the basis
of secularism, non-alignment, peaceful co-existence and noninterference in each other's internal affairs. India is of the
view that normal and friendly relations among the countries of
the sub-continent without any outside pressure and influence are
necessary for the progress of their people and peace and stability in the region.
India continued to work for closer cooperation with the countries of South-East and East Asia. She welcomed the triumph
of the nationalist forces in the states of Indo-China and the
process towards reunification of South and North Vietnam.
She also accorded diplomatic recognition to the Provisional

Revolutionary Government of Vietnam as well as the Royal
Government of the National Union of Cambodia in April
1975 and offered to help these countries in the task of
reconstruction and development. The visit of the Indian President to Indonesia in May signified India's desire to develop
closer ties with that country. The visit of the Indonesian
Foreign Minister to India in August highlighted the similarity of
views of the two countries on important international problems.
They also supported the objectives of ASEAN for regional economic cooperation to promote conditions of peace and stability.
In East Asia steps were taken to expand economic cooperation
with Japan. Various fields were identified in which such cooperation could take place to mutual advantage. India reiterated
<pg5>
Support for the reunification of Korea through direct bilateral
discussions without any outside intervention during the
visit to India of the Foreign Minister of the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea. Talks during the visit of the Foreign
Minister of Mongolia reflected India's growing friendship and
cooperation with that country.
In West Asia, India continued her efforts to strengthen
bilateral relations with all the countries of the region. Besides
the strong support for the Arab cause and the legitimate aspirations of the Palestinians, the keynote of India's aproach to West
Asia was economic cooperation. The Minister of External
Affairs, during his visit to Egypt and Syria in May-June 1975,
laid stress on India's support for the Arab people and on the
need for the restoration of the legitimate national rights of the
Palestinian people. The Minister also expressed the possibilities
of further economic cooperation with these countries. India
welcomed the reopening of the Suez Canal in June as a step that
would benefit international trade and economics of the countries
in Asia and Africa. The visit of the Syrian Foreign Minister to
India in November, during which an agreement for cultural
cooperation was signed, reflected the developing ties with that
country. The visit of Prime Minister's Special Envoy to a number of West Asian countries and countries of North Africa showed
India's desire to have friendly relations with all the countries of
the region.
India's efforts to develop closer ties with the states of the
Gulf were highlighted by the visit of the Minister of External
Affairs to Iran and the United Arab Emirates in November
1975. Both these countries shared India's belief that the
Indian Ocean should remain as a zone of peace free from great
power rivalry and the security of which should be the responsibility of the littoral states. Agreements were reached for further
economic cooperation between India and these states.
India's desire to have friendly relations with the counries
of Africa was demonstrated when the Vice-President visited

<pg6>
Tanzania in May and the Deputy Minister of External Affairs
visited a number of countries in East Africa in June. During
the visit they discussed India's bilateral relations with the leaders
of the countries concerned and different fields of economic cooperation between India and these countries. The visit of the
President of Tanzania to India in January 1976 provided another
opportunity to the Indian leaders to discuss African problems
and matters of mutual interest. Both India and Tanzania expressed their support for the Organisation of African Unity, for
the people of Zimbabwe and Namibia in their struggle to achieve
majority rule, condemned appartheid in South Africa and made
known their resolve to work for the total elimination of racialism
and apartheid in any form. When the United Nations Council
for Namibia visited India in April-May, India condemned South
Africa's illegal occupation of Namibia and expressed her full support for the national liberation movements in territories still
under colonial domination. India welcomed the emergence of
Mozambique as a free nation in June 1975 and expressed the
hope of developing close cooperation with that country. The
visit of the Deputy Minister of External Affairs to a number of
West African countries in October highlighted India's interest in
exploring the possibilities of developing closer economic cooperation with these countries. The understanding reached regarding payment of compensation for the assets of Indian settlers
who had left Uganda paved the way for the restoration of
friendly relations with that country. A formal agreement on
the payment of compensation was signed during the visit of the
Deputy Minister of External Affairs to Kampala in January
1976. The solution of this once seemingly intractable problem
has further strengthened the belief, that given patience and
understanding, developing countries can find mutually satisfactory,
solutions to their problems.
India's relations with the Soviet Union continued to develop,
in various fields on the basis of the solid foundations bid by the
Treaty of Peace, Friendship and Cooperation signed between the
two countries in 1971. These relations found sustenance from
<pg7>
the common endeavour of both countries to work for the reduction in international tension, develop friendly relations with all
countries irrespective of their social systems and hastening the
end of colonialism and racialism. Possibilities of cooperation in
various fields, such as industries, steel, petroleum and chemicals,
were explored and reviewed from time to time through highlevel contacts and discussions. As a result of official talks hold
with the Soviet Union in November it is hoped that the two
countries would be able to double their volume of trade within
the next 5 years through utilisation of new fields of cooperation.
Relations on bilateral basis were further fostered with the

countries of Eastern Europe on the basis of equality, understanding and mutual benefit. The visit of the President of India to
Hungary and Yugoslavia in October and the visit of the Foreign
Minister of Czechoslovakia to India in November and the visit
of the Hungarian Foreign Minister to India in February 1976
focussed attention on the developing friendship with these
countries. The common association with the non-aligned movement gave an identity of purpose and added depth to India's
close economic and political ties with Yugoslavia. This was
further highlighted during the visit of the Prime Minister of
Yugoslavia to India. The signing of a Consular Convention
with the German Democratic Republic, during the visit of the
Foreign Minister of that country to India in December, indicated the growing cooperation between the two countries. A protocol was signed with Romania to promote cooperation in the
field of agriculture, food industry and water management.
India maintained friendly relations with the countries of
Western Europe. Substantial financial aid was received on bilateral. basis from Britain, France and the Federal Republic of
Germany for development purposes. Britain emerged first among
the countries providing bilateral aid to India. France also extended substantial credits to India and the visit of the France Prime
Minister to India in January 1976 helped to further strengthen
economic ties with that country. The Federal Republic of Germany gave economic aid to the extent of D.M. 365 million
<pg8>
during 1975-76. India hoped that the Indo-EEC Joint Commission established last year would intensify its work and concerted efforts would be made by the European Community to
expand and diversify relations with India keeping in view her
problems and interests as a developing country.
India continued to work for friendly relations with the United States based on a sense of realism and cooperation. It was
regretted that there was lack of understanding in the United
States of the meaning and direction of the dynamic developments in India. Differences between the two countries on the
question of supply of arms to Pakistan and the setting up of
naval base at Diego Garcia also persisted. It was, however, felt
that these need not come in the way of normalisation and efforts
were maintained towards cooperation on the basis of the IndoUS Joint Commission set up last year. At the second meeting
of the Commission held in the United States in October, it was
agreed to establish a Joint Business Council and encourage joint
ventures between Indian and United States firms in third countries.
At the first meeting of the Indo-US Joint Business Council held
at New Delhi in February 1976, avenues were explored for
expanding trade between the two countries. It was felt that as
the present day world had become inter-dependent, the key to
the future lay in the management of that inter-dependence. These
discussions held out the prospect of greater economic coopera-

tion with the United States in various fields.
The visit of the Peruvian Foreign Minister, the President of
Mexico and that of the President of Guyana to India in July
indicated favourable response of these countries towards developing closer ties with India. India took active steps to promote
technical and economic collaboration with the countries of the
region through the setting up of joint ventures in various fields.
In sum, during the year under report, India showed active
interest in the need for a new international economic order based
on equality and justice and the necessity for cooperation among
<pg9>
the developing countries and unity among the non-aligned countries to meet the economic and political challenges confronting
the world community. This cooperation was essential not only
for greater self-reliance among the developing nations but also
to enable them to withstand pressures by major powers to bring
them under their sphere of influence to enhance their own interests in different parts of the world. It was India's conviction
that only through self-reliance, cooperation and development
among the developing countries it would be possible to contribute
towards peace and stability and help in the emergence of a new
economic order based on cooperation and friendship among all
the nations of the world.
<pg10>
FINLAND
CAMBODIA LAOS VIETNAM PORTUGAL FRANCE USA PERU CHINA ANGOLA INDIA EGYPT
ISRAEL SYRIA LEBANON CYPRUS GUINEA GUINEA-BISSAU MOZAMBIQUE JAMAICA
PAKISTAN MALI AFGHANISTAN NEPAL BHUTAN SRI LANKA BANGLADESH INDONESIA
JAPAN KOREA MONGOLIA IRAN UNITED ARAB EMIRATES TANZANIA NAMIBIA ZIMBABWE
SOUTH AFRICA UGANDA HUNGARY YUGOSLAVIA NORWAY SLOVAKIA OMAN ROMANIA
GERMANY GUYANA MEXICO
Jan 01, 1975

India's Neighbours
CHAPTER I
INDIA'S NEIGHBOURS
Afghanistan

The bonds of traditional friendship which have been the
hallmark of Indo-Afghan relations were further strengthened by
the visit of the Minister of External Affairs, at the invitation
of the Afghan Government, from Oct 28, 1975 to 1 November
1975. During his visit, the Minister called on the President
of Afghanistan and held discussions with the Ministers of Planning, Agriculture and Irrigation and Mines and Industry. He
also attended the fourth session of the Indo-Afghan Joint Commission for Economic and Technical Cooperation. The Joint
Commission reached agreement on all issues involved and took
appropriate decisions.
The two sides exchanged views on important international
issues, in particular, problems and developments in the region.
They reviewed the development of the non-aligned movement
and its role in strengthening world peace and security and promoting international cooperation. The two countries, both being
founder members of the non-aligned movement, reaffirmed the
need for preserving the spirit and fundamental principles of
non-alignment to enable them to continue to play their genuine
role in international affairs.
The Afghan leaders also shared India's concern about the
stockpile of sophisticated military weapons in Pakistan which
would add to her already considerable military strength.
<pg11>
20 M of EA/75-2
Bangladesh
India continued to work for friendly ties with Bangladesh on
the basis of mutual cooperation. A major breakthrough was
achieved on the Farakka question following discussions between
India's Minister of Agriculture and Irrigation and former Bangladesh Minister for Flood Control, Water Resources and Power
in Dacca from 16 to 18 April. With a view to running the feeder
canal of Farakka barrage during the 1975 lean period, it was
agreed by both sides that between 21 April and 31 May 1975
India would withdraw between 11,000 cusecs to 16,000 cusecs of
water ensuring the continuance of the remaining flow for Bangladesh. It was also decided to set up a joint team of experts to
observe, at appropriate places in both countries the effects of
the agreed withdrawal.
The Home Ministers of India and Bangladesh met between
21 and 23 April, and discussed issues such as anti-smuggling measures, border incidents, guidelines for border forces and influx of
Bangladesh nationals into India.
At the talks held at the Foreign Ministers level in New Delhi
from 29 March to 2 April, differences on the delimitation of
the maritime boundary were narrowed down to a point where
both sides felt confident of reaching a mutually acceptable settle-

ment before long. Unfortunately, owing to developments in
Bangladesh after 15-August, further talks could not be held.
A 5-Member Indian Parliamentary delegation led by the
Speaker of the Lok Sabha, Shri G. S. Dhillon, visited Dacca
between 22 and 23 June on its way to Hanoi.
The restoration and opening of the Hardinge Bridge, the
longest bridge in Bangladesh, with the assistance of Indian Railways, on 11 July, was another example of Indo-Bangladesh
cooperation.
<pg12>
India was deeply concerned at the political developments in
Bangladesh during and after August 1975. There was great
shock and grief at the brutal murder of Bangabandhu Sheikh
Mujibur Rahman, his family as well as of a number of other
prominent leaders of the country. Sheikh Mujibur Rahman was
an outstanding personality who had played a great role in the
freedom movement of Bangladesh.
The developments in Bangladesh caused concern in India
about the safety of Indian nationals. India was equally worried
about the uncontrolled anti-Indian propaganda, sometimes
even in the official media in Bangladesh. India, however, continued to regard the developments in Bangladesh as an internal
affair of that country. Despite serious provocations, like the
planting of a live grenade in the residence of the High Commissioner and the armed attack on the High Commissioner himself
on 26 November 1975 in which he narrowly escaped serious injury, India continued to maintain an attitude of calm and restraint.
The developments in Bangladesh, did not affect India's policy
of trying to maintain close friendship and cooperation and good
neighbourly relations with Bangladesh. India was vitally interested in the sovereignty, territorial integrity and independence
of Bangladesh as her immediate neighbour. She was convinced
that so long as Bangladesh pursued an independent foreign policy
and adhered to the principles and policies of secularism, it
should be possible to develop relationship of friendship and
cooperation based on mutual understanding between the two
countries. The Prime Minister of India welcomed the message
of President Moshtaque Ahmed, who succeeded Sheikh Mujibur
Rahman, stating that his Government desired to continue existing bilateral treaties and agreements and to strengthen relations
with India. The Prime Minister said that India attached fundamental importance to peace, harmony and cooperation with all
her neighbours and it was her firm resolve to continue efforts
to promote friendship and work for lasting peace in the subcontinent. Recalling close and friendly relations between the
<pg13>

two countries within the framework of common objectives, the
Prime Minister expressed confidence in the two countries working
together for progress and prosperity in the region.
The thick fog of distrust, suspicion and hostility towards
India, which had been largely created by certain forces within
and outside Bangladesh, began to show signs of clearing after
the visit to New Delhi of a high-level delegation led by
Mr. Justice A. Sattar between 5-8 December and the meeting between the Chiefs of the Border Security Forces of the two
countries from 2-4 December. At these meetings, an understanding was reached on measures to maintain peace and tranquility on the border. It was agreed that officers at different
levels of the two forces would meet more frequently to settle
problems relating to border incidents, smuggling and trans-border
crimes. India reaffirmed her, desire for a peaceful border and
to see a stable, strong and prosperous Bangladesh. Each side
indicated the steps it considered necessary to create a proper
climate for better understanding, friendship and cooperation.
Bhutan
Indo-Bhutan relations continued to be strengthened further
in the spirit of mutual confidence, warmth and traditional friendship.
The Minister of External Affairs paid a goodwill visit to
Bhutan from 17 to 19 July 1975. During this visit, he held
discussions with the King of Bhutan, members of the Royal
Family, the Council of Ministers and other dignitaries on various
issues of common interest.
His Majesty Jigme Singye Wangchuck, the King of Bhutan,
accompanied by his sister, Her Royal Highness Ashi D. W.
Wangchuck, paid an unofficial visit to India from 10 to 16 September 1975. He held discussions with the Prime Minister and
other senior Ministers of the Government of India on bilateral and
international issues. These high-level exchange of visits further
<pg14>
strengthened the bonds of friendship, understanding and goodwill
existing between the two countries.
India continued to provide assistance to Bhutan for her
economic development. For the implementation of the Third
Five-Year Plan, India agreed to provide Rs. 11.10 crores to
Bhutan during the year 1975-76. India's contribution to the
implementation of the Third Five-Year Plan of Bhutan (197176) would be about Rs. 46 crores. The Fourth Five-Year Plan
of Bhutan (1976-81) was under examination. Efforts were
being continued to identify projects on which the two countries
could cooperate, in addition to the Chukha Hydro-electric Project and the Pagli Cement Project on which agreements had been

signed earlier. The Chukba Project Authority came into being
when its first meeting was held in Thimpu on 27 September
1975. With this, the work of the project went into full swing.
During his visit to Bhutan in November 1975, Shri K. C. Pant,
Minister of energy, inspected the site and the works going on at
the Chukha Project. The completion of this project, with India's
assistance, will provide the most important power base for thedevelopment of Bhutan's economy and industry.
As in the past, cooperation between the two countries in
various developmental fields continued to be implemented by
visits and surveys by Indian teams of experts and specialists
to Bhutan, in the fields of forestry resources, minerals, telecommunications, hydel survey. town planning etc. Students and
trainees from Bhutan continued to receive educational an training: facilities in. India in various fields, including science, technology, medicines, public administration, tourism, hotel managemeat, forestry, post and telecommunications etc.
Burma
India's relations with Burma continued to be friendly and
cordial.
Shri Raj Bahadur, Minister of Tourism and Civil Aviation,
visited Rangoon on 7 October 1975, as the Special Envoy of
<pg15>
the Prime Minister. While in Rangoon he visited the tomb of
the last Mughal Emperor Bahadur Shah Zafar whose death centenary was celebrated on a national scale in 1975.
A 40-member dance and music troupe from the Burmese
National Theatre visited India under the Cultural Activities Programme. from 9 to 25 October 1975 and gave performances
at Madras, Bangalore and New Delhi.
The Burmese Deputy Minister for Education, U. Myint Aung,
visited India from 10 to 15 November 1975.
Burma participated in the International Seminar on the
'Ramayana Tradition in Asia' held in New Delhi from 8 to 12
December 1975, as part of the Quincentenary Celebration of
Ramcharitmanas.
Maldives
Relations between India and the Republic of Maldives were
strengthened by growing cooperation between the two countries
in economic, educational and technical fields.
Mr. Ali Maniku, now Vice-President of Maldives, visited
India in March 1975, as a Special Representative, to discuss

bilateral and economic cooperation.
IAC commenced a direct air service between Trivandrum
and Male.
Nepal
India's relations with Nepal, one of her closest neighbours,
continued to be cordial and friendly. Significant contributions
were made to strengthening this friendship by the visits to India
of His Majesty the King of Nepal, and the Nepalese Foreign
Minister, and to Nepal of Shri Y. B. Chavan, Minister of External Affairs. Shri Radha Prasad Ghimire, the Nepalese Minister for Education and Communications also visited India at the
invitation of the Education Minister as well as Minister for
Communications.
<pg16>
The Foreign Minister, Shri Krishna Raj Aryal, visited New
Delhi from 13 to 17 August 1975, and held extensive discussions with the Minister of External Affairs and other leaders.
His discussions encompassed a wide range of subjects concerning
bilateral relations, including political and economic questions, as
well as international issues of mutual concern. He was assured
that India would make her contribution to Nepal's Fifth FiveYear Plan and would, as always, give friendly considerations to
Nepal's problems of trade and transit. The importance of IndoNepalese cooperation for harnessing the rivers, which are shared
by the two countries, was particularly stressed. The stop-over
visit of His Majesty the King on 30 September and 1 October
1975, though brief, was extremely significant as it provided an
opportunity for the exchange of views between the leaders of
the two countries at the highest level. Shri Chavan, Minister of
External Affairs, during Ms visit to Nepal in January 1976, discussed areas of possible cooperation and development of agriculture and water resources to the mutual benefit of the two
countries.
On the question of trade and transit, the two countries
remained in touch with each other. The two meetings of the
Indo-Nepal Joint Review Committee, in March and October
1975, reviewed various problems that came up during the implementation of the Treaty a Trade and Transit, 1971 and found
mutually beneficial and acceptable solutions. Particular emphasis
was laid during discussions on the ways and means to stop smuggling as well as deflection of trade.
The trade between the two countries was brought on the
same footing as India's trade with her other close friendly
neighbours like Sri Lanka, Burma, Bangladesh, etc. Essential
commodities like iron, steel, cement and coal are now being sold
to Nepal at the same price as to other friendly neighbouring
countries.

Two schemes-Kosi and Gandak projects-had already been
implemented to utilise the waters of these two rivers. It was
<pg17>
decided to constitute a joint group of experts from the two countries to discuss how best the waters of the other common rivers
could be shared by the two countries to the benefit of both.
The Government of Nepal were anxious to implement the Karnali Hydel Project and the Government of India were committed
to buy all the surplus power generated there.
Since 1951-52, India is cooperating with Nepal in her economic development and till the end of March 1975, India had
provided Rs. 113.6 crores for this purpose. To complete the
various projects in hand and also for the construction of some
new ones, in the current financial year Rs. 9 crores were budgeted.
The major projects currently under implementation are central
sector of the Mahendra Raj Marg, bridge on the river Kamla,
telephone exchanges at Biratnagar, Janakpur and Jhapa, etc.
Two major projects---Chhatra Canal and Trisuli Hydel projectwere handed over to His Majesty's Government of Nepal during
the year. The survey work on the Dulaghat-Dhankuta road was
in progress and the Government of India made a commitment
to provide financial and technical assistance for the construction
of this major mountain highway.
Pakistan
During 1975, India, on her part, continued to follow a positive
approach for settling differences peacefully and for developing
harmonious relations with Pakistan in order to establish durable
peace in the subcontinent. However, the progress towards
normalising relations was rather slow and halting as, unfortunately, the Government of Pakistan since May 1975, launched
a campaign of baseless propaganda and denigration of India,
which vitiated the atmosphere. After India had announced her
candidature in April for election to the UN Security Council,
Pakistan also decided to enter the fray and contest the election
against India. The official media in Pakistan as well as Pakistan
missions abroad, began to spread false rumours that India might
resort to a military adventure against Pakistan to divert attention
<pg18>
from the internal situation. After the violent overthrow of
Sheikh Mujibur Rehman's Government in Bangladesh, on 15
August, Pakistan's publicity media added a fresh dimension to
their campaign against India by falsely alleging that India was
likely to intervene in Bangladesh. The Government of India
invited the Attention of Pakistan to this hostile and malicious
propaganda campaign which was in violation of the Simla Agreement and was proving to be a hindrance in the way of normalisation. However, Pakistan's official media and press continued

this campaign.
The conclusion drawn in India by this incessant propaganda
campaign by Pakistan's official media was that Pakistan was not
only misrepresenting India to her own people but was also trying
to arouse false misgivings about India amongst the people in
countries neighbouring India. This matter was brought to the
notice of the Government of Pakistan and it was pointed out
that this was contrary to the fundamental concept of working
for harmonious relations and the establishment of durable peace
in the sub-continent, envisaged in the Simla Agreement.
While this negative campaign against India continued, unabated, the Government of Pakistan kept propagating the view
amongst third countries that she was keenly interested in implementing the Simla Agreement and was making every effort to
normalise relations with India. Against this background, it was not
surprising that the Foreign Secretary-level meeting between India
and Pakistan, held in New Delhi from 15-20 May failed to
lead to any tangible results. The talks on the resumption of
airlinks and overflights were inconclusive.
Another issue discussed at the Foreign Secretaries meeting,
at India's initiative, related to the construction of the hydroelectric power project on the river Chenab at Salal in accordance
with the criteria laid down in the Indus Waters Treaty of 1960.
India had suggested bilateral talks on the subject in order to
clear. certain doubts raised in Pakistan about the design of this
project. The Foreign Secretaries' meeting in May resulted in an
<pg19>
understanding that the experts of the two sides would meet and
endeavour to resolve the matter within two months after the
furnishing of additional information relevant to the design of
the project by India within one month. It was also agreed that
the two Commissioners for Indus Waters would keep their respective Governments informed of the progress so that in case
difficulties arose, fresh Government instructions could be given
for their resolution. Information asked for by Pakistan, relevant
to the design criteria of the project, was furnished to Pakistan
within the prescribed time limit; thereafter four meetings took
place between the experts of the two sides including an inspection
of the project site. However, despite the fact that there was good
progress in resolving the matter through these bilateral talks, Pakistan Government decided that the matter had to be taken to a
neutral expert.
The Government of Pakistan seemed to have some reservations on the extent to which agreements signed in pursuance
of Simla Agreement were to be implemented. In contrast to
India's liberal attitude on encouraging travel between the two
countries, Pakistan's attitude was restrictive. In the matter of
trade, following the agreements signed with Pakistan for resump-

tion of trade in January 1975, India fulfilled her contract for the
purchase of 200,000 bales of cotton worth about Rs. 25 crores
in foreign exchange. India also shared the freight for transporting this cotton from Karachi to Bombay on a 50-50 basis with
Pakistani shipping. A visit by a team of the Trading Corporation of Pakistan was arranged to various commercial and industrial centres in India of interest to Pakistan. This visit established that there were good prospects for mutually beneficial
trade between the two countries. However, Pakistan failed to
sign any contracts for purchase of goods from India in 1975.
In January 1976, following the visit of an Indian S.T.C. delegation to Pakistan, contracts were signed for the purchase of 5,000
tons of pig iron and 250 tons of bidi leaves worth about Rs. 70
lakhs. This denoted a rather small beginning but it was hoped
that mutually beneficial two-way trade between India and Pakistan
<pg20>
would pick up, if Pakistan finalised contracts for the purchase
of other commodities from India, identified during the talks.
During the year Pakistan continued her efforts to unilaterally
alter the situation regarding the territory of Jammu and Kashmir
under her illegal occupation. Despite protests from the Government of India, Pakistan went ahead and set up a Council for
Pakistan Occupied Kashmir in August 1975, under which the
Government of Pakistan, for the first time, institutionalised its
control over Pakistan Occupied Kashmir. The Government of
India pointed out to the Government of Pakistan that its action
in setting up this Council was in violation of the Simla Agreement as it constituted a material and unilateral alteration in
the situation in the Pakistan occupied territories of Jammu and
Kashmir. In an exchange of notes, the Government of India
made it clear that the setting up of the Council was a major
constitutional change envisaged under the 'interim constitution'
imposed on the occupied territories and could not be considered
as a mere administrative arrangement.
Contrary to its commitment in terms of the Simla Agreement to settle the Kashmir issue through peaceful. means bilaterally, the Government of Pakistan made attempts to revive
international interest in the defunct UN resolutions. A reference
to this effect was included in the joint communiques issued in
Pakistan on the conclusion of the visits of the Heads of State
of Turkey and Cambodia. It may be observed that Simla Agreement did not contain any reference to the UN resolutions as
these had been defunct and inoperative for a long time due to
the fundamental change in the situation and circumstances in
Kashmir. Pakistan was, therefore, trying to mislead third countries by one-sided and incorrect interpretation of the wording
of the Simla Agreement.
Sri Lanka

India's friendly relations with Sri Lanka were further strengthened by exchange of visits and by collaboration in economic
and technical fields.
<pg21>
Mr. W. T. Jayasinghe, Foreign Secretary, Ministry of. Defence
and External Affairs, Sri Lanka, visited India, from 11 to 17
November 1975, for talks on maritime boundary in the Gulf
of Mannar and the Bay of Bengal-the boundary in the Palk
Bay was settled earlier in June 1974. A second round of talks
took place when Foreign Secretary Shri Kewal Singh visited Sri
Lanka from 14 to 17 January 1976. He was received by
Prime Minister Mrs. S. Bandarnaike.
At the invitation of Shri K. Raghuramiah, Minister of Works,
Housing and Parliamentary Affairs, Mr. P. B.G. Keuneman,
Minister of Housing and Construction of Sri Lanka, visited India
from 27 November to 8 December 1975.
The Chief of the Air Staff of India visited Sri Lanka from 4
to 10 December 1975, at the invitation of Air Vice Marshal
P. H. Mendis, Commander-in-Chief of the Sri Lanka Air Force.
The Inspector-General of Police of Sri Lanka, Mr. D.S.E.P.R.
Senanayake, visited India from 23 to 30 October 1975.
A party of 34 officers from the National Defence College
visited Colombo from 27 to 31 October, 1975.
The implementation of the 1964 Agreement on persons of
Indian origin made satisfactory progress. In 1975, 18,448 accountable persons were repatriated to India. Till the end of 1975,
157,470 accountable persons were repatriated and 89,993 granted Sri Lanka citizenship out of 525,000 & 300,000 respectively
agreed to under the 1964 Agreement.
<pg22>
INDIA
AFGHANISTAN USA LATVIA PAKISTAN BANGLADESH VIETNAM PERU BHUTAN UNITED
KINGDOM BURMA MALDIVES NEPAL SRI LANKA MALI CAMBODIA TURKEY
Oct 28, 1975

South East Asia
CHAPTER II

SOUTH EAST ASIA
Australia
Indo-Australian relations continued to develop satisfactorily.
The seventh round of Indo-Australian officials' talks was held
in New Delhi in April 1975. These talks afforded an opportunity for a detailed exchange of views on regional and international matters and on bilateral relations. A programme for
co-operation between the two Governments in the cultural and
educational fields was reviewed and endorsed.
Dr. J. F. Cairns, the Deputy Prime Minister and Treasurer
of Australia, paid an official visit to India in May 1975. He
had meetings with the President, Prime Minister, Defence Minister, Finance Minister, Commerce Minister, Minister of Industry
and Civil Supplies, Chairman-Policy Planning Committee and
Deputy Chairman of the Planning Commission.
Australia's Minister of Science and Consumer Affairs,
Honourable Clyed Robert Cameron, visited India in June 1975.
He discussed various aspects of Indo-Australian cooperation
in the fields of science and technology.
A scientific delegation from India visited Australia in June
1975 to hold discussions with their Australian counterparts under
the Indo-Australian Agreement on Science and Technology. A
two-year programme was worked out jointly by the Indian Department of Science and Technology and Australian Department of
Consumer Affairs.
<pg23>
New Zealand
India's relations with New Zealand continued to be friendly
and cordial. Progress was maintained in cooperation in various
fields.
Papua New Guinea
The Indian High Commissioner in Canberra represented
India at the Independence celebrations of Papua New Guinea
on Sep 16, 1975. Messages of greetings were sent by
the President and the Prime, Minister to the Government of
Papua New Guinea.
Fiji
Relations between India and Fiji continued to be cordial
and friendly and were further strengthened by the exchange of
visits during the year.

The Honourable Ratu William Toganivalu, Minister for Fijian
Affairs and Rural Development, visited India in March 1975
and had meetings with the Minister of State in the Ministry of
Agriculture and the Deputy Minister in the Ministry of External
Affairs.
The Minister of Tourism and Civil Aviation, Shri Raj Bahadur,
visited Fiji in November 1975.
The Government of India gifted some medicines to the
Government of Fiji to combat dengue epidemic which had broken
out in Fiji. The Government of India also made available
the services of an Entomologist to the Fiji Government for the
same purpose.
Tonga
India's relations with Tonga continued to be friendly and
cordial.
<pg24>
At the invitation of the Government of Tonga, the Minister
of Tourism and Civil Aviation, Shri Raj Bahadur, paid a visit
to Tonga in November 1975 to attend the centenary celebrations of the granting of the Constitution of Tonga.
The Government of India presented some scientific instruments to the Government of Tonga.
At the invitation of the President of India, His Majesty the
King of Tonga, accompanied by the Queen paid a state visit
to India from 18 to 21 February 1976. The King received
the degree of Doctor of Laws (LL.D) honoris causa from the
University of Delhi.
Nauru
India's relations with Nauru continued to develop satisfactorily. The High Commissioner of India in Fiji was concurrently
accredited as High Commissioner to Nauru.
The Philippines
India's relations with the Philippines continued to develop
satisfactorily.
Shri Shah Nawaz Khan, Minister of State in the Ministry of
Agriculture, visited the Philippines, in February 1975, to attend
the Conference of Afro-Asian Rural Reconstruction Organisation.
He had meeting with the Secretary (Minister) of Agriculture and
Natural Resources of the Government of the Philippines and
discussed, food and agricultural problems of the two countries.

Shri B. George Verghese, Editor of the Hindustan Times,
was awarded the 1975 Ramon Magsaysay Award for journalism,
literature and creative communication arts.
Indonesia
The President paid a state visit to Indonesia from 26 to
31 May 1975 and had fruitful discussions with President
Soeharto. The warm and cordial reception accorded to him
reflected the close and friendly relations between the two countries.
<pg25>
Dr. Adam Malik, the Indonesian Foreign Minister, visited
New Delhi from 27 July to 1 August 1975 for the 6th round
of annual bilateral talks at Ministerial level. His discussions
with the Minister of External Affairs revealed a similarity of
views and close understanding on important international questions. The two Ministers reviewed the progress in relations
between India and Indonesia and exchanged views on measures
for the further development and consolidation of these relations.
Shri Raj Bahadur, Minister of Tourism and Civil Aviation,
visited Djakarta from 12 to 14 October 1975, as the Special
Envoy of the Prime Minister.
Gen. Surono, Deputy Commander-in-Chief of Indonesian
armed forces was in India from 11 to 16 March 1975, and
Admiral R. S. Subiyakto, Chief of Indonesian Navy, from 3 to
9 July 1975. Admiral S. N. Kohli, Chief of the Naval Staff,
visited Indonesia from 22 to 28 November, 1975 and Air Chief
Marshal O. P. Mehra, Chief of the Air Staff from 7 to 13
November 1975.
Malaysia
Traditionally friendly relations with Malaysia were further
strengthened during the year.
Shri Raj Bahadur, Minister of Tourism and Civil Aviation,
visited Kuala Lumpur on 11 October 1975, as Prime Minister's
Special Envoy.
Shri Raj Bahadur, Minister of Tourism and Civil Aviation
represented India at the funeral of the late Malaysian Prime
Minister Tun Abdul Razak on 16 January 1976, and called
on Prime Minister Datuk Hussein on 17 January.
The joint ventures in Malaysia registered satisfactory progress during the year.
<pg26>
India was represented at the International Quran Reading

Competition. held in Kuala Lumpur, from 24 to 27 September,
1975.
Singapore
The friendly relations with Singapore were further strengthened during the year.
Shri Raj Bahadur, Minister of Tourism and Civil Aviation,
visited Singapore from 14 to 16 October 1975, as Prime Minister's Special Envoy.
A 7-member delegation, led by Shri A. P. Sharma, Minister
of State for Industry and Civil Supplies, visited Singapore from
29 to 30 October 1975 and held discussions with the Singapore
Department of Trade and Economic Development Board.
Admiral S. N. Kohli, Chief of the Naval Staff, visited Singapore from 28 to 30 November, 1975.
Thailand
Relations with Thailand continued to be cordial.
An 8-member delegation led by Shri A. P. Sharma, Minister
of State for Industry and Civil Supplies, visited Bangkok on 21
October 1975.
A delegation from the Thai Defence Energy Department,
led by Lt. Gen. Samran Khirote, visited India from 10 to 13
April 1975 and had discussions with officials of the Ministry
of Petroleum and Chemicals and that of the Ministry of Defence.
A delegation from the Thai National Defence College visited
India from 1 to 5 May 1975.
20 M of EA/75-3
<pg27>
AUSTRALIA
USA INDIA NEW ZEALAND GUINEA PAPUA NEW GUINEA FIJI TONGA NAURU PHILIPPINES
INDONESIA MALI MALAYSIA UNITED KINGDOM REPUBLIC OF SINGAPORE THAILAND
Sep 16, 1975

East Asia

CHAPTER III
EAST ASIA
China
Chinese media continued hostile propaganda against India
during the year. The Chinese government issued a statement
on Apr 29, 1975, calling the Sikkimese attainment of statehood within the Indian Union "illegal annexation". Since this
was an internal matter of no concern to any other Government,
the Government of India issued a short statement on 1 May
1975, pointing out China's interference in India's internal affairs,
China continued to claim that India had "hegemonistic and expansionist ambitions" towards her neighbours and aspired to
become a "sub-super-power" with the support of the Soviet
Union. Despite all these Chinese distortions, Indian desisted from
any kind of a propaganda campaign.
The Indian Government followed a Consistent policy of seeking to normalise relations with China. A Chinese Table-Tennis
team came to India in February 1975, at the invitation of the
Indian Table Tennis Federation to take pan in the world Table
Tennis Championships. Similarly, the Indian Government agreed
to the Chinese request to instal a general telex link at its Embassy
in New Delhi on a reciprocal basis. India also supported China's
candidature in international organisations like the Asian Development Bank.
On 20 October, about 40 Chinese soldiers crossed the Indian
border in the eastern sector and ambushed and killed 4 of
India's soldiers, in Indian territory. The Government of India
lodged a strong protest with the Chinese Embassy in New Delhi,
against this incident.
<pg28>
Prime Minister Indira Gandhi, in her message addressed to
the Vice Premier of China, expressed deep condolences on ber
behalf and on behalf of the Government of India on the death
of Mr. Chou En-lai in January 1976.
Japan
Contacts and exchanges at various levels marked the growing relations between India and Japan.
On 28 March 1975, notes were exchanged in Tokyo between Governments of India and Japan providing for a Japanese
loan of Yen 11 billion (about Rs. 29.8 crores) for the proposed
Panipat Fertilizers Project in Haryana. On 12 September 1975,
notes were exchanged in Tokyo between Governments of India
and Japan for the 15th Yen credit amounting to Yen 30.16 billion (about Rs. 74 crores).

Shri Vishvnath Pratap Singh, Deputy Minister of Commerce,
lad a commercial delegation to Tokyo in June 1975.
A 3-member delegation, led by Shri Y. J. Mohite, Minister
for Cooperation in the Government of Maharashtra, visited Japan
in June 1975, to explore the possibility of exporting long staple
cotton from India.
Shri A. P. Sharma, Minister of State in the Ministry of
Industry and Civil Supplies, headed a 7-member delegation of
the Central Silk Board of India to Japan, in October 1975, for
exploring the possibility of collaboration with Japan in the development of sericulture industry in India.
Shri A. K. M. Ishaque, Deputy Minister for Health and
Family Planning, led a delegation to Japan, from 18 to 22 November 1975, to study the family planning programme and its
related problems.
<pg29>
The 8th meeting of India-Japan Business Corporation Committee was held in Nagoya (Japan) on 2 and 3 October, 1975.
The Indian side was led by Shri Harish Mahendra, President of
FICCI and the Japanese side was led by Mr. S. Nagano, President of the Japan Chamber of Commerce and Industry.
The 7th Joint Meeting of India and Japan Committee for
Studies in Economic Development in India and Japan was held
in Tokyo on 6 and 7 October 1975. The 7-member Indian delegation was led by Shri B. R. Bhagat, MP, and the Japanese side
was led by Mr. Saburo Okita, President, Overseas Economic
Corporation Fund.
The 10th India-Japan Consultative Meeting was held in Tokyo
on 13 and 14 November 1975. The Indian delegation was
led by Shri V. C. Trivedi, Secretary in the Ministry of External
Affairs, Government of India, and the Japanese delegation was
led by H.E. Mr. K. Arita, Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs
of Japan. The meeting was held in a most frank and friendly
atmosphere and greatly contributed to a better understanding of
the policies and positions of the two Governments. During his
stay in Japan, the leader of the Indian delegation called on Mr.
K. Mivazawa. Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Government of
Japan.
A 25-member Dance Ensemble participated in the Asian
Folk Music and Dance Festival held in Tokyo in November 1975
to commemorate the 50th Anniversary of NHK (Japan Broadcasting Corporation).
On the occasion of the untimely death of Mr. E. Sato.
former Prime Minister of Japan and Nobel Laureate, the Prime

Minister sent a message of condolence to the Japanese Prime
Minister. The Ambassador of India attended the funeral on
16 June 1975.
<pg30>
Democratic People's Republic of Korea
Friendly relations between India and the DPRK continued
to grow apace. A number of important dignitaries visited India
from the DPRK and the Indian side, too, sent delegations to the
DPRK.
A trade mission from the Ministry of Commerce visited the
DPRK in February 1975 and signed the Indo-DPRK Trade
Protocol for 1975.
A 4-member delegation of the DPRK Foreign Ministry, led
by H.E. Mr. Jon Myong Su, Vice Minister of Foreign Affairs
of the DPRK, visited India from 4 to 7 March 1975. During
the course of the visit, the delegation called on the Minister
of External Affairs.
H.E. Mr. Hwang Jang Yop, Chairman of Standing Committee of the DPRK Supreme People's Assembly and President
of the Parliamentary Group of the DPRK, led a 5-Member Parliamentary delegation to India from 20 to 25 March 1975.
Dining the visit, the leader of the delegation called on the President, Vice-President, Prime Minister, the Hon. Speaker of the
Lok Sabha, Minister of Parliamentary Affairs and visited the two
Houses of Indian Parliament in session.
H.E. Mr. Ho Dam, the Vice-Premier and Foreign Minister
of the DPRK, led a 7-member delegation on a visit to India
from 30 July to 2 August 1975. H.E. Mr. Ho Dam called on the
President, the Prime Minister, the Minister of External Affairs
and the Commerce Minister of India. He carried a personal letter
from the President of the DPRK to the Prime Minister. The
talks were held in a cordial atmosphere between the visiting
dignitary and the Minister of Exernal Affairs.
A commercial exhibition of the DPRK was organised in New
Delhi in September 1975. This was inaugurated by Smt. Abida
Begum, wife of the President, and also visited by Shri V. P. Singh.
the Deputy Commerce Minister.
<pg31>
Republic of Korea
The existing friendly relations with the Republic of Korea
continued to grow apace and a number of visits by important
dignitaries were exchanged.
His Excellency, Mr. Dong Jo Kim, Foreign Minister of the

ROK, paid a goodwill visit from 20 to 23 April 1975, on an
invitation from the Government of India. H.E. Mr. Kim was
received by the President, the Prime Minister, the Hon'ble
Speaker of Lok Sabha, Minister of Defence and Minister of Commerce. He held useful discussions on a wide range of subjects of
mutual interest in a cordial and friendly atmosphere with the
Minister of External Affairs.
A commercial delegation of the Government of the Republic
of Korea, led by Mr. Kim Sun Kil, Assistant Minister in the
ROK Ministry of Commerce and Industry, visited New Delhi
from 23 to 27 November 1975. He held talks to review the
working of the Agreement on Trade Promotion and Economic
and Technical Cooperation, concluded on 12 August 1974, between the Government of ROK and the Government of India.
In the field of trade, an Indian Trade Exhibition was held
in Seoul from 25 April to 9 May 1975. The Exhibition was
opened by the Deputy Prime Minister of the ROK. This Exhibition attracted a large number of visitors and helped to project
India's trade growth and potential.
In the field of cultural exchanges, India sent a 25-member
group of Little Ballet Troupe, Gwalior, to participate in the Asia
Pacific Folk Festival held in Seoul in September 1975 to celebrate the 30th anniversary of the independence of the ROK.
Shri Balachander, an eminent exponent of classical Carnatic
music, attended the Fourth Symposium on Arts held in Seoul in
October 1975. This symposium was hosted by the National
Academy of Arts, Korea.
<pg32>
Mongolia
Relations between India and Mongolia continued to be
friendly and cordial.
A Mongolian Parliamentary delegation, led by Ts Gotov,
Secretary of the Presidium of the Great People's Khural, visited
India (27-2-1975 to 6-3-1975). Subsequently, the Mongolian
Foreign Minister, Mr. Lodongyn Rinchin, paid an official and
friendly visit to India (17-22 November 1975). The Foreign
Ministers of the two countries held talks on bilateral relations
and major international issues of mutual interest. A joint communique, issued on 24 November 1975, bore witness to the
utmost cordiality and complete mutual understanding in the exchange of views between the two countries and also Mongolian
People's Republic's high appreciation for the consistent peaceful
foreign policy of the Republic of India, for strengthening international peace, non-alignment, cooperation and stability in Asia and
the world.

In the field of trade, efforts were continued to identify items
which could be traded between the two countries under the Trade
and Payments Agreement.
Cultural exchanges between the two countries progressed
steadily under the Indo-Mongolia Cultural Agreement. The
annual programme for 1975-76 was signed on 17 May 1975,
providing for exchanges in the fields of culture, art, science,
medicine and education.
Cambodia
Although the Government of India had not extended de jure
recognition to the Royal Government of the National Union of
Cambodia (GRUNK) until 1 April 1975, it had all along maintained contacts with Prince Norodom Sihanouk and other representatives of GRUNK and had lent support to their representation in international forums vis-a-vis the claims of representatives of the Lon Nol regime, to which India had in fact never
<pg33>
extended de jure recognition. Mr. Sarin Chhak, Foreign Minister,
of the GRUNK, visited India from 28 March to 1 April 1975,
and on the day he left India conveyed her recognition of the
new Government.
Laos
The Government of India was satisfied with the progressive
stabilisation of the internal situation in Laos. India provided some
emergency assistance to Laos in the form of sewing machines,
medicines, bicycles and irrigation pumps. India agreed to enhance her non-repayable grant of Rs. 10 lakhs to Rs. 15 lakhs
as contribution to the Nam Nagum Hydro-electric Project
Phase II.
Republic of South Vietnam
India welcomed the end of the war in Vietnam and accorded
diplomatic recognition to the Provisional Revolutionary Government, on 30 April 1975, within hours of the surrender of the
Thieu regime. Even before the assumption of control by the
PRG, India had been maintaining friendly contacts with its representatives, and within the framework of the policy of developing
'more direct relations' and 'formal contacts', had agreed to the
opening of a PRG General Delegation Office in New Delhi but
events moved with such rapidity that before the office was set
up, the Thieu regime had surrendered. Simultaneously with the
recognition, the Indian Consulate General in Saigon was raised
to the status of an Embassy. The Indian Ambassador at Hanoi
was concurrently accredited to the Government of the Republic
of South Vietnam. The Provisional Revolutionary Government
set up an Embassy in Now Delhi in May and their Ambassador

arrived in November 1975.
Democratic Republic of Vietnam
India supported and welcomed the admission of the DRVN
as a full member of the non-aligned group during the Lima
<pg34>
meeting of the non-aligned Foreign Ministers (South Vietnam
had earlier become a number). India also supported the
admission of the DRVN and the RSVN into the United Nations.
On invitation, an Indian Parliamentary delegation, led by the
Hon'ble Speaker of the Lok Sabha, paid a visit to Hanoi from
23 June to 1 July 1975. India was also invited to participate
in the celebrations of the 30th Anniversary of the Declamation
of Independence of Vietnam on 2 September 1975. A delegation
headed by Shri G. Parthasarthy, Chairman, Policy Planning Committee, who was designated as a Special Representative of the
Prime Minister with the rank of Minister, visited the DRVN
from 1 to 3 September 1975 for thisi occasion and had discussions with the DRVN leaders, including Premier Pham Van
Dong.
<pg35>
CHINA
INDIA MALI USA JAPAN KOREA CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC MONGOLIA CAMBODIA
UNITED KINGDOM LAOS LATVIA VIETNAM PERU
Apr 29, 1975

West Asia and North Africa
CHAPTER IV
West Asia and North Africa
India's bilateral relations with the countries of this area
remained friendly and continued to improve during the year. The
Government of India continued its support to the Arab cause
in various international forums. The Government believes that a
solution to the West Asian problem must be based on the
withdrawal by Israel from all territories occupied by force and
that there could be no just and lasting peace until the legitimate,
national rights of the Palestinian people were restored. India
welcomed the Sinai agreement between Egypt and Israel to the

extent it helped to reduce tension in the Area and did not impair
unity of the Arab States.
President Fakhruddin Ali Ahmed paid official visits to Egypt
(2-7 December) and Sudan (7-11 December). The Minister
of External Affairs, Shri Y. B. Chavan, visited Egypt (27-30
May), Syria (30 May to 1 June), Iran (1-5 November) and
United Arab Emirates (5-7 November). The Prime Minister's
Special Envoy, Shri Mohammad Yunus, visited Algeria. Tunisia,
Libya, Arab Republic of Egypt, Saudi Arabia, Iraq, Bahrain, Iran,
Afghanistan and Kuwait in October/November, 1975. He was
warmly received and had discussions with leaders of these
countries on important matters of mutual interest. He also had
discussions with Ministers and other senior officials on the
organsation of Wakf affairs in many of these countries, Besides,
a number of other visits were also exchanged which not only
re-affirmed India's traditional friendship with the Arab world but
also exhibited a similarity of views on regional and international
issues, thus providing a framework for greater collaboration in
different fields.
<pg36>
There was a greater awareness in the region of the problems
facing a friendly country like India as a result of the increase in
crude oil and fertilizer prices as also of the potential for greater
economic, commercial and technical cooperation and exchanges.
Iran
The close and friendly relations existing between Iran and
India were further strengthened during the year.
Dr. Mohd. Ali Toussi, Deputy Minister in-charge of Science
and General Education, Iran, visited India from May 06, 1975 to 9 May 1975
and had discussions with Indian officials including those from
the All India Institute of Medical Sciences and the University
Grants Commission.
The Minister of Labour and Social Affairs of Iran led a manpower delegation to Indian in the month of May 1975 as a result
of which several hundred Indian doctors left for Iran during the
year under review.
In April, Shri P. N. Haksar, Deputy Chairman of the Planning
Commission, visited Iran for 5 days and had high level discussions with the Iranian officials. Shri Haksar also had an audience
with the Shahanshah.
At the invitation of Iranian Foreign Minister, Mr. Khalatbary,
Shri Y. B. Chavan, Minister of External Affairs, paid a 5-day
official visit to Iran from 1-5 November 1975. He was also
received by the Shahanshah. In addition, Shri Chavan also had
meetings with Prime Minister Hoveyda, Minister of the Interior,

Jamshed Amouzegar, Minister of Economy and Finance, Hushang
Ansary and Dr. Eghbal, Chairman of National Iranian Off Company. The talks covered bilateral, regional and international
problems of mutual interest. Shri Chavan also attended the
5th Meeting of the Indo-Iran Joint Commission for Trade,
Economic and Technical Collaboration. A significant outcome of
<pg37>
this visit was the finalisation of $ 630 million agreement for the
exploitation of Kudremukh Iron-Ore project, which is a landmark in the development of Indo-Iranian relations.
Other visits to Iran included the visits of India's Chiefs of
the Air and the Naval Staff.
Egypt
President Fakhruddin Ali Ahmed paid A state visit to Egypt
from 2 to 7 December 1975. The two Presidents had a wide
ranging exchange of views on bilateral and international issues of
common interest, with special reference to the situation in West
Asia.
The Minister of External Affairs, Shri Y. B. Chavan, paid
an official visit to Egypt from 27 to 30 May 1975. He was
received by President Sadat. Shri Chavan held wide ranging discussions with Mr. Ismail Fahmy, Deputy Prime Minister and
Foreign Minister of Egypt, on bilateral and international problems with special reference to the situation in West Asia. He also
called on the Speaker of the People's Assembly, the Prime Minister and Minister of Information. Shri Jagjivan Ram, Minister
of Agriculture and Irrigation and Shri K. D. Malaviya, Minister
of Petroleum and Chemicals also transited through Cairo during
1975.
Dr. Abdul Halim al-Mahmoud, the Grand Sheikh of Al-Azhar
University, Cairo, paid a three week visit to India and visited
places of educational, cultural and Islamic religious interest in
Lucknow, Delhi, Hyderabad, Bangalore, Madras, Bombay and
Srinagar. While in Delhi he was received by the President and
the Prime Minister. (Some other Muslim dignitaries from a number of countries including the Egyptian Minister of Wakfs, Dr.
Sheikh Mohd. Hussein Al-Zahabi who had attended a Conference
in Lucknow were later treated as guests of Government and shown
places of educational and cultural interest in Delhi, Aligarh,
Deoband and Agra).
<pg38>
Syria
At the invitation of Mr. Abdul Halim. Khaddam, Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign Affairs of Syria, Shri Y.
B. Chavan, Minister of External Affairs, paid an official visit to

Syria from 30 May to 1 June 1975. He was also received by
President Assad. The two Foreign Ministers held wide ranging
talks on bilateral and international issues with special emphasis
on significant developments in West Asia.
Mr. Khaddam accompanied by his wife paid a return visit
to India from 10 to 14 November 1975. He was received by
the President. Mr. Khaddam had detailed discussions with the
Minister of External Affairs particularly on the important developments in West Asia and on other matters of mutual interest.
A Cultural Agreement between the two Governments was signed
during the visit and the scope for greater economic and technical
cooperation between the two countries was also discussed.
Iraq
The Congress President, Shri D. K. Barooah, accompanied
by Smt. Purabi Mukherjee, General Secretary of AICC, repreinvitation of the Assistant Secretary General of the Arab Baath
Socialist Party from 29 March to 5 April 1975. At the conclusion of the visit, a protocol was signed envisaging closer contacts betwen the two Parties. A 3-Member delegation headed
by Smt. Purabi Mukherjee, General Secretary of AICC represented India at a big rally in Baghdad organised by the Iraqi
All-Party Front on 25 August, 1975 "to express Iraq's solidarity
with friendly India, her people and her patriotic struggle". Admiral S. N. Kohli, Chief of the Naval Staff visited Iraq in October, 1975. The Iraqi Chief of the Air Staff. Major General Niema
Al-Dulaimi visited Indian in the second half of October 1975. A
number of other official visits were also exchanged during the
year.
<pg39>
Saudi Arabia
President Fakhruddin Ali Ahmed accompanied by Shri Mohd.
Shafi Qureshi, Minister of State for Railways, visited Saudi Arabia
on 26 March 1975 and attended the funeral ceremonies of late.
King Faisal. The President was received by King Khaled and
Crown Prince Fahd the same day and exchanged view on
subjects of mutual interest.
The Saudi Minister of Communications, Mr. Mohammed
Umer Tewfiq, visited India in April 1975 at the invitation of
Shri I. K. Gujaral, Minister of Information and Broadcasting.
During his 4-day stay, Mr. Tewfiq called on the President and
had meetings with the Minister of Communications, Dr. Shanker
Dayal Sharma, as well as with his host, Shri I. K. Gujral and
discussed matters of mutual interest.
Shri K. D. Malaviya, Minister for Petroleum and Chemicals,
visited Saudi Arabia from 18 to 21 July 1975, returning the visit
paid by the Saudi Minister for Petroleum and Mineral Resources,

Shaikh Ahmed Zaki Yamani in February 1975. Shri Malaviya.
was received in an audience both by King Khaled and Crown
Prince Fahd.
U.A.E.
At the invitation of the UAE Foreign Minister, Shri Y. B.
Chavan, Minister of External Affairs, paid an official visit to
the United Arab Emirates from 5 to 7 November 1975. Shri
Chavan was received by his Highness Sheikh Zayed bin Sultan
al-Nahayan, President of the UAE and also by His Highness
Shaikh Rashid bin Saeed al-Maktoum, Vice-President of the UAE.
The visit strengthened the growing ties between the two countries.
The two Ministers had wide ranging discussions covering the international situation, regional developments and bilateral relations
particularly in the economic field.
<pg40>
During the visit, the Minister of External Affairs also led
the Indian side to the First meeting of Indo-United Arab Emirates Joint Commission on Economic, Scientific and Technical
Cooperation. Both sides expressed satisfaction at the progress
made in the fields of trade, industry, petroleum and related
matters and agreed to take further steps to increase economic cooperation between the two countries.
Algeria
The Foreign Secretary, Shri Kewal Singh, visited Algeria in
July, 1975. He was received by the Algerian Head of State,
President Boumediene.
Mauritania
Shri A. C. George, Minister of State in the Ministry of Industry and Civil Supplies, visited Mauritania from 7 to 9 November, 1975. He was received by President Moktar Ould Daddah.
Tunisia
Mr. Mohd. Sayah, the Tunisian Minister without Portfolio,
and Mr. Abdel Karim Balkheria, Director, Neo, Destour Party
and Editor of 'la Presse' visited India in April, 1975 in connection with the celebrations organised by the Bohra Community
in Bombay. During his visit to Delhi, he called on the President
of India and the Minister of External Affairs.
Sudan
Indo-Sudanese relations were strengthened when the President
of India paid a state visit to Sudan from 7 to 11 December, 1975.
A 5-member Indian defence delegation visited Sudan in May,

1975. The delegation was received by President Nimeri. A high
level Sudanese defence delegation paid a return visit to India in
September, 1975.
<pg41>
India's Deputy Minister for External Affairs, Shri Bipinpal
Das, was in Sudan from 13 to 14 June 1975. India also donated
relief supplies in the, shape of medicines, tea and textiles to the
flood affected people of Southern Sudan.
An Indian trade and commerce delegation led by Shri P. A.
Nazareth, Director, Foreign Trade, visited Sudan in October 1975
and signed a trade and commerce agreement for 1975-76
Morocco
Mr. Ahmed Laraki, the Moroccan Minister of State for
Foreign Affairs, visited India in March 1975. During his call
on the Chairman, Policy Planning, Shri G. Parthasarathy, be
explained his Government's position on the question of Spanish
Sahara.
Libya
Indo-Libyan relations in the commercial, economic and technical fields continued to expand. A number of delegations both
official and unofficial were exchanged. In the year under reference, Libya recruited a large number of Indian doctors and nurses.
As A follow-up to the visit of the Libyan Minister of Petroleum,
Mr. Ezzeddine al-Mabrouk in May 1975, a petro-chemical agreement was signed.
The Indian Minister of Petroleum and Chemicals, Shri K. D.
Malaviya, visited Libya in November 1975. In the, field of oil
exploration new ground was broken in that Engineers India Ltd.,
a public sector consultancy firm, and the Libyan National Oil
Corporation decided to set up a Joint consultancy firm.
<pg42
INDIA
USA ISRAEL EGYPT SUDAN IRAN SYRIA UNITED ARAB EMIRATES ALGERIA TUNISIA
BAHRAIN IRAQ LIBYA SAUDI ARABIA AFGHANISTAN KUWAIT UNITED KINGDOM LATVIA
MAURITANIA MOROCCO
May 06, 1975

Africa (South of the Sahara)
CHAPTER V
AFRICA
(South of the Sahara)
India's relations with independent African countries were
further enriched during the year in political, economic and cultural fields. India's commitment to the emancipation of the
people of Africa from colonialism, racialism and apartheid was
demonstrated in various international forums and she made a
positive response to requests for economic cooperation and support by friendly countries and African Liberation Movements.
The Government of India maintained its full boycott of the
racist regimes of South Africa and Southern Rhodesia and denounced South Africa's vicious policy of apartheid and her illegal
occupation of Namibia. The United Nations Commission for
Namibia, led by its President, Ambassador Rupiah B. Banda of
Zambia, visited India from Apr 29, 1975 to 3 May 1975, to express
appreciation of the United Nations for the help India had been
giving for the cause of freedom of Namibia. Following discussions
with the Commission, the Government of India substantially increased the extent of educational and training facilities for persons from Namibia. In response to the call of the U.N. General
Assembly India observed the 26th of August as Nambia Dav
and the Vice-President of India, Shri B. D. Jatti, released a spe
cial postage stamp to commemorate the occasion. In response to
a call from the U.N. a Solidarity Day for political prisoners in
South Africa was celebrated on 16 October all over the country.
<pg43>
20M of EA/75-4
Mr. John Malecela, the Tanzanian Foreign Minister, visited
India in March 1975, as the head of an OAU Liberation Committee delegation, to thank India for the consistent and principled
support given to various African Liberation Movements.
The Government of India watched with keen interest the negotiations which took place in August 1975 between the African
National Council and Ian Smith, the head of the illegal Rhodesian
regime. It was in full sympathy with the objective of establishing
a government based on majority rule in Zimbabwe.
In the wake of the dissolution of the Portuguese empire in
Africa the Government of India welcomed the independence of
Mozambique, Sao Tome and Principe, Cape Verde and Angola.
With Mozambique diplomatic relations were established immediately and India's Ambassador was one of the first to be accredited to the country. On the invitation of the Mozambique Gov-

ernment, India also sent a delegation composed of Shri Raj
Bahadur, Minister of Civil Aviation and Tourism and Shri K. R.
Narayanan, Additional Secretary, Ministry of External Affairs, to
participate in the Independence Day celebrations. India looks
forward to exploring the possibilities of economic and technical
cooperation with Mozambique and other ex-Portuguese colonies.
In a statement issued on 13 November, the Government of
India welcomed the attainment of independence by Angola and
paid tribute to the heroic efforts and sacrifices made by the
Angolan liberation movements in the struggle for national liberation. It also expressed its desire for close and friendly coope
ration with the independent state of Angola in the common
task of rapid economic development and building of a peaceful
world. While the OAU and the Angolan leaders and movements
were addressing themselves to the task of consolidating the independence and territorial integrity of Angola, the world learnt
of the intervention of South Africa through her armed forces
and the occupation of southern part of the country. The Government of India, in a statement issued on 19 December, expressed
<pg44>
its shock at the aggression committed by the racist regime of
South Africa against newly independent Angola. It reaffirmed its
pledge to support the heroic people of Angola in their struggle
for defending their newly won independence and territorial integrity. It hoped that the efforts of the Organisation of African Unity
would bear fruit in bringing about an end to bloodshed in the
country and preventing racist and outside intervention in its
affairs. The Government of India extended recognition to the
MPLA Government of Angola in February 1976 as the MPLA
alone seemed committed to preserve Angola's independence and
integrity. The Prime Minister in her message to President Dr.
Agostinho Neto of Angola pledged India's full support and cooperation to Angola in her task of national reconstruction.
After the scheduled constitutional talks between Britain and
the leaders of Seychelles, the territory is to become a sovereign
independent state in June 1976. Its Chief Minister, H.E. Mr. James
Mancham, visited India, at the invitation of the Government of
India, and held extensive talks with the Prime Minister, Shrimati
Indira Gandhi and the Minister of External Affairs, Shri Y. B.
Chavan. The Government of India expressed its support for
Seychelles and pledged its cooperation in any field considered
beneficial for the development of Seychelles. Mr. Mancham agreed
with the Indian leaders that the Indian Ocean must be preserved
as a zone of peace.
The problem of compensation to Indian nationals, who were
obliged to leave Uganda in 1972, was taken up in inter-governmental discussions during the year. In response to an invitation
from President Amin of Uganda, an official delegation led by Shri
J.S. Mehta, Additional Secretary, Ministry of External of Affairs,

proceeded to Uganda and held discussions with the Ugandan
officials from 25 October to 19 November 1975. All claims from
Indian nationals which had been filed with the Indian High Commission were scrutinised jointly with an official Ugandan delegation in the spirit of the Ugandan laws and decrees. As a result,
<pg45>
an understanding on the principles and quantum of compensation
was reached between the two delegations. Certain items in the
claims were left over for consideration through diplomatic and
other channels. The understanding reached can be looked upon
as an. example of how two developing countries belonging to the
non-aligned fraternity can resolve their bilateral problems through
friendly discussions.
In keeping with India's desire to develop closer understanding
with African countries, India's Deputy Minister of External Affairs,
Shri Bipinpal Das, undertook a goodwill visit to Mauritius, Kenya,
Tanzania, and Zambia in June 1975. During the tour, apart from
Government leaders, he also met leaders of African Liberation
Movements and assured them of India's continued support. The
Deputy Minister undertook a further tour of West Africa in
October during which he visited Zaire, Nigeria, Ghana, Ivory
Coast, Guinea and Senegal. The leaders of all the countries he
visited, agreed that the Indian Ocean should be maintained as a
zone of peace and that military bases conceived in the context
of the big power rivalries should be removed from the Indian
Ocean. The leaders of the countries concerned expressed their
appreciation for the training facilities provided by the Government
of India for personnel of their countries and the work done by
the Indian experts in these countries.
Shri A. C. George, Minister of State in the Ministry of Industry and Civil Supplies, visited Niger, Mali and Mauritania ; Shri
K. C. Pant, Minister of Energy, visited Dahomey, Togo, Sierra
Leone and Gambia and Shri I. K. Gujaral, Minister of State in
the Ministry of Planning, visited Cameroun, Chad, Central African
Republic, Congo (Brazzaville) and Gabon respectively in October
1975. They carried messages from the Prime Minister to the
leaders of these countries. These visits were highly appreciated.
At the invitation of the Mauritian Government, Shri Karan Singh,
Minister of Health, paid a four-day visit to Mauritius.
<pg46>
The Government of India responded with utmost alacrity to
a request received from the Government of Mauritius for help in
the repair of damage caused by an unprecedentedly severe cyclone
which hit the island. A defence contingent was promptly sent to
Mauritius and deployed in the island from February 1975 to
June 1975. They were able to successfully undertake the repairs
of the public utilities and the Government of Mauritius expressed
its great appreciation for the help offered by the Government of
India.

Relations with Tanzania continued to grow in strength. At
the invitation of the First Vice-President of Tanzania, His Excellency Mr. Aboud Jumbe, the Vice-President of India, Shri B. D.
Jatti, paid a state visit to Tanzania in May 1975. He had warm
and friendly conversations with leaders of Tanzania including the
President, His Excellency Julius Nyerere. Shri B. D. Jatti was
warmly received wherever he went. The TANU party rally acclaimed him and the Indian National Congress, under the leadership of Prime Minister Indira Gandhi, and paid tribute to
the memories of Mahatma Gandhi and Shri Jawaharlal Nehru. The
visit proved highly beneficial and reaffirmed the faith of India and
Tanzania in the role of non-aligned countries for building a peaceful world and an equitable world order.
The first meeting of Indo-Tanzanian Joint Commission at
ministerial level took place in January 1976. The entire gamut
of multi-stranded cooperation was reviewed and further important
projects of closer economic cooperation between the two countries
surveyed at the meeting.
India welcomed the second visit of President Julius Nyerere
in January 1976, when he came to receive the Nehru Award for
International Understanding conferred on. him for the year 1973.
President Nyerere's oration, after receiving the Nehru Award, was
acclaimed for its thoughtful and incisive analysis of the need for
equality and unity in an inter-dependent world. The visit also provided an opportunity for a wide-ranging exchange of views on
<pg47>
problems concerning Africa and the non-aligned group of nations.
During this visit, he was also able to visit Bangalore and Bombay
and see something of the industrial and economic development in
India.
With Zambia, relations were further strengthened. The Secretary-General of UNIP of Zambia, H.E. Mr. Grey Zulu, accompanied by Mrs. Zulu and Mr. Z. Kalulu, Mr. F. Liboma, Members
of the Central Committee of the UNIP and Mr. J. C. Mapoma,
Minister of Lands, Natural Resources and Tourism, and Mr. G. B.
Silwizya, Minister of State for Foreign Affairs, paid an official visit
to India in September 1975. Mr. Grey Zulu paid tribute to the
role of India in Africa and the world. In his discussions with
Indian leaders the close understanding between India and Zambia
was reaffirmed.
<pg48>
INDIA
USA SOUTH AFRICA NAMIBIA ZAMBIA MALDIVES TANZANIA ZIMBABWE ANGOLA CAPE
VERDE MOZAMBIQUE SAO TOME E PRINCIPE SEYCHELLES UGANDA KENYA MAURITIUS
GHANA NIGER NIGERIA ZAIRE GUINEA SENEGAL MALI MAURITANIA CHAD CONGO GABON

CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC
Apr 29, 1975

Europe
CHAPTER VI
EUROPE
Western Europe
The most significant political event of the year in Western
Europe was undoubtedly the third and final stage of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE), which
concluded, with the signature of the Final Act by 35 Heads of
State and Government in Helsinki, on Aug 01, 1975. While the
final document was not an international peace treaty, and not
legally binding, it represented a political and moral commitment
of considerable significance. An important commitment was that
of inviolability of frontiers, but the possibility of a change of
frontiers by peaceful means and by mutual agreement was specifically included. The Final Act adopted contained four main sections known as "baskets". These were (1) Questions relating to
Security in Europe, (2) Cooperation in the field of economics, of
science and technology and of the environment, (3) Cooperation in humanitarian and other fields and (4) Follow up to the
Conference. The last section provided for the holding of a meeting, at the level of representatives appointed by the Ministers
of Foreign Affairs, to be held in Belgrade in 1977, to exchange
views on the implementation of the provisions of the Final Act.
India welcomed the Final Act of the CSCE as a landmark
in the progress towards relaxation of tensions and consolidation
of peace in Europe and expressed the hope that the spirit of
detente shown at Helsinki would be extended to other areas of
the world where tensions still prevailed.
India's relations with the countries of Western Europe in
general continued to be cordial and to be characterised by close
<pg49>
cooperation in the economic, scientific, technological and cultural
fields.
The United Kingdom
The annual Indo-British bilateral talks were held in New

Delhi on 6 and 7 March 1975. The British delegation was led by
Mr. K. M. Wilford, Deputy Under Secretary in the British
Foreign Office, and the Indian delegation by Shri V. C. Trivedi,
Secretary, Ministry of External Affairs. Besides a general review
of international developments, bilateral issues such as trade, aid
and economic cooperation as well as scientific and technological
collaboration were discussed.
The British Government announced during the year that
all British aid to countries such as India, with a per capita income
of less than US $ 200 a year, would henceforth be in the form
of outright grants instead of loans. For 1975-76, the British Government pledged aid of about (pound) 100 million taking Britain to
the top of the list of bilateral aid givers to India.
A number of members of the British Parliament came to India
at the invitation of the Government. These included Messrs Greville Janner and Sidney Bidwell. Mr. Peter Shore, Secretary of
State for Trade and Baroness Lee of Ashbridge (Miss Jennie
Lee.) visited India in January 1976.
Letters of exchange were signed by the British Secretary
of State for Trade, Mr. Peter Shore, and India's Commerce
Minister, Mr. D. P. Chattopadhyaya, on 6 January 1976 for
the constitution of an Indo-British Joint Committee on Economic
Cooperation and Trade. This would promote the development
of economic relations and industrial cooperation and technical
collaboration between the two countries,
Federal Republic of Germany
A 25-point development policy was drawn up by the F.R.G.
Government, in June 1975, with emphasis on continued and
<pg50>
greater aid for agriculture and employment oriented and population control projects. F.R.G. aid to India in 1975-76 amounted
to DM 365 million. Mr. Egon Bahr, Minister of Economic Cooperation, came to India in January 1976 as guest of the Government of India.
In July 1975, Mr. Hans Jurgen Wischnewski, Minister of State
in the F.R.G. Foreign Office, visited India, accompanied by a
delegation of senior officials, to exchange views on the reconvening of the Paris Conference on International Economic Cooperation. The Minister of External Affairs, on his way to attend the
Lima Conference of non-aligned Foreign Ministers, had a cordial
exchange of views with Mr. Hans Dietrich Genscher, Minister
Of Foreign Affairs of the F.R.G., during a stop-over in Frankfurt
on 22 August 1975. An all-party Parliamentary delegation from
the F.R.G. led by Dr. Richard Jaeger, Vice-President of the Bundestag, visited India from 14 to 22 November 1975, as guests of
the Speaker of the Lok Sabha. Dr. Alfons Goppel, the Chief

Minister of Bavaria, accompanied by Mrs. Goppel, came to
India from 15 to 23 November 1975, as guests of the Government of India. Dr. Todenhoefer, Member of Parliament, was
another distinguished visitor from the Federal Republic of Germany.
France
A 5-member delegation of the Finance Commission of the
French Senate visited Delhi from 17 to 19 March 1975, to
study economic, financial and political relations between France
and India. Mr. Segard, Minister of Foreign Trade, visited India
from 15 to 20 December 1975 to discuss Indo-French economic
and commercial relations and to prepare for the visit of the French
Prime Minister, Mr. Jacques Chirac.
The visit of the French Prime Minister in January 1976
helped to further strengthen relations between India and France.
The two countries agreed to raise to the Ministerial level the
<pg51>
Indo-French Committee on Technical and Economic Cooperation and to use this framework to expand cooperation in economic exchanges, industries and technology to their mutual benefit.
Portugal
Consequent on the re-establishment of diplomatic relations
between India and Portugal on 31 December 1974, Indo-Portuguese relations developed satisfactorily during 1975. On 19 May
1975 an exchange of letters between the Minister of External
Affairs and the Foreign Minister of Portugal made the relevant
portions of the Portugal-Vatican Concordat of 1886, as well as
the other relevant agreements between Portugal and the Vatican,
inapplicable to India. Thus, the last vestiges of Portuguese patronage in appointments to high ecclesiastical posts in the Catholic
Church in India were removed. Both the countries opened missions in the other's Capital and India's ambassador in Lisbon is
already in place.
Cyprus
The year did not see any significant progress towards the
solution of the Cyprus problem despite four rounds of inter-communal talks. In the meantime, the Constitution of the so-called
"Turkish Federated State of Cyprus", the formation of which had
been announced by Mr. Denktash in February 1975, was reportedly approved by a referendum in the Turkish Cypriot area
in June 1975. This had a negative effect on the talks. Despite
resolutions at the United Nations the prospects of settlement do
not look bright. India would like the sovereignty. territorial integrity, independence and non-aligned status of Cyprus respected
and preserved and firmly believes that the U. N. resolutions, which

have been unanimously adopted, provide the best means of
reaching a settlement. India very much hopes that the intercommunal talks will be resumed and a settlement will emerge in
the interests of the peoples of Cyprus and of peace and stability
in the region.
<pg52>
Scandinavian Countries
In 1975-76 Sweden became the first country in the world to
achieve the target of 1 per cent of her GNP as foreign aid
commitment, this being the U.N, target for the Development
Decade. This involved a 25 per cent increase in Swedish aid
commitments which reached the total of Swedish Kroner 2.86
billion for 1975. In May 1975, a fresh Indo-Swedish Aid Agreement was signed providing for about Rs. 114 crores of Swedish
aid to India for the period 1975-78. Swedish aid is generally
announced over a three year period, which is advantageous in
that India is thus enabled to plan for the optimum utilisation of
the resources made available. In 1977-78, the entire assistance
is to become a grant.
The Foreign Policy Committee of the Swedish Parliament
visited India from 9 to 14 September 1975. It was led by Mrs.
Cecilia Nettlebrandt of Liberal Party and included representatives of the Liberal, Centre, Conservative and Social Democratic Parties, This visit enabled an influential Swedish Parliamentary
body to gain first hand acquaintance with the recent developments
in India as well as the economic and technical progress made in
the country.
In February 1975, the Finnish Minister for Foreign Trade,
Mr. Jermu Laine, visited India for a meeting of the Indo-Finnish
Joint Commission. Various projects for cooperation were drawn
up during his visit, mainly in the wood, copper and shipbuilding
industries.
The former Speaker of the Lok Sabha, Dr. G. S. Dhillon,
visited Norway, Sweden, Finland and Denmark at the invitation
of the Parliaments of the respective countries. His visit provided
an opportunity to acquaint the Parliamentarians of these countries with the recent developments in India. The Speaker and a
high level delegation from India led by Shri Om Mehta attended
the Conference of the Inter-Parliamentary Union in London in
September 1975.
<pg53>
THE SOVIET UNION AND EASTERN EUROPE
The Soviet Union
The relations of friendship, understanding and mutually beneficial cooperation between India and the Soviet Union were fur-

ther developed, diversified and strengthened during the year.
The Soviet Union continued to regard the steady development
of friendship and all-sided cooperation as meeting the fundamental interests of the peoples of both the countries and as facilitating further deepening of the process of international detente and
strengthening of peace in Asia and the world.
In their various pronouncements, Soviet leaders reaffirmed
the significant role of India in the non-aligned movement and
their recognition of the importance of non-aligned movement in
contributing to world peace and cooperation.
The Soviet Union and other socialist countries of Eastern
Europe expressed full understanding of India's consistent efforts
at achieving durable peace and good neighbourly relations on the
Indian sub-continent as well as India's contribution to the strengthening of world peace and to the struggle for the removal of
the remaining vestiges of colonialism and racialism.
India welcomed the significant contribution made by the
Soviet Union and other Socialist countries in bringing about the
successful conclusion at the Summit level of the Conference on
European Security and Cooperation at Helsinki and expressed the
hope that the spirit of detente, to be lasting and effective, would
extend to all parts of the world.
The regular annual Bilateral Consultations between the
Foreign Offices of the two countries in November 1975 in Moscow, provided a welcome opportunity for fruitful and extensive
high-level discussions and. exchange of views on bilateral matters
as well as current international problems of mutual interest. A
Soviet Parliamentary delegation led by Mr. S. B. Nivazbekov,
Deputy Chairman of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the
<pg54>
USSR, visited India from 10 to 17 April 1975, at the invitation of the Speaker of the Lok Sabha- Exchange of delegations
at various levels in specific areas of cooperation continued its
before.
The Soviet Union's agreement to accept the repayment of
the 2-million tonne wheat loan of 1973 through the export of the
commodities within the framework of Indo-Soviet rupee payment
trade, was an important development indicative of the Soviet
Union's interest in helping India strengthening her economy. As
in the previous year, the Soviet Union continued to supply substantial quantities of kerosene, diesel oil, fertilisers and other vitally-needed commodities to India under the trade plan. In connection with the negotiations for the conclusion of a long-term trade
agreement for the next five-year period from 1976-80, the
Commerce Minister, Shri D. P. Chattopadhyaya, visited Moscow
in November 1975. The new long-term trade agreement is expected to provide for further increase and diversification of bilateral

trade exchanges. The Soviet Union has already emerged as India's
largest trading partner.
The second meeting of the Indo-Soviet Study Group on cooperation in the field of planning, which was set up in November, 1973, was held in New Delhi in March 1975. The discussions
covered, among other subjects, the possibilities of production cooperation, between the two countries.
India's first artificial satellite, Aryabhata, wholly designed
and manufactured in India, was launched from the Soviet Union
on 19 April 1975, with the help of Soviet rocket-carrier, under
an agreement signed in May 1972 between the USSR Academy
of Sciences and the Indian Space Research Organisation. Another
agreement on the launching of the second Indian scientific satellite, with the help of a Soviet rocket-carrier, in 1977-78 was
signed on 22 April 1975. In November 1975, an agreement between the USSR Academy of Sciences and the ISRO on a cooperative programme of space research, through observations of
artificial satellites and space probes, was worked out.
<pg55>
There were new strides in Indo-Soviet cooperation in science
and technology during the year. An agreement on collaboration
in scientific research and scientific exchanges, including exchange
of delegations between USSR Academy of Sciences and the
Indian Science Academy, to strengthen cooperation between the
two countries in the field of Basic Sciences, was signed on 18
February 1975. On 19 September 1975, a protocol was signed
proposing the establishment of a 12-channel troposcatter telecommunication link between Dushanbe in the Soviet Union and
Srinagar in India, which would provide a vastly improved and
reliable communication service between the two countries.
The Soviet Union, in November 1975, made a gift of 250
Karakul sheep to India. This was the first time that the Soviet
Union, which has the largest number of this breed of sheep in
the world, gave another country these rare species of sheep. In
January 1976, the two countries signed a two-year protocol, for
the period 1976-77, on scientific and technical cooperation in
agriculture and animal sciences. The protocol envisaged cooperation between the scientific institutions of the two countries, exchange of visits by scientists and specialists, holding of joint symposia and exchange of seed samples and plant materials.
The Soviet Union rendered very valuable and prompt help In
the Chasnala coal mine disaster in December 1975. Soviet pumps
and experts were immediately flown out to India to help the
Indian side in the dewatering operations.
Bulgaria
Indo-Bulgarian relations continued to develop in all spheres

in a spirit of friendship and understanding.
There were a number of high-level visits exchanged between
India and Bulgaria. Mr. Nacho Papazov, Chairman of the Committee for Science, Technical Progress and Higher Education of
the Government of Bulgaria, visited India from 17 to 27 January 1975. Mr. Milko Tarabanov, First Deputy Chairman of the
<pg56>
National Assembly of Bulgaria, visited India from 7-16 April
1975. The Bulgarian Deputy Foreign Minister, Mr. Liuben Petrov, visited India from 7 to 10 January 1976 for official-level
consultations between the Foreign Offices of the two countries.
These talks provided a welcome opportunity to take stock of the
growing all-round bilateral cooperation and its future prospects.
Views were also exchanged on major international problems of
interest to both the countries.
From India, Shri C. Subramaniam, Finance Minister and coChairman of the Indo-Bulgarian Joint Commission, visited Bulgaria in June 1975, to lead the Indian delegation to the second
meeting of the Joint Commission. A protocol for economic and
technical cooperation in the fields of agriculture, food processing
industry, machine-building and heavy industry was signed. According to the protocol, Bulgaria would assist India in setting
up two agro-industrial complexes in Karnataka and Bihar. In
October 1975, Shri T. A. Pai, the Minister for Industry and Civil
Supplies, visited Bulgaria to attend the Round Table Conference
on the "Experience of Bulgaria in the field of industrialisation",
organised by UNIDO and the Bulgarian Government.
The Indo-Bulgarian Trade Plan for 1976, envisaging a twoway trade of Rs. 95.1 crores, was signed in New Delhi on 3 December 1975.
Czechoslovakia
Traditional ties of friendship and understanding, which characterise Indo-Czecboslovak relations, received a further stimulus
with the visit of the Czechoslovak Minister of Foreign Affairs,
Ing. Bohuslav Chnoupek, from 30 November to 4 December
1975. The talks between the Minister of External Affairs and
the visiting Czechoslovak Foreign Minister, that covered bilateral relations and international issues of current interests, were
useful and revealed an indentity of views between the two countries on various issues. The steady growth of bilateral cooperation, particularly in recent years, was reviewed, on the basis of
the guidelines set during the discussions.
<pg57>
There were, in addition, a number of other Ministerial visits
during the course of the year. The Minister of Commerce.
Prof. D. P. Chattopadhyaya, visited Prague from 15 to 24 Sep-

tember 1975, leading the Indian delegation to the 6th session of
the Indo-Czechoslovak Joint Committee on Economic, Trade
and Technical Cooperation. The protocol signed at the conclusion of the visit envisaged measures for promoting trade, economic and industrial cooperation, including cooperation in third
countries is well as cooperation in the field of electronics, science
and technology. The protocol also provided for the finalisation
of negotiations for concluding a bilateral shipping agreement during 1976. The Slovak Minister of Education, Prof. Stefan Chochol, visited India in October 1975, and a protocol on mutual
recognition of degrees and diplomas of the educational institutions of the two countries was signed on 17 October 1975. At
the invitation of the Defence Minister, the Czechoslovak Minister of Defence, Army Gen. Ing. Martin Dzur, visited India from
10 to 15 November 1975.
Czechoslovakia is an important trading partner of India
among the East European countries, next only to the Soviet Union
and Poland. A trade delegation led by Mr. J. Jakubee, Deputy
Foreign Trade Minister of Czechoslovakia, came to India in
late November 1975 and a trade protocol for 1976, envisaging
a trade turnover of Rs. 165 crores, was signed on 28 November 1975.
German Democratic Republic
Relations between India and the German Democratic Republic were further strengthened by the visit to India of the GDR
Foreign Minister, Mr. Oskar Fischer, from 11-15 December
1975. Mr. Fischer had talks with Shri Y. B. Chavan, the Minister
of External Affairs. and Shri T. A. Pai, the Minister of Industry
and Civil Supplies, who is also the co-chairman of the Indo-GDR
Joint Commission on Economic, Scientific and Technical Cooperation. During his visit, a Consular Convention was signed
between the two countries. The two Foreign Ministers agreed to
<pg58>
further strengthen and diversify bilateral cooperation. They also
discussed major international issues and the talks revealed a
close similarity of views on many important problems confronting the world. Earlier, in May 1975, the first official-level consultations between the Foreign Offices of the two countries were
held in Berlin.
The GDR Minister for National Defence, General Heinz
Hoffman, visited India from 4 to 10 January 1976 at the invitation of the Indian Defence Minister. This was the first visit of
the Defence Minister of the GDR to India. During his stay in
New Delhi, he had a useful round of talks with the Defence
Minister. A delegation of the Inter-Parliamentary Group of the
GDR, led by Mr. Herbert Fechner, Member of the GDR Parliament, had visited India in March 1975.

In June 1975, Shri T. A. Pai, Minister of Industry and Civil
Supplies and Co-Chairman of the Indo-GDR Joint Economic
Commission, visited Berlin to lead the Indian delegation to the
first meeting of the Joint Commission, which was established in
December 1974. An agreement on Scientific Exchange and Cooperation in Fundamental Research as well as a Supplementary
Protocol on Scientific and Technical Cooperation were signed.
The Indo-GDR Trade Plan for 1976, finalised in Berlin in
November 1975, envisaged a total two-way trade turnover of
Rs. 106 crores.
Hungary
Exchange of high-level visits which have been an important
feature of relations with Hungary continued during the year.
They provided opportunities for wide-ranging and extensive discussions covering general and specific aspects of bilateral relations as well as international questions of mutual interest. The
views of both the countries on all the important questions discussed were identical or similar. The two countries also continued to cooperate at the United Nations and other international
forums.
<pg59>
20 M of EA/75 - 5
The President of India, Shri Fakhruddin Ali Ahmed, paid an
official visit to Hungary from 26 to 30 September 1975, at the
invitation of Mr. Pal Losonczi, President of the Presidential
Council of Hungary. He was accorded a very warm reception and
his talks with Mr. Janos Kadar, First Secretary of the Hungarian
Socialist Workers' Party, President Pal Losonczi and Mr. Gyrgy
Lazar, Chairman of the Hungarian Council of Ministers, were
fruitful.
The Hungarian Foreign Minister, Mr. Frigyes Puja, visited
Indian from 5 to 7 February 1976 at the invitation of the Government of Indian. His visit provided and opportunity for a review
of bilateral relations in their various aspects as well as exchange
of views on current international issues.
From the Indian side, the Minister for Agriculture and Irrigation, Shri Jagjivan Ram, paid an official visit to Hungary from
9 to 14 September 1975. During the visit, two protocols envisaging cooperation in agriculture and food processing, and
water resources development and management were signed. The
Minister for Communications, Shri S.D. Sharma, visited Hungary
from 3 to 4 October 1975 and had talks on prospects of further
cooperation in the field of telecommunications.
Trade and economic relations between India and Hungary
continued to develop steadily. A trade plan was negotiated on 29
November 1975 for 1976 envisaging a two way trade turnover

of Rs. 61 crores. In the same month, a Hungarian industrial exhibition was also held in New Delhi. In preparation for the second
session of the Indo-Hungarian Joint Commission, which is now
expected to meet in April 1976, both sides continued to explore
prospects of cooperation in the field of telecommunications, agriculture, chemicals and pharmaceuticals and science and technology.
Poland
There was steady growth of all-round Indo-Polish cooperation during the year.
<pg60>
Trade and economic relations are an important feature of
Indo-Polish relations. Poland is, next to the Soviet Union, India's
largest trading partner among the European socialist countries.
Trade between the two countries has been expanding at a fast
pace and has doubled over the last three years. The 1976 Trade
Plan signed in New Delhi on 29 November 1975 envisaged a
trade turnover of Rs. 260 crores, which was a substantial increase over the previous year's level. The Commerce Minister.
Prof. D. P. Chattopadhyaya, visited Poland from 16 to 18 Nov.
ember 1975 and discussed the possibilities of further expansion
and diversification of trade and economic relations between the
two countries.
As in previous years, India participated in the Poznan International Consumer Goods Trade Fair held in September 1975.
The Polish Defence Minister, General Jaruzelski, paid a visit
to India in March 1975. From the Indian side, the Speaker of
the Lok Sabha, Dr. G. S. Dhillon, led a delegation to Poland
from 29 September to 4 October 1975 which further promoted
the contacts between the Indian and Polish Parliaments. Apart
from meetings with Polish parliamentarians, the Speaker had
useful meetings with Edward Gierek, First Secretary of the Party,
Mr. Henryk Jablonski, Chairman of the Council of State, and
other Ministers.
Poland extended very timely and valuable assistance in connection with the Chasnala coal mine disaster in December 1975.
She promptly airlifted pumps and experts to the site of the disaster.
Romania
Friendly relations between India and Romania continued to
develop, particularly in the economic field.
The Romanian Deputy Foreign Minister, Mr. Cornel Pacoste,
visited India from 7 to 11 June 1975 for holding official-level

<pg61>
consultations with the Ministry of External Affairs. The Romanian
Deputy Foreign Minister expressed appreciation for the measures
taken by India for the normalisation of relations with neighbouring countries. Both sides also showed a keen desire to further
expand their economic, technical and scientific cooperation. An
agreement for cooperation in the field of agriculture, irrigation
and water-management was signed during the visit.
In December 1975, the Minister-Secretary of State for Foreign
Trade and International Economic Cooperation, Mr. Nicolae M.
Nicolae, visited India from 8 to 15 December 1975 and concluded a new long-term Trade and Payments Agreement covering the period 1976-80 and a Trade Protocol for 1976 providing for a turn over of Rs. 124 crores. This represented a 10
per cent increase over the 1975 Trade Plan. The importance of
diversifying the trade pattern in order to ensure sustained growth
in the coming years was emphasised during the talks. An agreement was reached on a long-term programme for the purchase of
oil-field equipment from Romania between 1976 and 1980. Both
sides also agreed to identify areas in which joint ventures might
be launched in third countries.
Yugoslavia
India's traditionally friendly relations with Yugoslavia were
further strengthened with the exchange of high-level visits between
the two countries. The Vice-President of the Yugoslav State
Presidency, Mr. Vidoje Zarkovic, visited India in March 1975.
Bilateral consultations between the two sides were held in Belgrade in August 1975 when the Secretary, Shri V. C. Trivedi,
visited Belgrade.
The President, Shri Fakhruddin Ali Ahmed, paid an official
visit to Yugoslavia from 30 September to 4 October 1975 at the
invitation of President Tito. The President received a warm
and spontaneous welcome everywhere in Yugoslavia. The Presidents of India and Yugoslavia had talks on a wide variety or
subjects covering bilateral matters as well as international issues
<pg62>
of mutual interest in a warm and friendly atmosphere. The talks
revealed an identity of views of the two sides on all important
matters.
The Yugoslav Prime Miniser, Mr. Dzemal Bijedic, paid an
official visit to India from 14 to 16 October 1975. The visit provided a further opportunity for extensive discussions between
the Indian and Yugoslav leaders on bilateral and international
questions in an atmosphere of cordiality, mutual understanding
and friendship. The two sides noted with satisfaction the favourable growth of bilateral relations between the two countries and

expressed their readiness to further promote and strengthen
them.
India and Yugoslavia maintained regular contacts and closely
cooperated with each other at the non-aligned conferences in
Havana and Lima in 1975.
Indo-Yugoslav trade and economic relations continued to
develop. The 9th meeting of the Indo-Yugoslav Joint Committee
on Economic Cooperation was held in New Delhi in February
1975. The Indian and Yugoslav delegations were led respectively
by Shri D. P. Chattopadhyaya, Minister of Commerce, and
Dr. A. Vratusa, Deputy Prime Minister of Yugoslavia. The Commerce Minister visited Yugoslavia in September 1975 for talks
with Dr. Vratusa and the Foreign Trade Minister, with a view to
further intensifying bilateral economic cooperation and increasing trade between the two countries. India participated in the
Zagreb Autumn International Fair held in September 1975 as
well as the associated conference on the transfer of technology.
An agreement between India and Yugoslavia on cooperation
in the field of science and technology was also signed in February
1975. Under the Agreement, a protocol was signed in New Delhi
in November 1975 between the Yugoslav Federal Institute for
International Scientific, Educational, Cultural and Technical Cooperation and the Department of Technology, Government of
India which laid down a concrete working programme for 197677.
<pg63>
FINLAND
YUGOSLAVIA INDIA USA GERMANY FRANCE PERU PORTUGAL CYPRUS SWEDEN DENMARK
NORWAY UNITED KINGDOM RUSSIA CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC TAJIKISTAN BULGARIA
SLOVAKIA CZECH REPUBLIC POLAND HUNGARY OMAN ROMANIA MALI LATVIA CUBA
CROATIA
Aug 01, 1975

The Americas
CHAPTER VII
THE AMERICAS
The United States of America
The Indo-American dialogue and exchanges towards a mature

and constructive relationship and better understanding continued
in 1975. It was generally felt that, in spite of their different
perspectives, priorities and problems, there was no conflict of
national interests between the two countries and indeed there was,
much that they could do together to strengthen peace, stability
and cooperation. The process of building up an institutional
framework for bilateral exchanges in various fields also continued and some significant steps, were taken in that direction.
In October 1975, the Minister of External Affairs met the
President of the United States, the Secretary of State, secretaries
of the Treasury and Agriculture as well as Congressional leaders
and prominent public figures. Among other visitors to the
United States during the year was the Minister of Finance who
attended the annual meeting of the Board of Governors of theWorld Bank and the International Monetary Fund in Washington.
Several official delegations visited the United States for negotiations regarding export of fertilizers, textiles, jute goods, and other
items. A trade delegation of private businessmen also visited the
United States. Among the important American visitors to India
were the Secretary of the Treasury, Mr. William Simons, Senator
George McGovern, Representative Charles Diggs and several other
official and public figures. A delegation of American businessmen also toured India.
The highlight of the year was the visit of the Minister of External Affairs to Washington to attend the annual meeting of the
<pg64>
Indo-U.S. Joint Commission and to bold discussions with the
U.S. Secretary of State. During these discussions, as well as in
subsequent talks with President Ford and other American leaders,
the Minister reviewed the international situation and delineated
India's policy of promoting peace and stability in the sub-continent and her efforts to build up a cooperative relationship with
neighbours on the basis of sovereign equality and mutual respect.
India's policy of non-alignment, her support to the efforts to
creat a new international economic order and her role in bringing about a constructive approach to the international economic,
financial, energy, food and related problems was also spelt out.
The attention of the United States was also drawn to the dangers
of an arms race in the sub-continent and the need to make the
Indian Ocean a zone of peace. With regard to bilateral relations,
the Minister of External Affairs reaffirmed the desire of India to
have good relations with the United States on the basis of mutual
equality, respect and understanding. Both President Ford and
Secretary Kissinger expressed their interest in India's economic
development, strength and viability and reiterated their support
for the process of normalisation on the sub-continent. While recognising India's role for peace and in the non-aligned movement,
they reiterated their interest in working together to find solutions
to common problems facing mankind. As regards bilateral questions, the American leaders expressed willingness to continue to

work in specific areas of cooperation under the aegis of the Joint
Commission. It was also recognised that the Commission provided an important forum for mutually beneficial cooperation,
free from the stress of day-to-day fluctuations. Both sides felt
that they should continue to make conscious efforts to promote
better understanding and cooperation between the two countries.
President Ford affirmed his intention to pay a goodwill visit to
India at a mutually convenient date.
The visit of the Minister of external Affairs was also the
occasion of a productive meeting of the Indo-U.S. Joint Commission Both sides recognised the significance of this new institutional framework and agreed that the three sub-Commissions,
<pg65>
which had met earlier in the year, had done useful work in laying down guidelines for an action-oriented and time-bound programme for increased cooperation in the economic and cultural
scientific and technological fields. This was bound to yield tangible results in the coming months and years. It was also agreed
that the forum of the Joint Commission would be useful in creating an atmosphere where productive relations could be developed
between the two countries on the basis of equality and mutual
benefit. The Joint Commission inter alia endorsed plans for a
wide ranging programmes:-(i) To increase bilateral trade.
(ii) To stimulate trade through trade missions, exhibitions etc.
(iii) To set up a Joint Business Council which could bring
together business leaders of both sides including, as
appropriate, officials of the public sector in India.
(iv) To encourage joint ventures between Indian and U.S.
firms in third countries.
(v) To continue mutually beneficial consultations on
agricultural inputs, and
(vi) To conduct talks on a Treaty to avoid double taxation
between the U.S.A. and India.
In spite of the improvement in Indo-American relations
during the last three years, some problems still remain which
could affect this trend in the future. India conveyed to the
U.S. Government her strong feelings on the lifting of embargo on
arms supplies to Pakistan. It was the view of the Indian Government that deliveries of sophisticated American arms to Pakistan
could affect the process of normalisation under the Simla Agreement and encourage an arms race in the area. India's concern on
the naval base at Diego Garcia was also frequently conveyed to

the U.S. Government. The construction of this base at a time
<pg66>
when efforts were being made to strengthen detente could only
intensify great power military rivalries and come in the way
of relaxation of tension in the area. It was India's view that
in formulating her policies towards Asia the U.S. should keep
in mind her concern about peace and stability in the area.
Canada
Relations between India and Canada remained cordial and
friendly. While reaffirming a desire to further strengthen these
relations, both sides also continued the search for resolving
Indo-Canadian differences on nuclear matters. Canadian development assistance remained suspended, except for some projects
in the field of agriculture, food and fertilizers.
There were several high-level discussions between Indian
and Canadian leaders during the year. In May the Prime Ministers of India and Canada met during the Conference of Commonwealth Heads of Government in Kingston, Jamaica. In
September, the Minister of External Affairs held useful discussions
with his Canadian counterpart in New York. A Canadian Parliamentary delegation visited India in October to attend the 21st Commonwealth Parliamentary Conference in New Delhi. At the nonofficial level also there was a lively exchange of visitors and many
Canadian academicians, scholars and public figures visited India.
There were several Indo-Canadian discussions on nuclear
matters during the year. A Canadian technical team visited India
in April for talks with officials of the Department of Atomic
Energy in Bombay. At the diplomatic level, the Foreign Secretary discussed some of these problems with Mr. Ivan Head, Special Assistant to the Canadian Prime Minister and Mr. Michael
Deputy, Assistant Under Secretary of State in Kingston and later
in New York. In November an Indian delegation visited Ottawa
for the same purpose. These exchanges were useful in promoting
better understanding and appreciations of each other's position.
Both sides felt that efforts should be intensified to overcome the
remaining points of disagreement with a view to resolving this
<pg67>
problem and to restore Indo-Canadian relations to their former
level.
South and Central America
India's relations with the Latin American and the Caribbean
nations, which have always been good, were further strengthened
at the bilateral and multilateral levels. In their desire to break
away from their traditional preoccupations these nations have in
recent years been moving towards greater identification with the

third world, especially on economic issues, such as multilateral
assistance to developing countries, better terms of trade, sovereignty over natural resources and law of the sea etc. There has also
been an increasing participation in the non-aligned movement.
India therefore made systematic efforts to strengthen the points of
contact and collaboration with these countries both bilaterally
and in international organisations. In many ways, the year 1975
was a year of rediscovery and renewal of dialogue in Indo-Latin
American relations.
The Prime Minister visited the Caribbean in April 1975 to
attend the Conference of Commonwealth Heads of Government
in Kingston. During the visit she had useful discussions with
Prime Minister Manley of Jamaica Prime Minister Burnham of
Guyana and other Heads of Government present at the Conference.
After the Conference, the Minister of External Affairs visited
Mexico City to preside over a Conference of the Heads of Indian
Missions in Latin America and the Caribbean, especially convened
to consider ways and means of strengthening India's relations with
Latin America. Several proposals for strengthening political, commercial, economic and cultural ties with these countries emerged
at the Conference. Besides, specific suggestions for the region as
a whole as well as for individual countries, the Heads of Mission
recommended a total effort involving businessmen, media representatives, intelligensia, economists and political leaders on both
sides to build bridges of friendship and understanding. These recommendations are now at various stages of implementation. While
<pg68>
in Mexico City, the Minister of External Affairs also called on
the President of Mexico and held discussions with other leaders.
The Minister of External Affairs attended the Bureau and
Ministerial level meetings of the non-aligned nations held at
Havana and Lima in March and August respectively. These occasions were also used to hold discussions with the leaders of
Cuba and Peru on matters of bilateral interest and consider ways
and means of strengthening cooperation in the economic, cornmercial, cultural, technological and other fields. The Minister
also paid an official visit to Guyana in March which further
strengthened relations between the two countries. In brief halts at
Kingston and Port of Spain he met the Ministers of Finance of
Jamaica and the Minister of Foreign Affairs of Trinidad and
Tobago respectively. In Lima, he held wide ranging discussions
with the President of Peru as well as other ministers on various aspects of bilateral relations. During a short stopover in
Bogota he called on the President of Colombia to exchange views
on bilateral and international questions of mutual interest. These
discussions helped to create a better understanding in this area
about India's policies, programmes and national priorities. Other
visitors from India included Shri T. A. Pai, Minister of Industry
and Civil Supplies, and Deputy Minister of External Affairs,
Shri Bipinpal Das, who attended the Surinamese independence

celebrations at Paramaribo.
There were several important visitors from Latin America
and the Caribbean to India during the year. President Luis
Echeverria Alvarez, accompanied by Madam Echevarria, visited
India in July 1975 and was received with great warmth and cordiality. This visit was a landmark in Indo-Mexican relations, being
the first high-level visit between the countries in over a decade.
The President of Guyana, Mr. Arthur Chung, accompanied,
by his wife, paid a State visit to India for 10 days from Jul 15, 1975.
The President was accompanied by Mr. Desmond Hoyte,
the Guyanese Economic Development Minister, who held several
meetings with different Minister of the Government of India.
<pg69>
President Chung's visit served to further strengthen Indo-Guyanese
relations which had been growing closer in recent years.
Amongst other important visitors from this region to India
during the year were Gen. Miguel Angel de la Flor Valle, Foreign
Minister of Peru, Dr. Ricardo Castaneda Cornejo, Deputy Minister of Foreign Relations from El Salvador, Sen. Dudley Thompson, the Jamaican Minister of State for Foreign Relations, Tanerado de Almeida Nevas, former Prime Minister of Brazil.
<pg70>
USA
INDIA MALI PAKISTAN CANADA JAMAICA CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC GUYANA MEXICO
CUBA PERU SPAIN COLOMBIA SURINAME EL SALVADOR BRAZIL
Jul 15, 1975

United Nations And International Conferences
CHAPTER VIII
UNITED NATIONS AND INTERNATIONAL
CONFERENCES
The year 1975 witnessed a continuation of active efforts at
the United Nations and other international forums to deal with
the economic crisis confronting, in particular, the developing
countries due to world monetary instability and shortages and the
high price, of fuel, food, fertilisers, other raw materials and in-

dustrial commodities. The seventh special session of the U.N.
General Assembly, held in New York during the first fortnight of
September 1975, was the second special session to be held within
a year devoted exclusively to the problems of development and
international economic cooperation.
Two important meetings of the non-aligned countries were held
during the year-the meeting of the Coordinating Committee of
the non-aligned countries at the Foreign Ministers level in March
1975 at Havana and the meeting of Foreign Ministers of all nonaligned countries in August 1975, at Lima. The Lima Declaration
and the Programme of Action was a pace setter for the discussions
at the seventh special session and the decision taken therein.
These Conferences of the non-aligned countries highlighted the
need to strengthen non-aligned unity and solidarity and to safeguard the non-aligned movement against attempts to weaken,
divide or dilute it. There was growing realisation of the need to
promote cooperation among the non-aligned countries with a view
to promote collective self-reliance.
The 30th regular session of the U.N. General Assembly,
from September to December 1975, was lively and major international political and economic issues of concern to the developing
countries figured in its debates and resolutions. India played
an active role in the deliberations.
<pg71>
In pursuance to the call given by the Algiers Summit of nonaligned countries (1973) the U. N. General Assembly had endorsed
the proposal to hold a special session of the Assembly in 1975.
to be devoted exclusively to development and economic cooperation. The seventh special session was thus held in New York
from Sep 01, 1975 to 16 September. 1975. It benefitted from
the discussions held a year before at the sixth special session on Raw Materials and Development and carried
further the recommendations of the sixth session for the establishment of a new international economic order. In addition to
the ground already covered at the sixth special session, the
seventh special session was noteworthy for highlighting the importance of cooperation among developing countries and the
need for re-structuring of the U. N. system particularly in, the
economic and social sectors. The Session unanimously adopted
a comprehensive resolution on various aspects of international
economic cooperation. Some reservations were expressed on certain paragraphs by the US, EEC, Japan etc. The adoption of
this final document by consensus, notwithstanding reservations
by important developed countries, represented a welcome step
forward in the direction of greater cooperation at the international level for promoting the economic development of the developing countries of the world, including those most seriously
affected. It was hoped that the cooperative spirit which made this
consensus possible would endure and the early implementation of the measures agreed upon would facilitate the adoption

of more concrete agreements for action in relevant international
forums.
In 1970, the UN General. Assembly had adopted an International Development Strategy for the second United Nations
Development Decade laying down goals for international economic cooperation to facilitate the development process in
developing countries during the seventies. The 30th session of
the General Assembly carried out the mid-term review and appraisal of the performance of the International Development Strategy.
The General Assembly adopted a resolution which noted, inter
<pg72>
alia, that the developed countries had, by and large, implemented
the policy measures of the Strategy, and indeed there had been
some retrogression. The Resolution urged member states to implement, as early as possible, the policy measures unanimously
agreed upon at the seventh special session of the General Assembly, with special measures in favour of the most seriously affected,
least developed, landlocked and island developing countries.
The Second General Conference of UNIDO was held at Lima
during March 1975. The Conference adopted a Declaration and a
plan of action on industrialisation, which defined the means by
which the international community as a whole might take action
in the field of industrial development within the framework of
international economic cooperation for the establishment of the
new international economic order. The Lima Conference also recommended the conversion of UNIDO into a specialised agency in
the field of industrial development and cooperation.
At the 30th U.N. General Assembly session, Cape Verde,
Comoros, Mozambique, Papua New Guinea, Sao Tome and Principe and Surinam were admitted as new members. This raised the
U.N. Membership to 144. Earlier, attempts to admit the two
Vietnams were vetoed in the Security Council. The General
Assembly subsequently adopted a resolution, with an overwhelming
majority, requesting the Security Council to reconsider immediately and favourably the application of the two Vietnams for
membership. India co-sponsored this resolution. It may be mentioned that South Korea's application for membership could not
be considered since it was not included in the agenda of the Security Council.
The 30th U.N. General Assembly session considered a number of important issues. It adopted a resolution requesting the
Littoral and Hinterland States of the Indian Ocean to continue
their consultations and invited all states, in particular the great
powers, and the major maritime users of the Indian Ocean, to
cooperate in a practical manner with the Ad Hoc Committee on
the Indian Ocean in the discharge of its functions.
<pg73>

It will be recalled that the Resolution on the Indian Ocean
adopted in 1974 had called upon the Littoral and Hinterland
States to enter into consultations with a view to convening a
Conference on the Indian Ocean. In pursuance of this resolution,
the Chairman of the Ad Hoc Committee addressed letters to
Littoral and Hinterland States seeking their view on the following
six points: (1) purpose of a conference on the Indian Ocean, (2)
Date and duration, (3) Venue, (4) Provisional Agenda, (5)
Participation and (6) Level of Participation. The reply of India
on these points was as follows : (i) Purpose of conference.-The primary purpose of the
conference should be to provide the opportunity of
a constructive dialogue between the Littoral and Hillterland States on the one hand and the great powers
and other major maritime users of the Indian Ocean
on the other;
(ii) Date and duration.-There should be adequate time
for thorough preparations. Duration of one to two
weeks would be most appropriate;
(iii) Venue.--Colombo would be a most suitable venue;
(iv) Provisional agenda.--The agenda should include a
general assessment of the extent of great power military and naval presence, elaboration of measures for
achieving its reduction with a view to its eventual elimination as well as for the elimination of all foreign
military bases conceived in the context of great power
rivalry, and appropriate follow-tip action and machinery;
(v) Participation and its level.-Participation should be
not only of Littoral and Hinterland States but of the
great powers and other major maritime users of the
Indian Ocean. This should be at an appropriately
senior level.
A series of meetings of the Littoral and Hinterland States and
of the Ad Hoc Committee were held during the year to consider
<pg74>
the replies from the various governments. In these meetings,
India stressed the need to have the great powers and other major
maritime users of the Indian Ocean associated in the consultations even at the preparatory stages, since it was felt that without
their participation, no meaningful results would be achieved. India
believed that a process of constructive dialogue between the Littoral and Hinterland States on the one hand and the great powers
on the other, should be set in motion to discuss and determine
meaningful steps for the implementation of the "Declaration of
the Indian Ocean as a zone of peace."

The General Assembly adopted a Resolution in relation to
the "The Situation in the Middle-East", by an overwhelming majority of 84 votes in favour, 17 against and 27 abstentions. India
co-sponsored the resolution. The resolution condemned the continued occupation of Arab territories in violation of the Charter
of the U.N. and requested all states to desist from supplying
Israel with any military or economic aid as long as it continued to
occupy Arab territories and deny inalienable national rights to
the Palestinian people. It further requested the Security Council
to take all necessary measures for the speedy implementation of
all relevant resolutions aiming at the establishment of just and
lasting peace in the region through a comprehensive settlement
worked out with the participation of all parties concerned, including the PLO.
Two resolutions were adopted on the "Question of Palestine"
both of which India co-sponsored. The first resolution called on
the General Assembly to establish a Committee "to consider and
recommend a programme of implementation including a timetable designed to enable the Palestinian people to exercise their
rights and to take into account the powers conferred by the Charter
on the principal organ of. the UN". Twenty countries including
India were nominated to serve on the Special Committee on Palestine. The second resolution extended PLO participation on an
equal footing with other parties to all parleys and conferences
and not merely at the Geneva Conference. Both resolutions were
approved by the General Assembly with overwhelming majorities.
20 M of EA/75-6
<pg75>
Rightly fearing its exclusion, South Africa did not participate
in the 30th U.N. General Assembly Session. Seven resolutions condemning the racist policies of South Africa were adopted. India
co-sponsored six resolutions. India also introduced in the Special
Political Committee a resolution entitled "Apartheid in Sports"
which called upon all governments, sports bodies and other organizations to refrain from all contacts with sports bodies established
on the basis of apartheid or racially selected sports teams from
South Africa, and to exert all their influence to secure the full
implementation of the Olympic principle of non-discrimination.
The General Assembly approved a controversial resolution,
declaring that Zionism was a form of racism and racial discrimination, by 72 votes in favour, 35 against and 32 abstentions. India
voted in favour of the resolution. In his statement, India's Permanent Representative to the United Nations verified that in its
impact on the people in the Middle East suffering from the consequences of Zionist occupation and oppression, Zionism was certainly a form of racial discrimination.

India participated actively in the deliberations of the General
Assembly on items pertaining to colonialism and apartheid in
accordance with her well-known stand in such matters. India
continued to be a member of the U.N. Special Committee on
Decolonisation (Committee of 24), the Special Committee on
Apartheid and the Council for Namibia.
A Mission of the UN Council of Namibia visited India from
29 April to 3 May 1975. The Mission was led by the President
of the Council, His Excellency Ambassador R. B. Banda from
Zambia and included representatives from Colombia, India, Indonesia, Romania, Turkey and SWAPO. During their visit, the
Mission called on the Vice-President, Shri B. D. Jatti, and held
discussions with senior officials of the Ministry of External Affairs.
Both sides re-affirmed their conviction that policies of colonialism,
recialism and apartheid were flagrant violations of fundamental
<pg76>
human rights. The Government of India re-affirmed its full support
of positive and concrete measures taken by the U.N. to achieve
the withdrawal of the illegal administration in Namibia and the
transfer of power to the people. The Mission was also assured of
India's continuing and active support to the Council in
all its activities. In this context, the Government of India agreed
to provide training facilities to 150 personnel from Namibia and
to send experts, professors and lecturers to serve in the Institute proposed to be set up in Lusaka for the people of Namibia.
This would be in addition to continued economic and material
support being given by India to the people of Namibia through
SWAPO, the UN Fund for Namibia and the OAU Fund against
colonialism and apartheid. A special postage stamp was also
issued on 26 August 1975 to mark the Namibia Day celebrations
in India.
The dispute over the "Spanish Sahara" also engaged the
attention of the General Assembly. Earlier, the International
Court of Justice, in its advisory capacity, had opined that though
the nomadic tribes inhabiting the Spanish Sahara at the time
of its colonisation had "Legal ties of allegiance" with Morocco
and Mauritania, these were not of such a nature as to establish
sovereignty of either of these countries, and that the principle
of self-determination was unaffected. The U.N. also sent a visiting
mission to the territory which found a section of opinion in
favour of independence and another in favour of integration with
her two neighbours. Two conflicting resolutions on the Spanish
Sahara were adopted by the UN General Assembly. One (supported by Algeria) reaffirmed the inalienable right of the people
to self-determination and requested the administering power to
take necessary measures for the exercise of that right under UN
supervision. India voted in favour of this resolution which was
adopted by 88 votes in favour, none against and 41 abstentions.

The other resolution (supported by Morocco) also reaffirmed
the inalienable right of the people to self-determination, took note
of the tripartite agreement between Spain, Morocco and Mauritania and requested the "interim administration" to ensure the
<pg77>
exercise of this right through "free consultations" organised with
UN assistance. India abstained on this resolution which was
adopted by 56 votes in favour, 42 against and 34 abstentions.
Efforts to solve the problem of "Portuguese Timor" also engaged the attention of the General Assembly. A resolution supporting the position of Portugal was adopted by the General
Assembly with 70 votes in favour, 10 against and 43 abstentions.
The resolution strongly deplored the military intervention of
Indonesia and called upon her to withdraw her armed forces
without delay. It further called upon the Administering power to
continue to make every effort to find a peaceful solution. drew the
attention of the Security Council to the problem of Timor, and
called upon it to take all effective steps to protect the territorial
integrity of Portuguese Timor. India voted against this resolution.
For the first time in 1975, the General Assembly adopted two
mutually conflicting resolutions on the Korean question sponsored by the supporters of the DPRK and the Republic of Korea
respectively. It will be recalled that, up to the 29th Session, only
the resolution supporting the position of the Republic of Korea
had been adopted. The first resolution (Pro-DPRK) sponsored by
41 socialist and non-aligned countries, considered it necessary to
dissolve the "UN Command" and to withdraw all foreign forces
under the UN flag in South Korea, called upon the "real parties"
to the Armistice Agreement to replace it with a Peace Agreement,
and urged North and South Korea to observe the principles of
the North-South joint statement. The second resolution (proROK) sponsored by 28 countries, including the US and her
allies and a few non-aligned countries, expressed the hope that
all parties directly concerned would enter into negotiations on
new arrangements designed to replace the Armistice Agreement
and urged them, as a first step, to embark on talks so that
the UN command might be dissolved concurrently with arrangemens for maintaining the Armistice arrangements. The first resolution was adopted by 51 votes in favour, 38 against and 50
abstentions. The second resolution was adopted by 59 votes in
<pg78>
favour, 51 against and 29 abstentions. India abstained from voting on both the substantive resolutions in accordance with her
principled stand on the question.
During the year under review India was re-elected to the
F.A.O. Council, the I.M.C.O. Council, the U.N.D.P. Governing

Council, the World Food Council, the Statistical Commission, the
Commission on Narcotic Drugs, the Committee on Review and
Appraisal and the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination. India was also elected to the Commission on
Trans-National Corporations.
India withdrew her candidature for election to the Asian seat
of the Security Council after seven consecutive ballots resulted
in a deadlock and revealed that neither India nor Pakistan was
in a position to obtain the requisite 2/3rd majority. This was
done in response to appeals from friendly countries for breaking the deadlock and as a manifestation of India's spirit for
accommodation and concern for Afro-Asian solidarity. Pakistan expressed "sincere appreciation for the spirit of accommodation animating the Indian decision" and regarded "India's
decision as not only clearing the way for the election of Pakistan but also strengthening the unity of the Asian Group." The
third candidate for the Asian seat, Philippines, withdrew her
candidature after the fifth ballot. The voting in the successive
ballots clearly revealed a consistent hardcore support for India,
ranging between 54 to 64 votes.
A resolution adopted by the General Assembly in 1972 had
proclaimed the Year 1975 as the International Women's Year.
A draft programme for consideration by member states regarding the celebration of the Year was also prepared by the U.N.
Secretariat. The central theme was equality, development and
peace. India joined other countries in observing the year 1975
as International Women's Year. A National Committee, consisting of 38 eminent women, was set up with the Prime Minister
as its Chairman to formulate programmes for the year 1975
and to review their implementation periodically.
<pg79>
The focal point of the International observance of the
year was the World Conference of the International Women's
Year held in Mexico city from 19 June to 2 July 1975. More
than a hundred countries sent representatives to this Conference to discuss concerns and priorities relating to Women. The
Indian delegation was led by Smt. Prabha Rao, Minister for
Education in the Government of Maharashtra. The Conference
adopted a World Plan of Action and the Mexico Declaration.
The 30th General Assembly adopted a resolution by which
it, inter alia, endorsed action-proposals contained in the Report
of the World Conference of the International Women's Year,
and proclaimed the period 1976-1985 as the U.N. Decade for
Women and Development. It also urged examination and
national action on the various recommendations contained in the
World Plan of Action and called for the establishment of an
International Institute on Research and Training for the advancement of Women.

India continued her active participation in the work of the
Conference of the Committee on Disarmament (CCD). The
CCD held two sessions in Geneva in 1975; the first from 4
March to 10 April and the second from 24 June to 28 August.
During this period, the Committee held 33 plenary meetings
with verbatim records and, 19 informal meetings without records. In addition to the above meetings, members of the Committee met frequently for informal multilateral consultations on
disarmament questions of common interest.
The CCD continued its work in accordance with its general
agenda, which covered a broad range of disarmament questions.
The 29th session of the UN General Assembly had also entrusted the CCD with special responsibility in regard to certain issues.
Important among them were : (i) Prohibition of environmental
warfare; (ii) Arms control implications of Peaceful Nuclear Explosions (PNEs); and (iii) Comprehensive study of the question of nuclear-weapon-free zones in all its aspects.
<pg80>
Following agreement between themselves, the USSR and
the USA tabled at the CCD, on 21 August 1975, identical draft
conventions on the prohibition of military or any other hostile
use of environmental modification techniques. The agreed SovietUnited States text could not, however, be further negotiated as
the identical draft conventions were presented almost towards
the end of the Committee's session. On the question of arms
control implications of PNEs, in the context of a comprehensive
test ban, detailed discussions took place and a section of CCD's
report the UNGA was devoted to that subject. India expremed the view that the question of arms control implications
of PNEs was a political one and that it could be considered
usefully only after a comprehensive ban on nuclear weapon testing had been achieved. In pursuance of the UN General Assembly resolution 3261-F (XXIX) the CCD invited the Governments
of 21 countries including India to designate experts to prepare a
comprehensive study on the question of nuclear-weapon-free
zones in all its aspects. The Ad Hoc Group of experts submitted to the CCD its study on 18 August 1975. The CCD in
turn transmitted it to the UN General Assembly, together with
comments made by members of the Committee. The study
dealt with the question exhaustively and while no precise rules
were established it indicated general principles and guidelines
which should be taken into account when the creation of such
zones was contemplated. India took an active part in the
preparation of the study.
The first Review Conference of the parties to the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons was held in Geneva
from 5--30 May 1975. India did not participate in the Conference, as she is not a party to that treaty.

The United Nations General Assembly adopted 27 resolutions on items relating to disarmament, outer space and atomic
energy, out of which 9 had been either sponsored or co-sponsored by India. Eleven out of them were adopted without a vote.
India voted in favour of 14, abstained on one and voted against
one (on peaceful nuclear explosions). Of particular interest
<pg81>
to India were the resolutions on the question of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in South Asia and peaceful nuclear explosions.
Pakistan, as she had done last year, tabled a resolution
calling for further efforts regarding the establishment of a nuclear-free-zone in South Asia. India sponsored a resolution,
according to which the General Assembly "decides to give due
consideration to any proposal for the creation of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in an appropriate region of Asia, after it has
been developed and matured among the interested States within
the region concerned". On the basis of a suggestion made by
Mexico and supported by Nigeria and Sri Lanka, both the
Indian and Pakistani resolutions were adopted without a vote.
The Indian delegation, however, stated that India would have
voted against the Pakistani resolution if it had been put to a
vote.
India voted against the resolution, co-sponsored among
others by Japan and Canada, on the question of peaceful nuclear
explosions. The resolution was unacceptable, because it sought
to perpetuate the discriminatory approach of the NPT in respect
of peaceful nuclear explosions and implied that such explosions
by non-nuclear weapon state would lead to proliferation of nuclear weapons. India has repeatedly made it clear that she
would not accept any international controls over her peaceful
nuclear activities, which were either discriminatory or not universal in character.
The Ministry continued to coordinate with and assist the
Department of Atomic Energy and the Department of Space in
respect of the international aspects of their activities. As in previous years, India was represented on the Board of Governors
of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) as a globally most advanced country in the field of utilization of nuclear
energy for peaceful purposes.
In the continuing process of consultations among non-aligned
countries, a series of meetings were held in New York by the
<pg82>
Coordinating Committee (or Bureau) of non-aligned countries
set up by the Algiers Summit Conference in 1973. In pursuance

of these meetings, a meeting of the Bureau at Foreign Ministers'
level was held in Havana in March 1975.
A number of subjects, both political and economic, were discussed at the Havana meeting. The main political issues debated were : detente, West Asia, decolonization, Indo-China, Indian
Ocean and Cyprus. The Final Declaration adopted at the end
of the meeting reaffirmed its adherence to the stand taken at
various earlier conferences by non-aligned countries on these
issues. The Bureau adopted a separate resolution on the question of Palestine, affirming the need for all non-aligned countries
to contribute effectively, positively and directly to all efforts
undertaken with a view to the establishment of a just and lasting peace in Palestine in compliance with U.N. resolutions on
the subject and in conformity with the principles and objectives
of non-alignment.
On the economic side, one of the most important issues before the meeting was the acute problem facing the countries most
seriously affected by the international economic crisis. In the
economic portion of the Final Declaration, the Bureau inter-alia
reiterated its conviction that the solution of world economic problems called for the involvement of the whole world in cooperation based on equality and respect for the interests of all
countries on the basis of the Declaration and the Programme of
Action on the establishment of the new international economic
order and stressed the need to implement the Charter of
Economic Rights and Duties of States which constitutes a significant step towards the establishment of a new era in international economic relations.
A Conference of Foreign Ministers of nonaligned countries
was held in Lima (Peru) from 25 to 30 August 1975. The
Conference adopted a declaration entitled "Lima Programme of
Mutual Assistance and Solidarity". The economic section of
the Declaration included a strategy to strengthen the unity and
<pg83>
solidarity of non-aligned countries in their search for the establishment of the new international economic order. It contained a Plan of Action in two Parts: "Cooperation among Developing Countries" and "cooperation with Developed Countries".
The Conference also adopted a number of resolutions on specific political issues and economic questions. The Conference was
attended by 82 member countries and several observers.
An important aspect of the Conference was the interest
shown by some aligned countries to attend it as observers or
guests. Countries which belonged to military alliances conceived in the context of great power rivalry and having foreign military bases on their territory in that context had not been invited in the past to non-aligned conferences. After dis-

cussion, therefore, the countries which had already sent representatives to Lima were invited as a special case, to attend only
the Lima Conference as guests, subject to a review of the whole
question before and at the forthcoming Summit Conference of
non-aligned countries to be held in Colombo in August 1976.
Among the political questions the Conference discussed
the Middle-East and Palestine, Cyprus, Indo-China and the
Indian Ocean, and reiterated the earlier stand of non-aligned
countries on these issues. A decision was taken to set up a
voluntary Solidarity Fund of non-aligned countries for assistance
in reconstruction in Indo-China. The Conference adopted a
separate resolution on the Indian Ocean which essentially reiterated UN resolutions on the subject.
Several landmark decisions on economic matters were taken
at the meeting. The Conference approved the convention on
establishing a Solidarity Fund for the Economic and Social
Development of non-aligned countries. The equal subscription
for membership of the Fund has been fixed at 500,000 SDRs.
The totality of these subscriptions will be complemented after the
establishment of the Fund (it comes into being as soon as 40
countries sign and ratify the convention) by additional voluntary subscriptions. India signed the convention.
<pg84>
The Conference authorised the inter-governmental group of
experts on the establishment of a special fund for the financing
of buffer stocks of raw-material and primary products exported
by developing countries to draw up the final text of the agreement.
On cooperation in the field of mass media of communication,
an Indian proposal, made after consultation with the non-aligned countries, for setting up a non-aligned Press Agencies Pool,
was adopted by the Conference.
The third session of the United Nations Conference on the
Law of the Sea was held in Geneva from 17 Match to 10 May
1975. The significant achievement of this session was the preparation of Informal Single Negotiating Texts by the Chairmen
of the three main committees. These texts will form the basis
for further negotiations at the fourth session of the Law of the
Sea Conference to be held in New York in March-May 1976.
The Conference was engaged in important negotiations on a
number of issues covering the uses of the sea and a regime for
the distribution of its resources. These issues included : International regime for the seabed and the ocean floor beyond
national jurisdiction and for the exploitation of its resources;
territorial sea; coastal State jurisdiction in the economic zone;
continental shelf; straits used for international navigation; archipelagos and islands; and marine pollution and scientific research.

India was named depositary State for the Agreement establishing the Association of Iron Ore Exporting Countries, 1975.
The functions of a depositary state are being performed by India
for the first time.
As a member of United Nations Commission on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL), India continued to play an
active part in the field of codification and development of international trade law. The work on International Sale of Goods
and the International Shipping Legislation was completed by
the working groups. It was hoped that the work on Negotiable
<pg85>
Instruments would be completed soon. As regards International
Commercial Arbitration, the Indian delegation emphasised the
viewpoint at the 8th session of UNCITRAL held in Geneva in
April 1975 that objective criteria should be laid down for
selecting venue of arbitration.
India was represented at the first meeting of the Inter-Governmental working group of Experts on Natural Resources shared by two or more states held in Nairobi in January 1976, The
Group consisted of experts drawn from 17 States, and was primarily concerned with formulating guidelines for exploitation or
utilization of natural resources with a view to avoiding damage
to environment.
The fourteenth session of the Legal Sub-Committee of the
United Nations on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space was held
at New York from 10 February to 7 March 1975. India continued to take an active part in its deliberations. The General
Assembly, by Resolution 3234 of 12 November 1974, had recommended to the Legal Sub-Committee to consider, on a high
priority basis, the draft treaty relating to the moon, the elaboration of principles governing the uses by States of artificial
earth satellites for direct television broadcasting with a view to
concluding an international agreement, and the legal implications of remote sensing of the earth from space. The SubCommittee made significant progress in all three fields and the
General Assembly, at its regular session in 1975, noted this
with satisfaction.
During 1975, India concluded 103 treaties and agreements,
a list of which is given in Appendix III.
The Heads of Government of Commonwealth countries met
at a Conference at Kingston in Jamaica in April/May 1975.
The Prime Minister of India attended the Conference along with
27 Heads of State and Government. The problems discussed at
the Conference included various issues relating to Southern
Africa, intra-Commonwealth cooperation and the aggravated pro-

blems of the gap between the affluent and the poor nations in
<pg86>
the wake of the global economic crisis. A group of ten experts,
on which India was represented, was set up to submit a report
on effective ways and means of bridging the gap between the
developed and the developing world. The interim report of this
group entitled "Towards a new economic order" was endorsed
later by the Commonwealth Finance Ministers and was acknowledged to have been of value in the deliberations of the UN
seventh special session. The Heads of Government showed
understanding of the need for the EEC to extend to the Asian
developing countries of the Commonwealth facilities on the same
basis as those given to the 46 ACP countries under the Lome
Convention.
The Plenary Conference of the Commonwealth Parliamentary
Association, held in New Delhi from 28 October to 4 November 1975, was attended by about 300 delegates from 28 Commonwealth countries. Besides political issues, the Conference
discussed the role of the Commonwealth in bringing about social,
economic and political transformation in member-countries and
challenges to Parliament.
The new Secretary-General of the Commonwealth, Mr. S. S.,
Ramphal, formally inaugurated the Commonwealth Asian Regional Centre for Advanced Studies in Youth Work set up in
Chandigarh under the Commonwealth Youth Programme. In
his statement, he particularly stressed the future role of the
Commonwealth in promoting economic cooperation and the
economic advance of its weaker members and the importance of
India's role in this context.
The number of member-countries of the Commonwealth rose
to thirty five with the admission of Papua New Guinea, in September 1975.
<pg87>
USA
CUBA PERU INDIA ALGERIA CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC JAPAN CAPE VERDE COMOROS
GUINEA MOZAMBIQUE PAPUA NEW GUINEA SAO TOME E PRINCIPE VIETNAM KOREA SRI
LANKA ISRAEL SWITZERLAND SOUTH AFRICA NAMIBIA COLOMBIA ZAMBIA OMAN
ROMANIA TURKEY MOROCCO MAURITANIA SPAIN PORTUGAL INDONESIA PAKISTAN
PHILIPPINES MEXICO NIGER NIGERIA CANADA CHINA CYPRUS KENYA JAMAICA TOTO
Sep 01, 1975

Technical And Economic Cooperation
CHAPTER IX
TECHNICAL AND ECONOMIC COOPERATION
The Economic Division in the Ministry continued to cope
with the increased tempo of work relating to inter-Governmental
Joint Commissions established to promote closer external economic and technical cooperation and management of a fast
growing and diversified technical cooperation programme. It
also maintained its interest in and support for programmes of
economic cooperation at the regional and international level.
During the year it was entrusted with the task of participation
and coordinating India's policies with regard to the energy crisis at meetings held at Paris on the initiative of the French
President. The Economic Division also paid special attention,
in co-operation with other Ministries and organisations in the
Public and Private Sector, to promote India's participation in
the industrial projects in third countries. In the field of technical cooperation programme, the Economic Division further
strengthened arrangements for briefing for large number of highly
qualified Indian experts, especially medical and paramedical
personnel who went to Iran and Libya.
I. Joint Commissions
Important developments during the year in the work of Joint
Commissions were as follows:
The fourth meeting of the Indo-Afghan Joint Commission
was held in Kabul from Oct 28, 1975 to 31 October 1975. The Indian delegation was led by the Minister of External Affairs, Shri Y. B.
Chavan, while Mr. Ali Ahmed Khorram, the Minister of Planning, was the leader of the Afghan delegation. The highlights
<pg88>
of the decisions taken at the meeting were : (i) continued assistance to the Institute of Child Health, Kabul, by way of medical personnel and medicines, and assistance to the Pathology and
E.N.T. Institutes; (ii) deputation of experts and supply of equipment to the new Agricultural Research Institute of Afghanistan;
(iii) expansion of the Industrial Estate in Kabul and exploring
the possibilities of setting up similar estates in three provincial
capitals; (iv) expansion of the Chardeh Ghorband micro hydel
project, and implementation of three other projects at Bamiyan,
Faizabad and Khulm.
Considerable progress was achieved on the projects considered during the fifth meeting of the Sub-Committee of the Indo-

Sri Lanka Joint Commission held in June 1974. Thus, machinery and equipment worth Rs. 6 lakhs has already been supplied
to Sri Lanka to establish three Rural Technical Centres there.
Consignments of 850 sheep and 220 cattle have also been supplied to Sri Lanka under the Indo-Sri Lanka Cattle Project and
steps are under-way to supply farm machinery worth about
Rs. 13 lakhs and depute three cattle experts to Sri Lanka. A
Memorandum of Understanding for setting up a microwave
link between India and Sri Lanka was finalised and is expected
to be signed shortly. Requisite information about establishing
the Indo-Sri Lanka Power Grid was exchanged between the two
countries. Discussions regarding the setting up of a rubberbased project in Sri Lanka are continuing. Steps are also underway to supply equipment for setting up a small scale trainingcum-production centre for laboratory glassware. Supply of 10
bio-gas/gobar-gas units and digging rigs along with some complementary equipment is also expected to be completed soon.
A loan agreement was also signed during the year, under which
a credit of Rs. 100 million shall be made available in connection with the setting up of a fertilizer project in Sri Lanka.
As in the past, trainees from Sri Lanka were received in
India and Indian experts were deputed to that country. Thus
two personnel from Sri Lanka were trained in India under the
<pg89>
'Cattle Project'; a batch of another two was invited at the Golden Jubilee celebrations of the Sugar Technologists Association
of India, Kanpur. Arrangements for the training of five personnel in the small scale industries in India were finalised. One
Mica expert from India was deputed to Sri Lanka and arrangements were finalised to depute one Professor of Sugar Technology to help Sri Lanka authorities to develop their Palmyra Jaggery industry.
The meeting of the Indo-US Joint Commission co-chaired
by the Minister of External Affairs and the US Secretary of
State was held in Washington on 6 and 7 October 1975. Stress
was placed by both sides on strengthening the work of the
economic and commercial sub-commission. The decision to establish a Joint Business Council was significant because the major
proportion of the industry and commerce in the United States
is concentrated in the private sector. The Council will essentially be a forum, within the ambit of the Joint Commission,
for the private sector to participate jointly in the development
of bilateral economic relations. The first meeting of the Joint
Business Council was held in New Delhi on 2-4 February 1976.
It discussed among other things the economic situation in India
and the United States, possibilities of American corporate participation in India's economic development and expansion of IndoUS trade and industrial cooperation in third countries. Participation in third country ventures with the United States firms,

particularly in Western South-east Asia, is expected to enlarge
the field of Indian technical capacity and consultancy services.
The second meeting of the Sub-Commission on Science and
Technology was held in New Delhi on 27-29 January, 1976.
The Commission announced detailed projects and cooperating
agencies were designated from both the Indian and the United
States sides for each project. Technical cooperating institutions and agencies are to proceed with the development and
finalisation of specific plans and projects appropriate to the
resources available to each side and in accordance with procedural requirements of each government.
<pg90>
The second meeting of the Joint Commission established
under the Indo-EEC Commercial Cooperation Agreement was
held in Brussels on 11 and 12 November 1975. It was inter
alia agreed that the Community would associate European
exports with India's plan for export production and export
promotion in identified sectors with a view to increasing India's
exports to the EEC countries. Also, the EEC would consider
production cooperation with India in engineering goods and
possibilities of cooperation in thrid countries. However, India's
request for abolition of quota restrictions on jute and coir goods
pending negotiations was not accepted. In respect of other important exports, the textiles interests in the Community, in a
recent report to the EEC, asked for tightening of import restrictions on textiles.
It would appear, therefore, that the major obstacles to India's
exports to West Europe were tariff and non-tariff barriers and
protectionist policies. The implications of the Lome Convention between the EEC and the ACP Group of countries were
examined. It was India's assessment that these should not
inhibit seriously the prospects of trade and economic activities
with the Community, provided India can move fast enough and
respond effectively to the changing demand patterns of the countries of that region, where her capabilities in a wide range of
new and unconventional fields have now become well
recognised.
The second meeting of the Indo-Bulgarian Joint Commission was held in Sofia from 9 to 17 June 1975. The Indian
delegation was led by Shri C. Subramaniam, Minister of Finance,
and the Bulgarian delegation by Mr. T. Chakarov, Minister for
Machine Building. In the Protocol concluded after the meeting,
both sides agreed on steps to strengthen cooperation in the
fields of agriculture and food processing, machine building and
heavy industry, drugs, pharmaceuticals and chemical industries,
science and technology, electronics and trade exchanges.
<pg91>

The first meeting of the Indo-GDR joint Comimssion was
held in Berlin from 19 to 25 June, 1975. The Indian delegation was led by Shri T. A. Pai, Minister for Industry and Civil
Supplies, and the GDR delegation by Mr. Wolfgang Rauchfuss,
Deputy Prime Minister of the GDR. In the Protocol concluded
after the meeting, the two sides agreed to strengthen cooperation
in the fields of science and technology, engineering and machine
too] industries, light industry and consumer goods, electrical
engineering and electronics, trade and shipping, drugs, chemicals
and pharmaceuticals and photo-chemistry. The GDR agreed to
cooperate in the supply of ships, purchase of polyester-based Xray films from India and in setting up capacities for processing
food products for export to the GDR.
The sixth meeting of the Indo-Czechoslovak Joint Committee was held in Prague from 15 to 24 September 1975. The
Indian delegation was led by Prof. D. P. Chattopadhyaya, Minister of Commerce, and the Czechoslovak delegation by Mr. A.
Barcak, Minister of Foreign Trade. In the Protocol concluded
after the meeting, the two sides agreed on further strengthening
cooperation in the fields of industry, electronics, science and
technology and trade. Of particular interest was the identification of items which India could supply to Czechoslovak projects
in third countries, e.g. Iraq, Iran, Syria, Brazil and Argentina.
The first, meeting of the Indo-Tanzanian Joint Commission
on Technical, Economic and Scientific Cooperation was held in
New Delhi on 2 and 3 January 1976. The Commission agreed
to increase cooperation in a wide variety of fields such as industries, agriculture, science and technology, railways, civil aviation,
small scale industries, civil engineering and irrigation. India
also agreed to provide training to Tanzanian personnel in small
scale industries and engineering and to provide long term financing for the purchase of Indian plants, machinery and technical
services on mutually satisfactory terms.
<pg92>
II. Paris Conference on Energy and Related Problems.
India was one of the ten countries invited to participate in the
Preparatory Meeting for the Conference on International
Economic Cooperation. The representatives of both industrialised and developing countries met at Paris on the French initiative,
firstly in April and then in October, to prepare for the Ministerial Conference which would discuss problems relating to
Energy, Raw materials, Development and Finance in a comprehensive and coordinated manner.
India participated in the Ministerial Conference on International Economic Cooperation held in Paris from 16 to 19
December, 1975. The Conference was attended by 27 representative countries from the developing (both oil rich and oil im-

porting) and the industrialised world.
The Conference decided to initiate an intensified dialogue on
international economic issues. To this end it established four
Commissions consisting of 15 members each to deal with Energy,
Raw Materials, Development and Financial Affairs respectively.
The Commissions will meet periodically and would submit their
recommendations to the Ministerial Conference which may meet
again in about a year's time.
India drew the attention of the Conference to the plight of
the developing countries, particularly those most seriously affected
by the recent changes in the international economic scene, and to
their special problems of development.
India was selected for representation on three Commissions
dealing with Energy, Development and Financial, Affairs. On
the 4th Commission i.e. the one concerned with Raw Materials,
India delegated an observer to follow its proceedings.
III. Industrial Projects
These projects were separate from industrial joint ventures
in which private Indian firms cooperated with foreign firms in
<pg93>
setting up industries. They consisted of setting up large industrial
projects or projects relating to infrastructure of the economies
such as construction of harbours, road network, housing, airports and railways. They were undertaken either on turnkey
basis or on a sub-contracting basis. A fist of the important
projects secured in third countries is at Appendix IV. Efforts
were made during the year to secure larger allocation of commercial credits to finance some of the industrial projects secured by
Indian organisations.
iv. Indian Technical and Economic Cooperation Programme
The Economic Division further developed arrangements for
briefing Indian experts going abroad. A special brochure on
"Developing India" describing India's achievements in economic,
social and cultural fields, was prepared in addition to notes on
living conditions for the countries to which the experts were
assigned. Senior officers of the Division personally briefed
larger groups of Indian experts, especially medical and paramedical personnel, which left in increasing numbers during the
period under review.
The expenditure on Technical Assistance Programme increased
from Rs. 132 lakhs in 1973-74 to Rs. 220 lakhs in 1974-75.
About 50 countries remained covered by the ITEC Programme.
Countrywise break-up of Indian experts working in foreign, coun-

tries under ITEC Programme, and the number of foreign trainees in India under ITEC Programme during the current year
are at Appendix V.
(i) India's Neighbours
Since the emergence of Bangladesh as an independent nation
in December 1971, India has extended/committed economic
assistance amounting to Rs. 323.19 crores to that country for
rehabilitation and reconstruction of the economy. Out of the
above sum of Rs. 323.19 crores, the total amount utilised until
end of September 1975 came to Rs. 218.84 crores.
The Technical Assistance Programme, for 1975-76 included
the financing of three feasibility studies on cement, fertilizer and
<pg94>
Sponge iron projects proposed to be set up by Bangladesh. For
the, cement plant, India committed Rs. 5 crores as Governmentto-Government aid. Regarding the fertilizer project, an IndoBangladesh Technical Advisory Group was set up. As regards
the sponge iron project, Bangladesh was in touch with the
UNDP for study of the feasibility report. The Bangladesh
Machine Tools Factory approached the Hindustan Machine Tools
Ltd. for technical assistance. The request is under consideration.
45 fresh scholarships were awarded to Bangladesh nominees for
various courses. Training was also provided in matters relating
to jute and in surveying and mapping courses. An agriculture
expert was deputed to Bangladesh. Books and documentary
films were presented.
After preliminary discussions between the Indian, and Bangladesh Railways, a Joint Engineering Survey financed by India
was completed for providing a rail link, from Akhaura/Singerbal
in Bangladesh to Agartala (Tripura). This link would substantially reduce the cost of transport of goods to Tripura.
After the liberation of Bangladesh in December 1971, two
trade agreements were signed between India and Bangladesh.
The first trade agreement known as Limited Payment Arrangements (LPA) signed on 28-3-1972 (initially valid for one year
upto 27-3-1972 but subsequently extended upto 27-9-1973) envisaged movement of trade each way to the extent of Rs. 25
crores. Under the second trade agreement signed on 5-7-1973,
a Trade Protocol. known as Balanced Trade & Payments, Arrangement (BTPA) was also signed (originally valid for one year from
28-9-1973 to 27-9-1974 but subsequently extended upto
31-12-1974) envisaged trade exchanges to the extent of Rs. 30.50
crores each way.
Both under LPA and the BTPA, principal items of export
from India to Bangladesh were coal, tobacco, cement, raw cotton,

cotton yarn, stones and boulders, machinery and spans, slices,
ehemicals and pharmaceuticals, books etc. Major items of export
from Bangladesh to India were raw jute, fish and newsprint.
<pg95>
Trade exchanges that took place under the LPA were not
quite satisfactory in the sense that they did not reach the target
of Rs. 25 crores, each way. The performance of trade under
the BTPA was even more unsatisfactory than under the LPA.
Exports from Bangladesh to India lagged so much behind exports
from India that Bangladesh exceeded in June/July 1974 the
maximum limit of the technical credit of Rs. 6.5 crores which had
been agreed to be provided by either country to bridge any trade
imbalance between the two countries. Special arrangements had
to be made at the request of the Government of Bangladesh to
increase the technical credit by another Rs. 50,000 so as to
ensure uninterrupted supplies of coal to Bangladesh.
In spite of the fact that the validity of the BTPA was extended upto 31-12-74 (in respect of supply of coal from India
to Bangladesh and supply of raw jute, fish and newsprint from
Bangladesh to India, the date was extended upto 28-2-75),
exports from India to Bangladesh (as on 28-2-75) were valued
approximately at Rs. 15.30 crores while exports from Bangladesh
to India were valued approximately Rs. 9.21 crores, leaving a
trade imbalance (against Bangladesh) of Rs. 6.09 crores. To
enable Bangladesh to wipe out this imbalance in easy instalments
the Government of India agreed to give a Government-to-Government credit of Rs. 4.92 crores to Bangladesh.
In view of the unsatisfactory performance of both the LPA
and the BTPA, a review at Ministerial level was made between
India and Bangladesh and it was mutually agreed that all payments and charges in respect of, exports from India to Bangladesh
and vice-versa would be effected in freely convertible foreign
currency w.e.f. 1-1-1975. However, in regard to certain important items like coal, newsprint, raw jute, etc. the period was
extended upto 28-2-1975 so that supplies contracted under the
BTPA could be completed.
A Bangladesh trade delegation visited India from 7-12
Januuary 1976 and held discussions to review trade relations
between the two countries in 1975 and assess possibilities for
<pg96>
trade in 1976. It was agreed that trade between the two countries should be augmented and should continue to be in freely
convertible currencies. The two sides reached agreement in,
respect of supplies of the following important items : Coal,
Newsprint, Raw Jute and Fish. It was further agreed that the
technical credit extended under the BTPA should be converted
into an inter-government credit to be repaid by March 1977.

Agreement was reached in, principle among India, Bangladesh
and Nepal (which are the main jute producing countries) for
the establishment of a body to be called the Jute International
in order to maintain and develop a strong and expanding demand
at remunerative prices for jute and its products on a world-wide
basis, etc., in the face of the stiff competition posed by synthetics. A conference of the three countries, held in, New Delhi
in October 1975 to try and finalise a constitution for Jute International, reached, a large measure of agreement.
Programme to supply 16 Pilot Plants to Burma at an estimated cost of Rs. 2.2 crores was finalised and a Memorandum of
Understanding is expected to be signed shortly. Three trainees
from Burma were also trained in various laboratories/institutions
in India and two more trainees are expected to visit India
shortly.
The draft Memorandum of Undertaking for setting up the
fish canning plant in Maldives between the Governments of
India and Maldives was signed during the year. Indian experts
also visited Maldives to prepare a detailed feasibility report for
setting up cold storage plants in Maldives. During the year,
four teachers were received from Maldives for training in the
primary teaching course in Bangalore. Arrangements were also
finalised to receive five trainees in fire-fighting course.
(ii) East and South-East Asia
Five Indian teachers were sent on deputation in the Gandhi
Memorial School at Djakarta. It was also decided ton invite a
<pg97>
delegation of about 10 officers from Indonesia to visit various
industrial projects in India.
India agreed to depute three experts on, refrigeration, air
conditioning etc. to the Technical Training Institute in Negri
Sambilan State in Malaysia.
Machinery and equipment worth about Rs. 1.20 lakhs was
gifted to Thailand during the year. Two of their officials were
also received for training in gobar-gas plants. In addition,
arrangement was made for the training of a group of four Thai
officials. at the National Institute of Bank Management.
The Government of India sanctioned financial grants for
projects in Laos as follows :(i) Nam Nagum Hydro-electric Project-Rs. 15 laths for
technical assistance in the form of machinery and
technical services.
(ii) Ban Mak Nao Irrigation Project-Rs. 8.5 lakhs for

feasibility study.
(iii) Reconstruction of Laos on emergency bass.
Following the visit of a Ministerial delegation in January 1975,
it was agreed to supply bicycles, sewing machines, diesel irrigation pumps, medicines etc. and provide training facilities in India
for about 40 Lao technicians in 1975-76. 500 bicycles and 100
sewing machines costing about Rs. 2 lakhs have been sent. The
expenditure during two to three years from 1975 would be
around Rs. 30 lakhs, of which Rs. 10 lakhs are to be spent
on emergency aid.
India made a substantial contribution to the Prek Thnot
Project in Cambodia. According to a multilateral agreement
signed at the United Nations, on 13 November 1968, India
pledged assistance equivalent to US $ 200,000. So far India has
spent about Rs. 21 lakhs.
<pg98>
A 3-member DRVN delegation visited India in FebruaryMarch 1975, to study agricultural production and animal husbandry in India. They were mainly interested to study the rice
crop, particularly under rainfed conditions. Of the 15 DRVN
students, who were undergoing training in the English language
in Jawaharlal Nehru University, 9 went back in September 1974
and the remaining 6 in August 1975.
Indian nationals deputed to Fiji during 1975-76 were (i)
six ITEC experts and (ii) thirteen teachers and thirteen doctors
directly recruited by Fiji Government.
Science equipment costing about Rs. 1 lakh was sent to
Tonga as gift under the ITEC programme for use in schools.
400 books costing Rs. 2,000 were sent as gifts for setting up
a library in the capital of Tonga.
Japan is an important source of external assistance to India.
In the bilateral talks in Tokyo in November 1975, discussions
took place on the subject of mutual trade, Japan's cooperation
in improving silk industry in India, deep sea fishing, cultivation
of soyabeans and the question of Indo-Japanese collaboration in
third countries.
For phosphoric acid joint venture, a Memorandum of Understanding was signed, with Nauru providing for the carrying of
detailed feasibility and pre-investment study.
(iii) North Africa and Mediterraneam Region
Libya increasingly looked towards India, for her requirements
of technical manpower. India, as far as possible, met all Libyan
requests for experts who are now working in various Libyan

Ministries, Government Departments and Corporations including Petroleum, Telecommunications, Agriculture, Industrial
Research Centre, Housing Corporations, Cement Plant, Water
Resources Departments and Universities of Tripoli and Benghazi.
At present there are over 800 Indian experts drawn from various
<pg99>
Government Departments and Organisations and private sector
working in Libya and another 600, who have been selected, are
expected to join their respective assignments soon.
A 3-member delegation of Road Engineering experts from
the Ministry of Transport and Shipping and the Border Roads
Development Board visited India from 19 June to 2 July 1975,
to explore the possibility of India's participation in the roads
construction programme in Libya.
Shipping Corporation of India is also exploring the possibility
of collaboration in the development of maritime transport and
shipping with the Libyan General Maritime Transport Company.
As a result of the visit of two Agricultural Experts Delegations
to Libya, the Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation, in collaboration with public sector undertakings, are negotiating with their
Libyan counterparts to take up on bilateral basis the development
of two agricultural projects-Ubari and Sharir Agricultural
Development projects.
The Public and Private sector undertakings in India were
provided full assistance for undertaking development projects in
Libya. Construction equipment, operation and maintenance of a
textile mill complex in Zanzur (near Tripoli), being done by an
Indian firm, was commissioned by Col. Gadafi, Chairman, Revolutionary Command Council, in September 1975. Complete
design, engineering and construction management of a steel melting
and billet casting plant was provided by the NIDC. NIDC also
secured the assignment for the preparation of the Five Year
Industrial Development Plan of Libya. M/s. Dastur and Co.
were awarded Rs. 100 million consultancy contract for the setting
up of a major steel mill at Misuratha (Libya). The firm was
appointed as a principal consultant and would be responsible
<pg100>
for design, engineering, management of construction and recruitment of labour and personnel. Nearly thirty Indian experts are
also assisting in running the Libyan cement plant at Holmis.
Efforts were made to locate and identify the areas of economic
cooperation and collaboration with Egypt in Trade and Industry.
A delegation of Association of Indian Engineering industry visited
Cairo in August 1975 and suggested a proposal for establishing
an Indo-Egyptian Industrial Cooperation Group which would be

instrumental in identifying industrial projects that could be
undertaken jointly by both the countries.
The Development Consultants (Pvt.) Ltd. of India offered
a joint venture project to Egypt in the field of sponge iron,
estimated at a cost of US $ 150 million.
India gifted to Sudan the Techno-Economic Survey Report
of Sudan which was prepared by the Engineering Projects (India)
Ltd. under the ITEC programme.
For the past several years India has been extending ITEC
assistance to Sudan by way of granting scholarships and providing
training facilities in the Indian educational, professional and
technical institutes to a large number of nominees of the Government of Sudan and deputing Indian experts to Sudan. Three
Sudanese students are presently holding ITEC scholarships for
pursuing 3 years' degree courses in Economics, Agriculture and
Pharmacy at the Universities of Aligarh, Indore and Jadhavpur.
Since September three senior Sudanese Diplomats, nominated by
the Government of Sudan, have been awarded ITEC scholarships
for pursuing two years' Master's Degree course at Jawaharlal
Nehru University, New Delhi. Earlier, a Sudanese nominee was
provided training facilities at the Central Arid Zone Research
Institute at Jodhpur and another at Indian Bureau of Mines,
Hazaribagh, (Bihar).
Since April 1975, India has deputed to the Government of
Sudan an expert in Civil Law for a period of one year and has
<pg101>
also agreed to depute one expert each in Criminal Law, SocioEconomic Research and Medical Herbs under ITEC Programme.
A 3-member team of Indian experts visited Algeria from
31 January to 12 February 1975 to explore the possibilities of
technical collaboration in the field of water Engineering. The
delegation's Report was well received by the Algerian authorities
Who requested for deputation of over 300 hydraulic engineers to
Algeria and suggested the possibility of forming joint venture
company in this field. A few technical experts were also deputed
to SONTRACH, Algeria (An Algerian Public Sector Undertaking
for Petroleum).
A 2-member team of technical experts drawn from the Indian
Telephone Industries, Bangalore, and Bharat Electronics Ltd.,
Ghaziabad, visited Algeria from 9 to 14 June, 1975 to explore
the possibilities of technical collaboration and trade in the field
of telecommunications.
At the request of the Cyprus Government, an ITEC expert
on weights and measures was re-assigned to advise the Government on changing over to Metric system.

An expert in textile product design and resist process of
dyeing to assist the Government of Malta in providing design
advice and training in resist process of dyeing for textile products,
joined in November 1975.
(iv) West Asia
A team of specialists of Oil and Natural Gas Commission
visited People's Democratic Republic of Yemen (PDRY) in April
for studying the feasibility of joint oil exploration.
As many as 18 experts (six doctors, seven teachers, and five
technical officers) are on deputation with the PDRY Government
under the ITEC Programme.
<pg102>
It was agreed to offer postal equipment worth about Rs. 50,000
to the postal authorities of PDRY Government, as a gift. Its
purchase is being arranged through the Directorate General of
Posts and Telegraphs, New Delhi.
Under the Technical and, Economic Cooperation Programme,
India supplied two wheat thrashers. PDRY will be sending three
agricultural engineers for training in the operation and maintenance of thrashers and other agricultural equipment.
Under the ITEC Programme, a medical team comprising of
six specialists visited PDRY in the second half of April 1975.
The work of the team won acclaim from PDRY Government.
The visit of the Minister of External Affairs to Syria, from
27 May to 3 June 1975, provided an excellent opportunity for
high-level discussions on important economic matters of bilateral
interest and to identify various economic projects/fields which
could provide opening for Indian participation.
For Indian co-operation in the development of Syrian Railways, the Managing Director of the Rail India Technical and
Economic Service (RITES) visited Syria, As a result of the
visit RITES was commissioned for making feasibility studies in
respect of three new proposed Syrian Railway lines covering a
distance of 450 Kms.
The provisions of training facilities in India for about half a
dozen Syrian Railway officers have been envisaged during 1976,
under the ITEC Programme.
Mr. Hamdani, Executive Engineer of the Highway Authority
of the Government of YAR, visited India in February 1975 to
recruit engineers and technical/administrative personnel for their
Taiz-Turba Road Project. He selected 14 engineers and technical/
administrative personnel of whom 13 have already taken their
respective positions in YAR.

In the wake of their developmental programme, a number
of developing countries particularly the oil rich countries of
<pg103>
the Gulf, stepped up their demand for Indian experts and technical personnel for service on direct contract basis. During the
year, India received requests for over 1200 medical and paramedical personnel and for about 1100 engineers and technical personnel from countries in the Gulf area. Around 1400 experts
in different fields were selected. Their break-up is as follows :
------------------------------------------------------------------Country
Medical &
Teaching
Engineers
Para-mediassignments & other
cal
technical
experts/
personnel
------------------------------------------------------------------Iran
1200
1
Iraq
33
94
Oman
9
50
UAE
15
------------------------------------------------------------------(v) Africa (South of the Sahara)
Nine more experts were deputed under the ITEC programme,
in the fields of engineering, petroleum technology, fisheries, sericulture, tubewell drilling and administration, raising the total
number of long-term experts in Mauritius under this programme
to 42.
In response to a request from the Mauritian Government,
Indian assistance in the form of grant was increased from Rs. 10.5
million to Rs. 13.1 million to meet increased expenditure on the
Mahatma Gandhi Institute, Industrial Training Institute, Consultancy Service for the Central Electricity Board, the Rural Industrial Estate and deputation of Indian experts etc.
In addition, spinning and weaving equipment and fish seedlings were also gifted to Mauritians. A team of experts from
WAPCOS also conducted a feasibility study for laying a 66KV
transmission line in Mauritius.
In addition to over 80 Indian teachers deputed to Kenya
last year on direct contract basis, requests for recruitment of
<pg104>
46 experts in the fields of construction, irrigation and medicine
were responded to this year. A recruiting team from Kenya visited
India to interview the candidates. Two senior level experts were

also sponsored to visit Kenya to conduct a training course for
Kenyan engineers in standardisation.
One more teacher was deputed to Somalia under the ITEC
Programme making the total number of ITEC deputationists
seven. In addition, requests for services of 10 doctors, 8 technical teachers and 2 stenography instructors on direct contract were
also responded to.
50 knitting machines were gifted to Somalia. It was also
decided to finance the preparation of a detailed project report
for the setting up of a steel mill and a paper mill.
Contacts were established with Mozambique soon after her
independence and scope for building up technical and economic
cooperation between the two countries is being explored. India
hopes to be in a position to meet Mozambique's requirements of
Portuguese-knowing Indian experts in various fields of development.
During the visit of the Mission of the UN Council for Namibia
in early 1975, it was agreed to provide training facilities to 150
persons from Namibia and to send experts as well as equipment
for the Institute to be set up in Lusaka for the people of Namibia.
Training was arranged for one nominee of Ethiopian Government at the Indian Institute of Mass Communication. Another
nominee of Ethiopia is undertaking training at Varanasi in medicine. Indian doctors continued to work in the Gandhi Memorial
Hospital, Addis Ababa, under the ITEC Programme, besides a
large number of teachers.
India agreed to depute a senior officer of the Office of Development Commissioner, Small Scale Industries, to further explore the possibilities of cooperation in this field between India
<pg105>
and Ghana. Already three experts in Small Scale Industries are
working at a centre in Tema, Ghana. This centre was set up
on 'the basis of machinery and equipment supplied under the
ITEC Programme. Ghana has especially requested India's assistance in setting up food canning centre, fish canning, coir research
etc.
In June 1975, India gifted to Guinea 10,000 grafts of casawa
Stems. This timely contribution will help agricultural development of Guinea and the Government and the people of Guinea
have deeply appreciated this action.
An economic delegation which visited Gabon in December
1974 presented its report indicating areas of possible technical
and economic cooperation as well as joint ventures cooperation

between India and Gabon.
India agreed to extend the period of deputation of three
experts of Insurance working currently with the General Insurance
Co. of Malawi.
In February 1975, a Memorandum of Understanding was
signed between India and Nigeria to provide the services of
500 teachers trainees. Nigeria requested India's assistance in
setting up a small scale industries centre.
India agreed to mineral exploration survey by Mineral Exploration Corporation of India for Rwanda.
RITES delegation visited Tanzania and finalised arrangements
for providing experts in railways and training facilities to Tanzanian nominees. India started the export of rolling stock to Tanzania.
Civil aviation delegation visited Tanzania and finalised arrangements for providing training facilities as pilots and maintenance engineers to Tanzanian nominees.
<pg106>
A 3-member delegation of the National Building Organisation
visited Zanzibar for setting up plants for low cost house building
material.
A senior officer of the Office of C & A. G. visited Tanzania
in October 1975 to assist Tanzania Audit Corporation.
An ONGC delegation visited Tanzania and finalised an agreement for exploitation of Songo Songo Gas field.
An Officer of the Roorkee University was deputed to Tanzania
to finalise arrangements for 129 Tanzanian students at a special
water resources development course in Roorkee University.
A 16-member team from Tanzania under Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Communications, Tanzania, visited India for
purchase of steam locomotives, diesel locomotives and rolling
stock in July 1975.
Training facilities were arranged for four nominees of Zanzibar
in Lighthouse and Lightships, Calcutta.
India offered the services of 80 Education Officers to Tanzania. India gifted machinery facility centre as a part of the
Industrial Estate in Zanzibar. India provided the services of a
Radio and TV expert on bilateral basis to the Radio and TV
centre in Zanzibar.

Two experts working in Senegal, one in cashewnut and the
other in Small Scale Industries under the ITEC Programme, were
given extension in the period of their deputations.
India deputed a three-member steel team in October 1975 to
Sierra Leone under the ITEC Programme. India also agreed
to exchange cashewnut seeds for equal quantity of cocoa seeds.
Training facilities were arranged for a nominee of Uganda
Government in civil aviation with Air India. Uganda Government
recruited 23 doctors during 1975.
20 M of EA/75-8
<pg107>
Zaire recruited 16 experts from Indian Railways.
Two recruitment teams visited India in April/May 1975 to
recruit engineers, accountants, doctors, nurses for Zambia. Training facilities were arranged for four nominees of Zambia during
October/November 1975 at the Sericulture Institute, Mysore.
Training for three nominees of the Zambian Government was
arranged in photography and photo-library indexing at the Photo
Division of the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting.
(vi) Latin America
In order to explore possibilities for strengthening trade and
reviewing India's economic relations, a Conference of Heads of
Missions in Latin America was held in Mexico in May 1975
under the Chairmanship of the Minister of External Affairs.
During their visits to Latin America, to participate respectively
in the non-aligned and UNIDO Conferences, the Minister of External Affairs and the Minister for Industry and Civil Supplies
utilised the occasions to project India's industrial and scientific
image in the context of the developmental requirements of Latin
America. The official visits of the Presidents of Mexico and
Guyana to India in July 1975 also provided, an excellent opportunity for exploring the scope of greater economic and commercial cooperation with those two countries.
Public sector undertakings like Engineering Projects of India
Ltd. have a number of proposals in hand for setting up projects
on turnkey basis particularly in Guyana (mini-steel plant and
paper plant) and Peru (coke oven plant). In addition to these,
the All India Manufacturers' Association sent a team to South
American countries to identify and explore export potentials for
Indian goods. A team from the Andean Development Corporation (based in Lima) which is involved in the process of establishing and developing engineering industries in the membercountries (Bolivia, Chile, Columbia, Ecuador, Peru and Venezuela) made a useful visit to India in October/November 1975.

<pg108>
Several areas of collaboration were identified during the team's
visit. A Calcutta firm of engineering consultants secured a contract for the supply of design engineering assistance to the
Orinoco Steel Corporation, the Venezuelan public-sector steel
corporation. A batch of Indian technicians from another Indian
consultancy organisation joined the Venezuelan State Steel Complex (SIDOR) on short-term assignment.
Negotiations are going on with a view to collaborating in
expanding production in the steel industry and setting up of a
small industrial estate in Mexico. India is also negotiating the
purchase of fishing trawlers from Mexico. Two cooperation agreements with Mexico were signed in the fields of Science, Technology and Culture. An Agreement on Technical and Scientific Cooperation was signed with Peru in August 1975. Considerable
progress was made in the processing of several economic projects
in Guyana. Indian experts were assisting Guyana in setting up
a mini-steel plant, textile mill, bicycle manufacturing plant, construction of interior highways, etc. A Cuban delegation visited
India in October 1975 to study developments in animal husbandry and another delegation attended the Golden Jubilee Celebration of Indian Sugar Technologists Association, Kanpur. A
Jamaican delegation was invited to hold discussions with Bharat
Aluminium Company and visit their plant at Korba.
Efforts are underway to establish direct shipping services
between India and the Latin American countries. The Shipping
Corporation of India and Scindia Steam Navigation Company introduced regular services connecting Indian ports with Panama,
Jamaica and Guyana. This service, it is hoped, will also benefit
India's trade with other countries in the region. The Shipping
Corporation of India is prepared to take cargo for any country
of South America on transhipment basis in Hong Kong, Portugal,
etc. As soon as business builds up, the Corporation will organise
direct services specially to Brazil and Argentina. Meanwhile,
the Corporation and the two other Indian lines, viz. Scindias
and Indian Steamship are negotiating with the Argentine State
Shipping Company for establishment of a Joint sailing schedule
<pg109>
to provide for direct shipping services between Indian and Argentinian ports.
(vii) International Economic Organizations
ESCAP. In accordance with the decision taken, in principle,
at the New Delhi session of the ESCAP to establish a Centre
for Transfer of Technology in India, India's Ambassador in
Bangkok presented a cheque for US $ 10,000 to the Executive

Secretary of ESCAP, at a special ceremony on 30 July 1975.
This represented India's contribution towards the cost of preparation of a feasibility study and a comprehensive project report
for the establishment of a Regional Centre for Technology
Transfer in India. India was deeply interested in this project
as the ITEC Programme is now by far the most important
bilateral programme of co-operation with developing countries
in the region. In the 19th Session of the Committee on Trade,
in November 1975, India's offer of technical assistance in the
development, organisation and operation. of state trading institutions in other ESCAP developing countries was noted with
appreciation. Similarly, the Committee took note of the potential development and progress achieved by India in providing
technical cooperation, consultancy services and setting up of
joint ventures in diverse industrial sectors.
UNIDO. The Second General Conference of UNIDO was
held in Lima, Peru from 12 to 26 March 1975. The Conference
was attended by 114 States. The main discussions at the Conference were on the subjects contained in the Draft Declaration
and Plan of Action on Industrial Development and Cooperation
adopted by the Group of 77 at the Algiers meeting.
After detailed discussions and negotiations the Declaration
and Plan of Action were adopted. The USA, however, voted
against them as a whole. The following were the significant
results achieved at the Conference :(a) For the first time a large body of basic principles
regarding industrialisation and the role of international
<pg110>
cooperation was identified and agreed upon by the
world community.
(b) The developed countries accepted that by the year
2000, the developing countries should have a share
of at least 25 per cent of the world industrial production.
(c) The industrialised countries agreed that there should
be transfer of technology on easier terms and allocation
of certain areas of production in favour of developing
countries.
(d) An Agreement was reached to convert UNIDO into
a Specialised Agency and to expand the Industrial
Development Board. This would ensure greater representation of the developing countries in these bodies.
(e) UNIDO was to be institutionalised and would meet
regularly once in four years.

(f) An International Industrial Fund was to be established.
This would promote industrialisation of the developing
countries.
India made an offer of host facilities for the next General
Conference in 1979.
(viii) Joint Ventures
The Economic Division was associated with policy formulation processing and proposals for setting up industrial and
commercial joint ventures with Indian cooperation in foreign
countries, as also with follow-up of their progress. During the
year, 28 new proposals were approved, out of which 24 have
already started being implemented. With this, the total number
of Indian ventures abroad went up to 211 out of which 63 are
already in production. Country-wise details may be seen at
Appendix VI.
<pg111>
USA
INDIA FRANCE IRAN LIBYA AFGHANISTAN SRI LANKA BELGIUM TOTO BULGARIA
GERMANY NORWAY CZECH REPUBLIC ARGENTINA BRAZIL IRAQ SYRIA TANZANIA LATVIA
BANGLADESH NEPAL BURMA MALDIVES INDONESIA MALAYSIA THAILAND LAOS
CAMBODIA FIJI TONGA JAPAN CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC NAURU EGYPT SUDAN ALGERIA
CYPRUS MALTA YEMEN OMAN UNITED ARAB EMIRATES MAURITIUS KENYA MALI SOMALIA
MOZAMBIQUE NAMIBIA ZAMBIA ETHIOPIA GHANA GUINEA GABON MALAWI NIGER
NIGERIA RWANDA SENEGAL SIERRA LEONE UGANDA ZAIRE MEXICO GUYANA PERU RUSSIA
BOLIVIA CHILE ECUADOR VENEZUELA CUBA JAMAICA PANAMA HONG KONG PORTUGAL
Oct 28, 1975

External Publicity
Jan 01, 1975
CHAPTER X
EXTERNAL PUBLICITY
The External Publicity Division continued to work for the
promotion, understanding, sympathy and support for India's
foreign policy and to project a correct and objective image of
the country abroad. This involved close contact with Indian

and foreign press, informing Missions of developments at home,
and the supply to them of books, films, photographs, articles,
pamphlets and exhibition materials. In spite of financial stringency, efforts were continued to provide Indian Missions abroad
with the information and material necessary for their publicity
efforts.
In the international media's coverage on India during the
year under review, the pre-eminent subject of interest was the
recent developments within the country. This became the main
focus of global media interest, as compared to other significant
subjects of media interest in India, like constitutional developments in Sikkim, the accord in Kashmir, India's relations with
her neighbours and with the global powers. Both at the headquarters, and through Indian Missions abroad, consistent efforts
were made to project the correct position regarding these developments in publicity media of the concerned countries. The
most significant impact, in this connection, was made by the
various interviews given by the Prime Minister to important
newspaper and TV representatives from various countries covering a global cross section. They projected the aspirations of
the country and contributed effectively to a correct appreciation
of developments which was also eventually reflected in important
sections of the western media.
<pg112>
Indian Missions in many countries ensured suitable projections of India and her policies through TV/Radio interviews,
speaking engagements and suitable contacts with media, opinion
makers, intellectuals, political leaders and others. The External
Publicity Division serviced these activities, as necessary, through
adequate supply of publicity literature and other material in
English and other languages to Indian Missions abroad.
Indian Missions abroad and representatives of the Indian and
foreign press in India were regularly briefed on major issues as
well as other subjects of significance to India's foreign policy
and her image abroad. With regard to foreign press representatives, many of these briefings were conducted, under arrangements
made in consultation with the departments concerned at ministerial and senior official levels. The Joint Secretary for External
Publicity, in his capacity as the Official Spokesman of the Ministry
of External Affairs, held regular brefings for Indian and foreign
correspondents in Delhi when Parliament was not in session,
and was available for consultation even when it was.
The Ministry's regular publicity work continued under the
following heads
Press Work
The Press Relations Section catered to the needs of 116

visiting foreign journalists and 64 TV teams. It also provided
assistance to 108 Indian journalists going overseas on professional visits, some on cultural exchange programmes. Seventeen
foreign journalists visited India as guests of the Governments of
India.
In addition to the press releases put out in cooperation with
the Press Information Bureau, the Division issued 162 press
releases on varicus subjects, material for which was generally
supplied by Indian Missions abroad and the Territorial Divisions
of the Ministry. Representatives of mass media, both Indian
<pg113>
and foreign, made use of these releases, as well as the Transmission Unit of the Division and AU India Radio.
The Transmission Unit regularly sent out two news-casts per
day to Indian Missions, abroad. Up-to-date information on
political and economic developments in India was essential for
them to project India's image. The Division also liaised with
the Chief Censor in his work, particularly with reference to foreign
press representatives.
Audio-visual Publicity
India participated in 35 film festivals with some selected
feature and documentary films. These films were supplied
through the good offices of the Ministry of Information and
Broadcasting.
Special compilation films were produced on the State visits
Of the following : President Kaunda of Zambia; Vice-President
and Prime Minister of Tanzania; President of Afghanistan and
President of Guyana. Prints of the above mentioned compilation films were supplied for presentation to the concerned
Governments and also to concerned Missions for publicity.
Special films for supply to Missions were produced on the
Republic Day Parade, and on Indo-Arab collaboration. The
latter covered various aspects of friendship and cooperation between India and the Arab countries.
Suitable films on Indian women were supplied to some Missions for screening during international conferences held in the
countries concerned in connection with the International Women's
Year.
The following audio-visual equipment was sanctioned :
Nine 16 mm film. projectors, one each for Indian Missions/Posts in Kuwait, The Hague, Bogota, Port

<pg114>
Louis, Zanzibar, Tehran, Doha, Khartoum and
Mandalay.
Two cinema vans; one each for Indians Missions at
Dacca and Thimpu.
One radio-receiving set for the Mission at Copenhagen.
One public address system manufactured in India for the
Mission at Moscow.
50 LP/EP Gramophone records of Indian classical vocal
and instrumental and popular film music were supplied to different Missions.
Between December 1974 and October 1975, 25,000 photographs, including 2,000 in big size, were supplied to our Missions
abroad.
Exhibition and Cultural Work
For exhibitions in Prague, Algiers, Hanoi, Suva, Madrid,
Thimpu, Mexico City, Bangkok, Kinshasa, Vientiane, Maputo,
London and Ankara, Indian Missions/Post in these
places were supplied with books, photographs, dolls, children's
paintings, album pages of postage stamps, posters and tourist
folders and wall hangings. The Missions were also assisted in
organising Children's Day Painting Competitions on 14 November. The Division liaised. with the Department of Culture and
the Indian Council for Cultural Relations in connection with the
trips of Indian artistes and cultural troupes abroad. Indian
Missions were requested to co-operate with these delegations to
ensure that their exhibitions/performances abroad were a success. Indian Missions abroad were supplied with publicity material on reproductions of paintings brought out by the Lalit Kala
Akademi. Display material for use on the occasion of Olympic
games in Montreal in 1976 was also sent to the Mission in
Ottawa.
<pg115>
Print Publicity
The Production Unit of the Division continued to supply
publicity material to the Indian Missions regularly. These included
Foreign Affairs Record (monthly), Indian and Foreign Review
(fortnightly) and Courrier De L'Inde (French fortnightly).
The Division also produced several small pamphlets written
specially for foreign readership, and provided material for a num-

ber of pamphlets for production through the Ministry of I & B.
Besides the above material produced in the Division itself, the
External Publicity Division also distributed through Indian Missions abroad, some 50,000 pamphlets and brochures on various
aspects of the Indian development effort. Much of this material
came from the DAVP of the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting but material produced by other Government agencies
and non-Government publishers was also utilised.
About 200 articles on socioeconomic progress in India were
supplied to the Missions abroad for use in their weekly/fortnightly/monthly bulletins/Press Releases etc. Three special feature
articles, skits, books and other material brought out by the Department of Social Welfare for the International Women's Year were
supplied to the Missions abroad.
About 3,000 books on Indian history, philosophy, religion,
art and culture and economic development were supplied to
Indian Missions abroad for their libraries and presentation to
local institutions. Indian Missions were also supplied more than
100 Indian newspapers/periodicals for their reading rooms and
for distribution.
Reference Work
Indian Missions abroad sent a large number of press
clippings for screening, analysis and future reference. In addition, the World Press Review based on telexes, cables and
<pg116>
despatches from Missions on coverage of interest to India, appeared regularly.
In order to function effectively, the Division worked in close
coordination with several Ministries, Government departments and
other agencies, particularly the Ministry of Commerce, the Department of Culture, ICCR and the Ministry of Information and
Broadcasting and all its media units.
<pg117>
INDIA
USA ZAMBIA AFGHANISTAN TANZANIA GUYANA COLOMBIA KUWAIT IRAN QATAR SUDAN
DENMARK RUSSIA ALGERIA CZECH REPUBLIC FIJI SPAIN VIETNAM LAOS MEXICO
MOZAMBIQUE ZAIRE TURKEY UNITED KINGDOM CANADA
Jan 01, 1975

Cultural Relations
CHAPTER XI
CULTURAL RELATIONS
The Indian Council for Cultural Relations continued its efforts
to project the image of Indian culture and civilization through
diverse cultural exchanges and activities. These included sponsoring of visits to India from abroad of persons of prominence
in the field of art and literature and the sending abroad of Indian
scholars, writers and artists on goodwill-cum-lecture tours. The
Council also sponsored visits of cultural delegations for giving
performances in neighbouring countries and of foreign delegations
to India. The other activities of the Council included arranging
exhibitions both in India and in other countries. The Council
continued to bring out publications in the field of art and culture.
The Council also looked after the welfare of foreign students
studying in India in various fields.
The distinguished scholars, writers and artists whose visits
to India were sponsored by the Council included :
1. Dr. Syed Ali Ahsan, Vice-Chancellor, Jahangir Nagar
University, Dacca;
2. Dr. Jaya Kusuma, Chairman, Jakarta Arts Council and
Ajip Rosidi, a well known poet from Indonesia;
3. Mr. Narasaloo Ramaya, noted musician from Trinidad;
4. Mr. Jiri Syrovatka, Vice-Director of Crafts Centre,
Prague, Czechoslovakia; Mr. Frantisek Kopenec,
Deptt. of Arts, Ministry of Culture, Prague;
5. Mr. George Keyt, well known painter of Sri Lanka;
<pg118>
6. Mr. Emile Marze, Commissionaire. Incharge of the
Menton Biennale;
7. Chief J. D. Esema, Commissioner for Information and
Cultural Affairs from Nigeria;
8. Dr. Harpar Johnson, an eminent historian of Kenya;
9. Mr. Luzuka, a scholar of English Literature from
Uganda;
10. Mr. Zoltan Kocsis, a famous Pianist from Hungary;

11. Dr. (Mrs.) Ruby K. Mangahas, Prof. & Dean
of the College of Music, University of Philippines;
12. Mr. Sava Ganovski, Academician from Bulgaria;
13. Mr. A. Mercier from Switzerland;
14. Ali de Gortari from Mexico;
15. Prof. P. F. Strawson from U.K.
The Indian scholars, writers and artists who were sent abroad
included :
1. Swami Ranganathananda of Ramakrishna Mission to
U.K.;
2. Prof. Sankho Choudhury, Secretary, Lalit Kala Akademi, to Bangladesh;
3. Shrimati Dipali Nag, well known musician to Bangladesh;
4. Prof. B. K. Roy of Jawaharlal Nehru University to
USSR;
5. Shri A. Ramachandran, a well known painter to Japan:
6. Dr. Lokesh Chandra, Director, International Academy
of Indian Culture to Hungary;
7. Shrimati Indrani Rahman, noted dancer to USA;
<pg119>
8. Prof. C. P. Bhambhri, Prof. of Political Science to
Tanzania;
9. Shri Sripad Joshi, Journalist to the Gulf States;
10. Shri A. V. Subramanian, English & Tamil writer to
USA and Canada.
The Council sponsored the visits of cultural delegations to
participate in the Independence Day celebrations of Afghanistan,
Bhutan and, Nepal. A Cultural Troupe also accompanied the
President of India during his visit to Indonesia.
The Council made all arrangements for a group of Canadian
students who visited India in June and a delegation from the
United Kingdom who came to India in July 1975.
The Council organised an exhibition of photographs from

Italy in collaboration with the Italian Embassy Cultural Centre
and Lalit Kala Akademi. An exhibition of paintings by
Mr. George Keyt, the famous painter of Sri Lanka, was held
from Nov 14, 1975 to 4 December 1975. Six paintings by
Shri Swaminathan and Shri Ganesh Pyne were sent to the Seventh
International Festival of Paintings in France. An exhibition of
reproduction of Indian paintings from Ajanta to the modern
times was held in Turkey and Algeria.
The Council looked after the affairs of Indian Centre for
Africa and the programmes organised by it included: (a) Independence Day celebrations of Mozambique by the Mozambique
students in India, (b) organisation of public function to celebrate
the Namibia Day on 26 August, and (c) a public meeting to
celebrate the anti-Apartheid Day. A reception was held in
honour of the Council of Namibia Mission which visited India
during the year.
The Council continued to exercise control over the seven
British Libraries at Bangalore, Bhopal, Lucknow, Poona, Patna,
Ranchi and Trivandrum and the House of Soviet Culture at
<pg120>
Trivandrum. It also maintained overall supervision and control
of the activities of the Max Mueller Bhavan and Alliance
Francaises, in India and the two United States Book Corners in
Gauhati and Kanpur. The Educational Resources Centre which
prepared source material for use in American schools, and colleges
on behalf of the New York State and other educational institutions in the United States also continued to function under the
supervision of the Council.
In pursuance of its policy to disseminate Indian art and
culture, the Council presented books and objects of art to Mauritius, Tunisia, USA, Fiji, Mexico, Bangladesh, Czechoslovakia,
FRG, Algeria, Rumania, Zaire, Sri Lanka, Zambia, Canada,
Trinidad, Belgium, Australia, Bhutan, Chile, Indonesia, Republic
of Korea, Turkey, Somalia, Ghana, Afghanistan, Ireland, Brazil,
Kenya, Malaysia, Greece, Hongkong, Mozambique and Poland.
Some sets of musical instruments were sent to the United States
and Mauritius. Three replicas of Taj Mahal were sent to
museums in Trinidad, one Indian doll was sent to Canada for
presentation and another set of dolls to the United States.
The Council maintained Chairs-Centres of Indian studies in
Iran, Yugoslavia, Trinidad, Senegal, Guyana, Afghanistan, Lebanon, Mexico and Indonesia.
The Council continued to develop cultural centres already
set up in Fiji, Guyana and the United States of America and
proposals were considered to set up other centres in the near
future.

The Council organised four summer camps during the vacations for the benefit of foreign students studying in different parts
of India. Two summer camps were held in Kashmir and one
each in South India and Darjeeling. A total number of 198
students from 18 different countries took part in these camps.
Another mini-camp in Kashmir was specially organised for a
group of six North-Vietnamese students. Six study tours were
<pg121>
organised to Rajasthan, Goa, Madras and Mysore for the benefit of foreign students. 300 students from various countries Studying in Bombay, Madras and Delhi took part in these tours.
The Council organised a grand Deepavali reception in Delhi.
It was attended by about 400 foreign students studying in Delhi
and in neighbouring areas. ICCR Newsletter (quarterly) continued to be published by the Council for the benefit of foreign
students. The Council held a brief orientation programme for
a number of groups of American teachers. An Orientation lecture on 'Indian Social System' was organised by the Indian Centre
for Africa for the benefit of Nigerian scholars. A seven-day
orientation programme was organised for the trainees going to
the United Kingdom under the Manpower Development Project.
The Council invited Prof. M. Bugault, an eminent Indologist.
at the University of Sorbonne, France to visit India under the
scheme of orientation of foreign scholars. An orientation course
was also held for a batch of 26 IFS probationers.
Essay competitions were organised on subjects relating to
India through the respective Indian Missions in Turkey, Thailand,
Somalia, Hungary, Mauritius, USSR, Australia, Zambia, Bhutan,
Yugoslavia, and Senegal. The Secretary of the Council, Smt. S.
Kocher, visited Mexico as a member of the Indian delegation
to the International Women's Year conference held in May-June
1975.
The Nehru Award for international understanding for 1973
was presented to Mr. Julius Nyerere, President of Tanzania, at
a ceremony held at Vigyan Bhavan on 17 January 1976. Prime
Minister, Smt. Indira Gandhi read the citation.
The Azad Bhavan auditorium was used on more than twenty
occasions during the period under report to present performances
of dance and music by Indians as well as musicians from abroad.
The Azad Bhavan Library which preserves many rare
volumes and sound research material was put to use by a number
of foreign and Indian scholars.
<pg122>
The 'Nomination Scheme' under which the Ministry has been

assisting, for the past several years, self-financing students from
developing countries in Africa and Asia to secure admission to
Medical and Engineering Colleges in India, was continued during
the year. There was increasing demand from foreign students
for the facilities offered by the Government of India for Medical
and Engineering Courses under the Nomination Scheme. However, in view of the limited number of reserved seats, a large
number of students who were otherwise well qualified, could not
get admission to. such courses.
In 1975, the Ministry arranged admission in Medical and
Engineering colleges, of a total of 302 foreign students as against
293 in 1974. 78 of these were admitted to Medical Colleges
and 224 to Engineering Colleges. There were 38 students from
Africa, 77 from West Asia, 97 from South East Asia, 27 from
Sri Lanka, 44 from Nepal and 19 from other countries. Distribution of reserved medical and engineering seats is shown in
Appendix VII.
20 M of EA/75-9
<pg123>
INDIA
USA INDONESIA CZECH REPUBLIC NORWAY SLOVAKIA SRI LANKA NIGER NIGERIA KENYA
UNITED KINGDOM UGANDA HUNGARY PHILIPPINES BULGARIA SWITZERLAND MEXICO
BANGLADESH JAPAN TANZANIA CANADA AFGHANISTAN BHUTAN NEPAL ITALY FRANCE
ALGERIA TURKEY MOZAMBIQUE NAMIBIA FIJI TUNISIA ZAIRE ZAMBIA AUSTRALIA
BELGIUM CHILE BRAZIL GHANA IRELAND KOREA MALI SOMALIA GREECE MALAYSIA
POLAND MAURITIUS GUYANA IRAN SENEGAL YUGOSLAVIA VIETNAM GERMANY THAILAND
Nov 14, 1975

Protocol Matters
CHAPTER XII
PROTOCOL MATTERS
On reestablishment of diplomatic relations between India
and Portugal, Dr. Gabriel Mesquita de Brito assumed charge as
the Charge d'Affaires and interim of the Embassy of Portugal in
New Delhi with effect from Apr 15, 1975.
H. E. Mr. Mamady Lamine Conde, the first Ambassador of

Guinea to India stationed at Tokyo, presented his Credentials
to the President on 25 June 1975.
The High Commission for Zambia in New Delhi was opened
on 4 June 1975. H. E. Mr. Axson Chibeka Chalikulima, the
first High Commissioner for Zambia to India, presented his
Credentials to the President on 27 August 1975.
Mr. Vo Hai Hien assumed charge as Charge d'Affaires ad
interim of the Embassy of the Republic of South Vietnam wit
effect from 16 May 1975. H.E. Mr. Nguyen Van Sinh, the
Ambassador, presented his Credentials to the President on
1 December 1975.
The Embassy of the Libyan Arab Republic in New Delhi
was opened on 4 December 1975. Mr. Rageb A. Azzarouk
assumed charge as Charge d'Affaires and interim of the Embassy
on the same day. The appointment of Mr. Ezzedin Ali Mohamoud Al-Ghadamsi, as the First Ambassador of Libya to India
had been announced earlier on 2 June 1975.
<pg124>
INDIA
PORTUGAL GUINEA JAPAN ZAMBIA PERU USA VIETNAM LIBYA UNITED KINGDOM
Apr 15, 1975

Passport, Visa And Consular Services
CHAPTER XIII
PASSPORT, VISA AND CONSULAR SERVICES
During the year 1975, there was a sharp increase in the
number of applications for new passports, miscellaneous services,
etc. in all the Regional Passport Offices in India. The Regional
Passport Office, Kerala, which started functioning from Madras
on Mar 30, 1975 moved to Ernakulam on 26 April 1975.
The office was inaugurated at a function at Cochin on 26 April
1975 by Shri Madhavan Kutty, Director (PV) and Chief Passport Officer. The State's Home Minister and the other VIPs
attended the inaugural ceremony. The opening of this office
(the eighth RPO office in India) was welcomed by the State's
leading newspapers as a landmark and as a relief to the thousands
of applicants for passports from the Region who had hitherto

to go all the way to Madras to get a passport.
The total sanctioned strength of the Central Passport and
Emigration Organisation at the end of the year was as follows:---------------------------------------------------------------Regional Passport Officers
8
Assistant Passport Officers
7
Public Relation Officers
9
Superintendents/Protector of Emigrants
19
Non-gazetted clerical staff
335
Class III (Non-clerical Jeep-drivers)
2
Class IV staff
109
--------------------------------------------------------------Consequent on Sikkim becoming the 22nd State of the Indian
Union with effect from 26 April 1975, the Passport Act, 1967
(15 of 1967) and the Passport Rules, 1967 were made applicable to the State of Sikkim with effect from 28 June 1975.
The Political Officer in Sikkim ceased to function as the PIA
from that date and the Regional Passport Officer, Calcutta was
<pg125>
simultaneously vested with the powers to entertain applications
for grant of passports from those residing in Sikkim. The old
records on the subject were also transferred from the office of
the Political Officer in Sikkim to the Regional Passport Officer,
Calcutta. Similarly, the Emigration-Act, 1922 and the Emigration Rules, 1923 were extended to Sikkim with effect from
1 December, 1975.
All the Regional Passport Offices Were inspected by the Chief
Passport Officer and instructions on the spot were issued
to
streamline the procedure with a view to more speedy disposal
of passport applications. The Chief Passport Officer also gave instructions on urgent administrative matters.
Due to a sharp increase in the number of passport applications in the Regional Passport Offices in Chandigarh, Ernakulam.
Lucknow and Delhi, senior officers in the Ministry visited these
offices and the Work Study Unit of the Ministry of External Affairs also inspected them. Based on their recommendations,
steps were taken to increase the establishment of these offices to
enable them to cope with the additional work.
The number of ordinary, diplomatic and official passports,
issued, serviced and other miscellaneous services rendered up to
31 December 1975 are given below:-----------------------------------------------------------------------Figures for 1974 are

given in brackets:
(i) Ordinary Passports
4,52,437 (3,34,756)
(ii) Diplomatic Passports
800
(796)
(iii) Official Passports
3,031
(3,556)
(iv) Ordinary Passports services
1,04,212 (1,17,809)
(v) Diplomatic and Official passports serviced
2,264
(2,287)
(vi) Number of visas issued to foreigners (Diplomats and staff of foreign embassies)
3,043
(3,037)
(vii) Number of Emigration cases registered
3,018
---------------------------------------------------------------------------The Passport and Visa Division continued to make efforts,
through its various Regional Passport Offices, to issue passports
<pg126>
with the minimum of delay. In spite of a sharp increase in
the number of passport applications, these offices were able to
cope with the rush of work. Sixty passport applications were
rejected during 1975. Consistent with the increase in the number of passport applications the revenue earned by the Passport Offices also increased. Total amount collected in fees up to
31st December 1975 was Re. 1,62,71,943.79 as compared to
Rs. 1,11,01,742.09 in the previous year.
Consular Section coordinates consular functions of Indian
Missions abroad.
During the year, 335 destitute Indian nationals were repatriated to India at Government expense and 55 stranded Indian
nationals were extended financial assistance. Government dues
continued to be recovered with the help of respective State Governments. Cases of arrest/depurtation of 88 Indian nationals
abroad were reported. Besides continuing efforts to secure the
extradition of E. E. Jhirad from the United States of America,
11 fresh cases of extradition of fugitive criminals were examined.
164 cases of registration of persons as Indian citizens were processed in consultation with the Ministry of Home Affairs. Apart
from dealing with 38 cases relating to deaths of Indian nationals
abroad, 58 cases of estates of deceased Indians are being looked
into. Transmission of judicial documents and service of summons from India on persons residing abroad and vice versa
were also undertaken. Over 40,000 judicial, commercial and
educational documents were authenticated to facilitate their
production abroad. Bulk of these documents related to persons
from medical profession who went to Iran and Libya. Consular
Section also rendered assistance in resolving matrimonial disputes involving Indian nationals abroad, tracing the whereabouts
of Indians as well as foreigners and verification of the authenticity
of documents and certificates.
A Consular Convention was signed in December 1975 with

the German Democratic Republic on the lines of the ones signed
earlier with the Union of Soviet Socialist Republic and Czechoslovakia.
<pg127>
USA
INDIA IRAN LIBYA
Mar 30, 1975

Administration and Organisation
CHAPTER XIV
ADMINISTRATION AND ORGANISATION
Shri Y. B. Chavan and Shri Bipin Pal Das respectively were
the Minister and Deputy Minister of External Affairs throughout
the year. Shri G. Parthasarathi, continued as Chairman, Policy
Planning, with the rank of Cabinet Minister. During the year,,
there were three changes at the level of Joint Secretary and above.
Shri Kewal Singh remained Foreign Secretary while Shri V. C.
Trivedi and Shri B. K. Sanyal continued as Secretary (East) and
Secretary (Economic Division) respectively. Shri J. S. Mehta
Additional Secretary in overall charge of Administration and
Africa Divisions assumed charge as Secretary (East) in place
of Shri V. C. Trivedi, who retired on Feb 11, 1976. Shri
K. R. Narayanan assumed charge as Additional Secretary (Southern Division and Policy Planning) replacing Shri M. A. Rehman, on transfer as Ambassador to Bonn. Shri V. K. Ahuja,
after relinquishing charge as Ambassador in Bucharest, joined
the Ministry as Additional Secretary (WANA), Shri Surendra
Sinh Alirajpur continued as Joint Secretary (Adm.). Shri
Thomas Abraham, after relinquishing charge as High Commissioner, Singapore, was appointed as Joint Secretary (Establish-ment).
According to the Pillai Committee recommendations of 1965,
a cadre strength of 550 was envisaged for the Indian Foreign
Service over a ten-year period. As against this, the existing
cadre strength was 454. During the year under review, 27
officers were on deputation to other Ministries/Departments etc.,
viz., one in the Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic
Affairs), four in. the Ministry of Commerce, one each in the
Ministries of Petroleum and Chemicals and Education. two in

<pg128>
the Cabinet Secretariat, one each in the Department of Space
& Atomic Energy, five in the United Nations and related agencies, two, in the National Defence College, one in the Indian
Council for Cultural Relations, two on Fellowships to Harvard
and Oxford Universities, one in the Trade Development Authority, Delhi and four in Regional Passport Offices.
The Foreign Service needs to reassess priorities continuously,
taking into account changes in the international scene and the
fresh requirements, in consequence, of diplomatic activity. Recognising these considerations, and as part of a process required
by the Cadre Rules, a review of the IFS cadre was continued during the year, with the expectation that concrete recommendations
would, be made soon. The other major cadre of the Ministry,
the Indian Foreign Service 'B' had an overall strength of 2832
and including 68 officers who were posted in the Ministry of
Commerce at Headquarters. The Combined Research Cadre
of the Ministry, constituted in 1973, comprised 48 officers. Besides, the Ministry's strength included 44 officers belonging to
the Information Service of India, 23 officers of the L & T Division, 16 officers in the Hindi Unit, 28 Interpreters and 17 Library staff. Officers in class III non-Ministerial and Class IV
posts totalled 105 and 630 respectively.
The Headquarters of the Ministry was organised in 20 Divisions with. a total strength of 2422 personnel including those in
the Branch Secretariat, Calcutta (but excluding Regional Passport Offices). There were, 121 Resident Missions/Posts abroad
(including three Special Offices, i.e. those of the Representative in Bhutan and Permanent Representatives to, the U.N. in
New York and Geneva), with a total personnel strength of 636
Diplomatic Officers and 2487 Non-Diplomatic Officers, including
local employees. India had concurrent representation in 48
countries. Thus, with Resident and concurrent accreditation as
above, India was represented in most of the countries in the world.
India's representation in Sikkim through the Office of the
Political Officer in Gangtok, ended consequent on Sikkim
<pg129>
becoming the 22nd State of the Union on 16 May 1975 and
the Office was closed on 15 November 1975. During the year,
Embassies were opened in Maputo (Mozambique), and in Lisbon (Portugal) in June and July 1975. respectively, under
the charge of Resident Ambassadors. A High Commission was
opened in Kingston (Jamaica) and a Resident High Commissioner took charge there in November 1975. A Liaison Office
was also opened at Phuntsholing, Bhutan during the year. It has
been decided further to establish a Consulate General at Port
Said in the Arab Republic of Egypt.

With effect from 1 April 1975 the responsibility of administrative and budgetary control over the India Supply Missions,
London and Washington, and the Office of the Chief Accounts
Officer, Washington was transferred from the Department of
Supply, Ministry of Rehabilitation and Supply, to this Ministry.
Thereafter, the two Supply Missions were redesignated as the
Supply Wings of the Mission concerned, and their administration
was more closely coordinated with the overall administration of
the Mission.
The expenditure of the Ministry during the financial year
1975-76 is estimated to be of the order of Rs. 104,22.60 lakhs
(excluding loans to Bangladesh and Bhutan amounting to
Rs. 1702.13 lakhs), a break-down of which is given below:-----------------------------------------------------------------R. E. 75-76
is. in lakhs
Headquarters
429.60
Missions/Posts abroad
1989.51
Other Irems :
Contributions to the U.N. and other Commonwealth Secretariat 306.22
Central Passport & Emigration Organisation
74.80
Other Miscellaneous Items
1979.66
Subsidies and Aid
Grants to Sikkim
1323.17
Subsidy to Bhutan
1943.12
Aid to Nepal
976.51
Aid to other developing countries in Asia and Africa
461.69
Aid to Bangladesh
922.25
Special Security & Welfare
16.07
Total
Rs.
104,22.60
--------------------------------------------------------------------<pg130>
Details of sub-head-wise expenditure on Headquarters,
Missions/Posts abroad and on External Publicity are given in
Appendix VIII.
Economy was an over-riding consideration of the Ministry's
organisation and administration. Government policy of reducing
non-plan spending was scrupulously followed and the Prime
Minister's directives on economy and efficiency implemented. The
imperative need for the optimum use of resources led to special efforts on the part of the Ministry to minimise expenditure
and increase output. The Ministry's functioning both at home
and abroad, was accordingly closely reviewed. Due to the
world-wide, energy crisis and persistent inflation an increase in
outlay was however, unavoidable, if Missions were to function
effectively and if political and economic objectives were to be
fulfilled. Consequently, a rise in allowances for cost of living,

rents and salaries of local employees was necessary in many stations. This was however off set to a large extent by economics
effected through reallocation and reduction of posts and personnel and cuts in other items. Thus, the increase in establishment costs was kept low. Missions abroad employed less manpower and operated at a lower cost than most countries, in
proportion to the wide-ranging extent of India's representation
abroad and the political and economic returns this brings.
Between May and September 1975, the Foreign Service
Inspectors visited 14 Missions/Posts viz. Frankfurt, Oslo, Copenhagen, Hamburg, Bonn, London, Prague, Geneva, Bahrain, Muscat, Jeddah, Damascus Khartoum and Addis Ababa, and in
Dec. 75--Jan.76 they also inspected Missions at London, New
York, Washington, Ottawa, Brasilia, Buenos Aires, Lima, Kingston, Port-of-Spain, George Town and The Hague. At each of
these stations they examined the staffing, organisation of work,
structure of allowances, and service conditions of local employees.
They noted the marked increase that had taken place during the
year in most stations in rent and cost of living, and the special
problems of some Missions caused by large and constant fluctuations in exchange rates. The Inspectors made a number of
<pg131>
recommendations, which when implemented, will rationalise the
expenditure on establishments abroad.
As there was again a large increase in rent in most stations
during the year, the programme of acquiring buildings continued
and new property was purchased or constructed in a number of
countries. While a house was bought for the Ambassador in
Maputo (Mozambique), purchase of a residential flat in Dar-esSalaam, a chancery building in Maputo (Mozambique) and a house
for the chancery-cum-residence in Tananarive were approved. In
addition, proposals for purchasing a house for the Ambassador's
residence in Warsaw and another flat in Dar-es-Salaam are under
consideration. Apart from these, construction of a new chancery
building in Bangkok was approved and preliminary work begun
on the project. The construction of residential flats in Tokyo
which was undertaken earlier was completed during the year and
work on Chancery and residential buildings in Thimpu (Bhutan)
is nearing completion. The construction of chancery buildings
and residential flats on the newly acquired plots in Ottawa
(Canada) and Lusaka (Zambia) was under consideration. With
the acquisitions made this year, the Government of India now
own chancery buildings in 13 countries, residences of Heads of
Missions/Ports in 27 countries, and residences for other personnel
in 11 countries.
In accordance with the recent directives issued by the government, special measures were taken by the Ministry to streamline
administration by rationalising work methods. Schemes proposed by the Department of Personnel & Administrative Reforms,

to revise procedures and Rules and Regulations were also, adopted.
The Staff Inspection Unit of the Ministry of Finance continued
its assessment, commenced in 1973, of requirements in various
Divisions of the Ministry. By the end of 1975, the SIU had
furnished its reports on manpower requirements in all the ten
territorial divisions, and also the Historical, Legal & Treaties,
Administration, Coordination and External Publicity Divisions.
Inspection of the remaining five Divisions viz. Protocol, Economic,
Passport and Consular, Policy Planning and U.N. Div. is in
<pg132>
progress. The Internal Work Study (O&M) unit of the Ministryconducted studies of man-power requirements of some Missions/
Posts abroad and Divisions at Headquarters including Pakistan
Visa Cell. The Regional Passport Offices, New Delhi, Bombay.
Lucknow and Ernakulam were also subjected to on-the-spot
studies of work-loads and staff requirements. With the new procedures introduced as a result of these studies, it is estimated
that revenue receipts of the Regional Passport Offices on account
of provision of passport and consular services, would be of the
order of Rs. 143.55 lakhs as against total expenditure of
Rs. 54.63 lakhs on maintaining these offices.
The Welfare Unit in the Ministry continued to look afterthe general Welfare of all the officials serving at Headquarters
and Missions abroad. A major break-through in the matter of'
reservation of seats in the Central Schools as well as Schools
under the Administrative control of Delhi Administration forthe wards of officials of this Ministry was made. It secured 5
seats in the Engineering Colleges besides 10 seats in the Medical
Colleges for the wards of the officials serving abroad.
The Welfare Unit provided financial assistance out of theStaff Benefit Fund to the extent of Rs. 6,250.00 to the bereaved
families of officials who passed away during the year and toother officials in cases of prolonged illness. It also arranged forthe employment of 8 direct dependents of the deceased officials
in the Ministry and the Regional Passport office.
To augment the meagre resources of the Staff Benefit Fund,
Welfare Unit organised a Charity Show by Kumari Yamini
Krishnamurthi. A sum of about Rs. 20,000.00 was raised from
the Show.
Measures taken during the year, to bring about greater use.
of Hindi in the official work of the Ministry, in Missions and
Posts abroad and Regional Passport Offices produced encouraging results. The instructions of the Ministry of Home Affairs
<pg133>
relating to the progressive use of Hindi were submitted for periodical review, to the Official Language Implementation Committee
Hindi was being used increasingly in formal communications ad-

dressed to foreign missions and governments. Letters of Appointment, Letters of Recall, Letters of Credence and other protocol documents were issued in Hindi. International Treaties and
Agreements, to which India was a party, as well as bilateral
agreements entered into, and joint-communiques signed by the
Government of India with other foreign governments were prepared and signed also in Hindi. Planned efforts to promote Hindi
internationally through Missions/Posts abroad also continued.
Under the "Scheme for Propagation of Hindi Abroad", Hindi
books, Charts, language records and other teaching aids were
supplied to Missions/Posts abroad to enable them to cater effectively to the interest in Hindi on the part of people of Indian origin
abroad as well as others who wished to learn Hindi. Hindi
Officers who were posted in two Missions i.e. Mauritius and
Fiji, were entrusted as hitherto, with providing assistance in preparing curricula for the teaching of Hindi and the conduct of
examinations. They also helped organisation of literary and cultural activities. The Hindi Officer of the Ministry visited a num-ber of countries during the year to evaluate results achieved as
well as the potential for further promotion of Hindi.
<pg134>
GERMANY
ROMANIA REPUBLIC OF SINGAPORE INDIA USA BHUTAN SWITZERLAND MOZAMBIQUE
PORTUGAL JAMAICA EGYPT UNITED KINGDOM BANGLADESH NEPAL NORWAY BAHRAIN
CZECH REPUBLIC ETHIOPIA SAUDI ARABIA SUDAN SYRIA ARGENTINA BRAZIL CANADA
PERU CAYMAN ISLANDS SPAIN TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO POLAND JAPAN ZAMBIA PAKISTAN
MAURITIUS FIJI
Feb 11, 1976

Appendix I International Conferences, Congresses, Seminars
APPENDIX I
International Conferences, Congresses, Seminars etc. in which India
participated in 1975-76
------------------------------------------------------------------------------S.
Conferences etc. Participated
Nature
Foreign
Exchang
e
No.
(with dates)
of partiComponent of
Ex
cipation
penditure in

Rs
.
------------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
------------------------------------------------------------------------------A. ABROAD
1. IAEA-Advisory meeting on Review
of the Status of the Safe-guards Techniques and Identification of the
Objectives of their Development in
1976-80 in Vienna (Mar 03, 1975 -7 March
1975).
2. IAEA-International Symposium on
the use of High Level Radiation in
Waste Treatment Status and prospects at F.R.G. (17-21 March 1975).

Official

-

Do.

-

3. EXCAP Seminar-Cum-Training
Courses on Technical and Operational Aspects held in Bangkok from
17 March to 12 April 1975.

Do.

-

4. Third United Nations Conference on
the Law of the Sea held at Geneva
from 17 March to 10 May 1975.

Do.

5. IMCO-Symposiuw on Prevention of
Marine Pollution from Ships held in
Mexico from 22-30 March 1975.

Do.

Nil.

6. International Workshop on Comparative Risk Assessment of Environment Hazard held at Woods Hole,
Mass, USA from 31 March to 4 April
1975.

Do.

Nil.

3,72,560.03

7. Indian Delegation to the eighth
Do.
21,555.90
Session of United Nations Commission on International Trade Law
held in Geneva from 1 to 18 April
1975.
------------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg135>
APPENDIX II-contd.
------------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
------------------------------------------------------------------------------

-8. 3rd UN Conference on the laws of Official
Seas, Geneva, (1-30 April 1975).
9. 9th Session of FAO Committee of
Export on Pesticides in Agriculture,
Rome, (2-15 April 1975).

All Expenditure met
by E.A.

Do.

All Expenditure met
by FAO.

10. Meeting in connection
with an
International Energy Conference held
in Paris from 5 to 16 April 1975.

Do.

49,917.18

11.
IAEA-Fourth and final research coordination meeting and International
intercomparison
experiments on
nuclear accident dosimetry at U.K.
(6-19 April 1975)

Do.

Nil.

12.
Diplomatic Conference convened by
the Swiss Government and the Ad
Hoe Committee on Refulation of
Weapons convened by the ICRC,
Geneva, Switzerland, (7 April 1975).

Do.

13.
Iraqi Atomic Energy Commission-1st
Scientific; Conference on Peaceful
Uses of Atomic Energy for Scientific
and Economic Development at Baghdad, Iraq, (1 - 11 April 1975).

Do.

Nil.

14.
FAO Ad Hoc Consultation on Pesticides in Agriculture and Public Health,
Rome, (7-11 April 1975)

Do.

7,841.65

15.
26th Session of IMCO Legal Committee held in London from 7-11
April 1975.

Do.

Nil.

16. Fifth Asian Labour Minister's Conference, Melbourne (Australia) from
7 to 11 April 1975.

Do.

2,059.29

17. First Preparatory Meeting for the
Conference on International Economic
Cooperation (7-16 April 1975).

Do.

Not Known

18. IAEA-Meeting dealing with Microexplosions held at Vienna, (8 & 9
April 1975)

Do.

2,003.71

Nil.

19.
Meeting of Intergovernmental council
Do.
All expenditure met
for international Hydrological Decade
by CSIR.
programme, Paris, (9-17 April 1975).
--------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg136>
APPENDIX II-contd.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4

---------------------------------------------------------------------------20. Ist Session of the Intergovernmental
Council for I.H.D. held at Paris
from 9 to 17 April, 1975.

Official

-

21. Third UN Conference of the Law of
the Sea at Geneva from 9 April to
12 May 1975.

Do.

Nil.

22. IEC/TC 65 Industrial Process Measurement and Control, and its subcommittees, Moscow (10-11 April 1975).

Do.

-

23.
per

Do.

Meeting

of international Liaison

(pound) 45 per

day

Committee on Coop. Thrift and
Credit at Frankfurt (Federal Republic

person for one
day only in addi-

of Germany) (14 April 1975).
costs etc.

tion to travel

24. IAEA-International Symposium on
Reliability of Nuclear Power Plants
at Vienna, (14-16 April 1975).

Do.

Nil.

25. 9th Session of IMCO Facilitation
Committee held in London from 14 to
18 April 1975.

Do.

Nil.

26. Meeting of Sub-committee of Legal
Committee of International Civil
Aviation Organisation (ICAO) convened by the Organisation at Montreal from 14 to 23 April 1975.

Do.

5,100,00

27. International Financial Management
Seminar, 14-25 April 1975.

Do.

Expenditure borne by
the Centre for
Education in Inter.
national Management.

28. Participated in a Seminar-cum-Workshop on Soil Testing Methodology
relating to road development held
at Kuala Lumpur (Malaysia) from
14 to 26 April 1975.

Do.

Expenditure met by
the United Nations.

29. IAEA-Second Research Coordination
Meeting on the Environmental behaviour of Tritium at Belgium, (15-18
April 1975).

Do.

-

30. 3rd Session of FAO Committee on
Do
10,479
Agriculture, Rome, (15-24 April
1975).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg137>

APPENDIX II-contd.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
---------------------------------------------------------------------------31. Third Session of the Governing
Council of United Nations Environment Programme held in Nairobi
(Kenya) from 17 April to 2 May
1975.

Official

12,970

32. Third meeting of the IGCP Board at
London from 20 to 25 April 1975.

Do.

Nil.

33. Sixth Regional Collegium on InterRegional Technicians Training Sponsored by the Colombo Plan Bureau
held at Kuala Lumpur, between 21
to 25 April 1975.

Do.

Nil.

34. IAEA-Research Coordination meeting on Neutron Scattering (21 to 28
April 1975).

Do.

Nil.

35. Annual meetings of the Asian Development Bank held in Manila (21 to 28
April 1975).

Do.

12,375

36. (a) ISO Planning Committee (ISO/
PLACO) Geneva (21-22 April 1975.)
(b)
ISO Executive Committee (ISO/
EXCO) Geneva (23-25 April
1975).
(c)
ISO Standing Committee for the
study of Principles of Standardization (ISO/STACO). Geneva
(28 to 30 April 1975).

Do.
Do.

3150.00

Do.

37. Ninth Session of the Industrial Development Board held in Vienna from
21 April to 2 May 75.

Do.

1,500

38. Meeting of the, Inter-governmental
Working Group of the UN Committee
on Science and Technology for development under the auspices of United
Nations Economic and Social Council
held at New York from 21 April to
2 May 75.

Do.

7,960

39. IMCO/International Conference on the
Do.
15,961.75
Establishment of an International
Maritime Satellite System held in
London from 23 April to 9 May
1975.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg138>
APPENDIX I--Contd.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
---------------------------------------------------------------------------40. Intl. Training Seminar on Geoscientific
Studies and presentation of Potential
of the Natural Environment at Hannover between (24 April to 24 May
75).

Official

Nil.

41. 2nd Meeting of FAO Expert Groups
me
t
on International Agricultural Adjustments, Rome (27-30 April 1975).

Do.

All expenditure

42. 7th World Meteorological Congress
at Geneva from 28 April-23 May 1975.

Do.

43. Conference of Commonwealth Heads
of Governments held in Kingston,
Jamaica (29 April to 5 May 1975).

Do.

44. Conference of Commonwealth Heads
of Governments held in Kingston
from 29 April to 7 May 1975.

Do.

45. Meeting convened by the Mekong
Committee of ESCAP for financing
and execution of Pioneer Agricultural
Projects (1-2 May 75).

Do.

2220.56

46. Delegation to the Ad-hoc meeting of
Commonwealth Telecommunications
council on Indian Ocean Commonwealth/South East Asia Cable Planning in Hong Kong during 1--7 May
1975.

Do.

1073.55

47. Matters relating to fisheries survey
with Govt. of Poland, Warsaw (2-15
May 1975).

Do.

11894.60

48. For Negotiating Mission with World
Bank for Negotiating Credit, Washington (3-5 May 1975).

Do.

4,300.00

49. Sub-Regional Programme of Training of trainees in Administrative organised jointly by ACDA, ESCAP
held at Tehran (Iran) from 3-19 May
1975.

Do.

Nil.

by FAO.
20,946
-

1,52,154.11

50. Meeting of interested countries
Do.
3,036.43
for the setting up of International
Fund for Agricultural Development
Geneva (5-7 May 1975).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------20 M of EA/75-10

<pg139>
APPENDIX I--contd.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
---------------------------------------------------------------------------51. Offshore Technology Conference held
at Huston (USA) from 5-8 May 1975.

Official

7,481.76

52. International meeting of experts on
Participation and Self-management in
Education, convened by the Institute
for Pedagogical Research and Yugoslav Commission for UNESCO held at
Belgrade from 5-10 May 1975.

Do.

Nil.

53. 97th Session of the Executive Board
of UNESCO held at Paris from 5 to
22 May 1975.

Do.

3,000

54. Eleventh Photo-Voltaic Conference at
Phonix, Arozona, USA from 6 to 9
May 1975.

DO.

Not Known.

55. Third Tripartite Technical Meeting
for Mines other than Coal Mines of
ILO Geneva from 6 to 16 May 1975.

Do.

Nil.

56. ACC Market Seminar on Coconut
Production Manila (Philippines)
(6-17 May 1975).

Do.

Nil.

57. Market Seminar on Coconut Products
organised by ITC UNCTA-D/GATT
and ACC at Philippines (6-17 May
1975).

Do.

Nil.

58. Meeting of the International Association for the study of the Cultures of
Central Asia convened by UNESCO
in Paris from 7-9 May 1975.

Do.

Nil.

59. To obtain first hand information of
the condition of Law and its progeny
in Nepal (9-13 May 1975).

Do.

8,397.13

60. IX World Petroleum Congress held
at Tokyo from 11-16 May 1975.

Do.

16,104.50

61. Conference on Statistical Policy in
Less Developed Countries at Institute
of Development Studies, University of
Sussex Brighteak (UK) from 12-16
May 1975.

Do.

2,310.00

62. 3rd Meeting of the Middle East/South
East Asian Communications/Metro-

Do.

1,129

logical Regional Planning Group of
ICAO at Cairo from 12-20 May 1975.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg140>
APPENDIX I--contd.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
---------------------------------------------------------------------------63. International Conference on Marine
Parks and Reserves Tokyo (12-24
May 1975.

Official

Nil.

64. General Assembly of World Tourism
Organisation Madrid, Spain (12-31
May 1975).

Do.

15,140.00

65. To attend Asian Workshop for Agraian Reforms and Rural Development,
Manila (12 May to 11 June 1975).

Do.

Nil.

66. 28th World Health Assembly held at
Geneva. (13-30 May 1975).
(Approx
.)

Do.

24,000.00 Swiss
Francs

67. United Nations Children's Fund Executive Board Meeting New York
(14-30 May 1975).

Do.

25,563.75

68. Annual Meeting of Steering Committee of the CCPs held at Berne
from 15-16 May 1975.

Do.

1,803.85

69. Conference held at Dacca (Bangladesh) in connection with the demarcation of Indo-Bangladesh boundary
in Tripura. West Bengal Sector
(16-23 May 1975).

Do.

Nil.

70. Symposium on Social Economic
Changes in the process of industrialization held in Moscow from 18-27
May 1975.

Do.

Nil.

71. South Asian Housing Ministers Conference held at Colombo (Sri Lanka)
from 19 to 21 May 1975.

Do.

5,240

72. ESCAP Workshop on the Legislative
Shippers held in Bangkok from
19-30 May 1975.

Do.

Nil.

73. Ad Hoc (FAO) Consultations on
World security and Agricultural
Adjustment Rome (19-30 May 1975).

Do.

8,864.45

74.

Do.

Nil

Fast West Centre Research

Pig.

Workshop on Inter-Prenterial Development in Small Farm Region,
USA (19 May to 6 June 1975).
75. symposium on Oil Seeds and Plant
Protection Manitoba (Canada) (20-23
May, 1975).

Do.

Nil.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg141>
APPENDIX I--Contd.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
---------------------------------------------------------------------------76. APO 17th GB Meeting held in Seoul
from 20-23 May 1975.

Official

1,602.00

77. Seminar on Radiometric Age Dating
held at Bangkok from 20-27 May
1975 under the auspices of the committee for coordination of joint prospecting for Mineral Resources in Asian
Off-shore Areas (CCOP) of ESCAP.

Do.

3,793.55

78. Second UN Symposium on the development and use of geothermal resources
at San-francisco, California, USA,
from 20-31 May 1975.

Do.

Nil.

79. Regional Workshop on Curriculum
Development for Moral Education at
the First level of Education in Asia,
Tokyo 20 May to 19 June 1975 organised by the National Institute for
Educational Research of Japan in
cooperation with the UNESCO
Regional Office for Education Asia,
Bangkok.

Do.

Nil.

80. 10th Session of Inter-governmental
in Jute Kanaf or Allied Fibres, Rome
(21-23 May 1975).

Do.

2,727.52

81. Seminar on 'Radiometric Age Dating'
at Bangkok from 21-27 May 1975.

Do.

591.65

82. IAEA-Research Coordination meeting
on Radiation Preservation of Asian
Fish and Fishery Products-First
meeting of the project committee of
Asian Regional Project on Radiation,
Preservation of Fish and Fishery Products at Jakarta, Bangkok (22-30
May 1975).

Do.

83.

Do.

General Assembly of ICOMOS hold

8,214

in Rothenburg, Federal Republic of
Germany from 22 May to 1 June 1975.
84. Symposium on New International
Economic order organised by, the
Govt. of Netherlands at The Hague
from 23-24 May 1975.

Do.

Nil.

85. 43rd Session of O.I.E. Paris (26-31
Do.
2,535.65
May 1975).
--------------------------------------------------------------------<pg142>
APPENDIX I--contd.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
-----------------------------------------------------------------------86. Second Regional Consultation meeting on the Asian Programme of Educational Innovation for Development
held at Tokyo from 26-31 May 1975.

Official.

Nil.

87. Low Cost Automation Training
Courses held in Philippines and Japan
from 26 May to 4 July 75.

Do.

1,155.00

88. Indo-USSR Joint Commission in
Social Sciences in Moscow from
27-29 May 1975.

Do.

Nil.

89. The First meeting of the lndo-Soviet
Joint Commission for Co-operation in
the field of Social Sciences held in
Moscow from 27-29 May 1975.

Do.

-

90. Workshop on Development in the
Collins Chohi, Bangkok (27 May to
4 June 1975.)

Do.

Nil

91. IAEA-Second meeting of the Senior
Advisory Group (28-30 May 1975).

Do.

92. International Seminar on Approaches
to Rural Development Kualalumpur
(23 May to 4 June 1975).

Do.

93. 11th Session of IMCO Committee
on Tech. Cooperation and PreCouncil Budgetary Working Group
meeting and 34th Session of Council
held in London from 28 May to 6 June
1975.

Do.

94. 1st Seminar on Criminal Investigation held in Tokyo, Japan from 29
May to 8 June 1975.

Do.

95.

Do.

60th Session of the International

Nil.

9,661.00

Nil.

1,44,471.86

Labour Conference held in Geneva
from 4 to 25 June 1975 and 196th
Session of the Governing Body
of ILO Geneva on 30-31 May 1975
various meetings from 26 May 1975.
96.

Symposium on Comparative

Study

Do.

The expenditure on

of Geology of Caucasus & Himalaya

the delegation in

with reference to mineral oil and natural
USSR on intergas and geothermal resources, held
national
hospitalit
y
------------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg143>
APPENDIX I--contd.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------at TBILLISI (USSR) from 31 May

and internal tra-

to 10 June 1975.

vel was met by
the USSR Academy Sciences.

97.

Third Inter-American Conference on

Official

Nil.

Training & Development organised
by the international Federation of
Training & Development Organisation at Caracas in May 1975.
98.
IAEA-Research Coordination meeting
in the field of Marine Transpuranic
Biogeochemistry held at Cadarache
Nuclear Research Centre, France
(2-4 June 1975).

Do.

99.
IAEA Symposium on the combined
effects on the Environment of Radioactive, Chemical and Thermal Releases
from the Nuclear Industry at Stockholm (2-4 June 1975).

Do.

-

100. Meeting of COCOTECH, Bangkok

Do.

Nil.

(2-7 June 1975).
101.

(a)

ISO/TC 38 Textiles, London.

Do.

3411.0
0
(b) ISO/TC 38/SC 8 Physical Testing
of Fabrics & Fabric Terminology,
London.
(c) ISO/TC 38/SC 12 Textile Floor
Coverings, London.
(d) ISO/TC 38/SC 12/WG 2 Tests for
Machine-made Products, London.
(e) ISO/TC 38/SC 12/WG I Classification & Terminology-London
(2-12 June 1975).
102. 20th Session of the UNDP Governing
1,73
9
Council held in Geneva, 2 June
to 1st July 1975).

Do.

103. 2nd Session of PAO Commission on
6,993.
50
Fertilizer, Rome (3-7 June 1975).

Do.

104. 10th Session of FAO Committee on
Do.
7,840.
40
Fisheries, Rome (3-10 June 1975).
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg144>
APPENDIX I--contd.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------105. 30th Session of Administrative Coun2,000.
00
cil of International Telegraph & Telephone Consultative Committee,
Geneva (4 June to 4 July 1975).

Official

106. Ist Session of FAO Ad-Hoc Cosultation on Food Nutrition, Rome (5-6
June 75).

Do.

107. Meetings of the Group of 24. Interim
18,350

Do.

-

Committee and the Development
Committee held in Paris (5-14 June
1975).
108. International Marketing Conference,
3,458.
35
USA/8-11 June 1975).

Do.

109. Satory Exhibition held at Paris during
expend
i(8-13 June 75).
kno
wn

Do.

110. 6th Session of IMCO Sub-Committee
2,511.00

Do.

TA/DA
ture not

on Standards of Training and Watchkeeping held in London from 9-12
June 75.
111. Symposium on Expert Inspection &
385.00

Do.

Standardization held in Japan from
9-13 June 1975.
112. Second World Sanskrit Conference
Ex
held from 9-15 June 1975 at Torino
Nil
.
(Italy).
Exp.
550.

Do.

113. ISO/TC-55 Technical Meeting, USSR
4,631.
00
(9-19 June, 75).

Do.

114. ISO/TC 55 Sawan Timber and Sawlogs and its Subcommittees, Tibilissi
(USSR) (9-19 June 1975).

Do.

115. 66th Session of FAO Council, Rome
14,914
.60
(9-20 June 1975).

Do.

116. ISO/TC 113 Measurement of Liquid
5,985
.00
Flow in open Channels, and its
Subcommittees, Zurich (10-24 June
1975).

Do.

Government
penditure
Participant's

-

117. Meetings of ISO/TC-113 and its
Do.
11,220
.00
working groups held in Zurich
(Switzerland), from 10-24 June 1975.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg145>
APPENDIX I -- contd.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------118. To attend the inauguration ceremony
of the Satellite Earth Station of
Bangladesh during 13-15 June 1975.

Official

196.10

119. Regional Preparatory Conference
on Human Settlements(14-21 June
75, Tehran).

Do.

120. 27th Session of IMCO Legal Committee held in London from 16-20
June 1975.

Do.

121. UNESCO-A meeting of experts to
advise it on the contents of UNESCO's
entire programme, present and future,
in the fields of information, documentation, liberaries and archives at Paris
(16-20 June 1975.)

Do.

122. IAEA-Senior Advisory Group meeting
Technical Review Committee meeting
on Designs at Vienna (16-20 June
1975).

Do.

123. Meeting of the Expert Group of the
Inter-disciplinary Project "Reviewing
the International Order" held at
Rotterdam, from 16-22 June 1975
under the auspices of the Club of
Rome (Netherlands).

Do.

124. For Selection of Marine Sheep, USSR
(18 June to 2 July 75).

Do.

5,153,00

125. United Nations World Conference
of the International Women's Year
held at Mexico City, Mexico from
19 June to 23 July 75.

Do.

85,382.00

126. Aid India Consortium Meeting
held in Paris (22-28 June 75).

Do.

127. IAEA-Senior Advisory Group Meeting Technical Review Committee
meeting or Sitting, Vienna (23 to 27
June 1975).

Do.

8,981

128. IAEA-Symposium on the OKLO PheDo.
nomenon held in Franceville Gabon
(23-27 June 75).
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg146>
APPENDIX I--contd.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------129. 3rd Session of IMCO Marine Environment Protection Committee held
in London from 23-27 June, 1975.

Official.

130. The first Meeting of World Food
Council Rome (23-27 June 1975).

Do.

22,534.00

131. SARTC meeting at Ulan Bator,
Mangolia (24-28 June 1975).
132. Meeting of the non-aligned countries,
on private foreign investment held in
Peru (28 June, 7 July 1975.

Do.

2,840.00

Do.

5301

133. IX International Congress of sedimentology organized by. International
Association of Sedimentologist at
Nice (France) from July 6-13,1975 and
field trips preceding and succeeding
the Congress from 28 June to 6 July,
1975 and from 13-19 July 1975.

Do.

17,516.80

134. VI International Histocompatibility
Workshop at APRHUS (DENMARK)
from 29 June to 5 July 1975.

Do.

3,004,13

135. To discuss the Salal Hydro Electric
Plant in a meeting held at Islamabad
in Pakistan from 29 June to 5 July, 1975.

Do.

397.20

136. 73rd and 74th Sessions of International Wheat Council held in
London from 30 June to 3 July, 1975.

Do.

8,936.58

137.

Do.

4,773.15

Meeting of Ad-Hoc Working Party

on International Fund for Agricultural
Development, Rome (30 June to 4
July, 75.
138. Ninth Session of the Inter-governmental Group on Hard Fibres held at
Rome 30 June to 4 July, 1975.

Do.

139. Meeting of the Study Directors of the
Do.
Comparative Study on Input & Output
Relationships in Family Planning
Programme in selected countries
of the ECAFE region held in Bangkok from 30 June to 4th July, 1975.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg147>
APPENDIX I--contd.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
---------------------------------------------------------------------------140. Delegation to the meeting of the Specialist Group for System Development
(SGSD) for Commonwealth Telecommunications held from 30 June,
to 4 July 1975.
141. FAO Expert Consultation on FFHC
Rome (30 June to 10 July 1975.)

Official

947.26

Do.

142. Industrial & Systems Engg. Training
Course held in Japan from 30 June
75 for 12 weeks

Do.

1155.00

143. FAO Govt. Consultation, on Fishery
Harbour Planning Rome (1-7 July
1975).

Do.

2,727.50

144. 59 Session of the UN Economic and
Social Council (ECOSOC) held in
Geneva from 2 July to 1 August 1975.

Do.

16,200

145. Seminar on Tropical Wood Preservation Papua (New Guinea) (4-24
July 1975).

Do.

146. Conference of Overseas Natural Resources Officers on Natural Resources
Development Strategies in Scotland
Edinburg (6-12 July 1975).

Do.

147. Conference on Combustion in Engines
registraheld in UK during 7-9 July, 1975.
(Rs.
1,680

Do.

(pound) 84.00
tion fee
Approx).

as

148. 17th Session of IMCO Sub-Committee
on Fire Protection held in London
from 7-11 July, 75.

Do.

149. IAEA-Senior Advisory Group Meeting Technical Review Committee
meeting on "Operations at Vienna"
(7-11 July, 1975.)

Do.

2,511.88

150. seminar on SEA/PAC Aeronautical
Do.
1,499.98
(Estima
ted)
Information service (AIS) organised
by the ICAO held at Bangkok (Thailand) from 7 to 11 July, 1975.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg148>
APPENDIX I-contd.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------151. Preparatory Group Meeting on
Science Education convened by
Asian Centre for Educational Innovation for Development, Unesco Regional Office for Education, Bangkok
and the Korean Educational Development Institute in Seoul from 7-12
July, 1975.

Official

152. Seminar on Employment Promotion
Training for Managers, Engineers
and Technologists organised by ILO
at the Turin International Centre, Italy
from 7-15 July, 1975,

Do.

153. Ad-hoc Group of Experts to study the
question of nuclear weapon-free zones,
Geneva-from 9 July to 19 Aug. 1975.

Do.

154. Consultative Group Meeting of ACDA
& UN Asian Development Institute,
Bangkok from 14 to 18 July 1975.

Do.

155. Seminar on Women's Participation
in the Economic Development of
their countries and the Upbring of
Children, organised by the Soviet
Women's Committee at A-lma Ata,
U.S.S.R. from 16 to 22 July, 1975.

Do.

Nil

7,086.28

9,000.00

156. 4th Session of IOFC Committee
Management of Indian Ocean Tuna
and 3rd Session of IPFC Special
Committee on Management of IndoPacific Tuna and 4th Session of IPFC
Mombasa (Kenya) (18-25 July, 1975).

Do.

157. IAEA Seminar Advisory Group meeting Technical Review Committee
meeting on Governmental Organisation, (21-25 July, 1975)

Do.

158. Regional Conferences on the role of
Women in Cooperative Development
at Kuala Lumpur (Malaysia) from
21-28 July, 1975.

Do.

2,107.70

273.00

159. 7th International Seminar on InteDo.
grated Approach to Rural Development organised by AAPRO at
Tokyo from 21 July to 9 August, 1975.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg149>
APPENDIX I--contd.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
---------------------------------------------------------------------------160. I-AEA-Technical Committee- Specialists Meeting on "Control Room
Design for Nuclear Power Stations"
held in San Francisco. (22-24 July
1975.)
161. Delegation to the Task Force Experts
(Estimated)

Official

Do.

2,292.00

Meeting of Commonwealth Telecommunications held in Singapore
from 22-28 July 1975.
162. 9th International Congress on Irrigation and Drainage Moscow (23 July
to 2 Aug. 75.)

Do.

163. 16th Congress of International Association for Hydraulic Research held
at Sao Paulo (Brazil) from 27th July
to 1 August 1975.

Do.

5,126.10

164.

Do.

Expenditure borne

Meeting of Group of Experts on in-

flation convened by Secretary General,
U.N. Conference and Trade and
Development held in Geneva (25 July

7,427.00

by the UN

to 2 August 75.)
165. Ninth International Congress on
Irrigation and Drainage held in
Moscow from 27 July to 4 August
1975.

Do.

1,823.33

166. IMCO-Ad-hoc Working Group on
Sub-Standards Ships held in London
from 28 to 30 July 1975.

Do.

167. 12th Session of the Asian Coconut
Community Panel on techno-economic
studies held at Bangkok (28-31 July
75)

Do.

168. Indo-Pak Meeting on Locust Control
1657, Pakistan (29-31 July 75.)

Do.

590.70

169. Meeting of the Inter-Sessional Working Group of the Conference on Establishment of an International
Martime Satellite System London
during 31 July to 9 August 1975.

Do.

5,937.35

170. International Congress of Nutrition
pai
d
held at Kyoto, Japan during 3-9

Do.

Nil
Membership fee
by the organisers

August 75.

of the Congress

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg150>
APPENDIX I-Contd.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------171. ESCAP Export Group Meeting on
Regional Cooperation in Food and
Agriculture, Bangkok (4-8 August
75)

Official

172. Editional Committee Meeting of the
Regional Techtonic: Map of S.E.
Asia at Djakarta from 4-9 August 75.

Do.

Nil

173. Tak force Meeting on MAB-14 Research on Environmental Pollution &
its effects on the BIO-sphere held at

Do.

Nil

Ottawa (Canada) from 5-8 August, 75.
174. Industrial Quality Control Training
Course held in Netherlands from 6
Aug. to 19 December 75.

Do.

770.00

175. Group of Seven Meeting held in
Geneva on 10 & 11 August 75.

Do.

2,443.79

176. Group of 77 Developing Countries
Meeting at Geneva 10-12 Aug. 75.

Do.

Not Known

177. Seminar on the Education for Trade
Union Leaders Organised under the
Colombo Plan by Asutrian Govt. at
Melbourne from 10 August to 22
Sept. 75.

Do.

Nil

178. Commonwealth Survey Officers conference held at Cambridge from 11-12
Aug. 75.

Do.

179. 14th International Cosmic Ray Conference organised by IUPAP at Nunchen, FRG (15-29 Aug. 75.)

Do.

5,240.00

180. The Seminar on Alternative
Approach to the Economic Development of Asian Region organised by the
Association of Development Research
and Training Institute for Asia and
the Pacific at Canberra, Australia
from 17 to 23 Aug. 75.

Do.

Nil

181. To Study the Administration and Management of National Parks Kenya
and Tanzania (17 Aug. to 15 Sept. 75)

Do.

182. WMO/I-A-MAP Symposium on Long
Do.
1,352
Term climate Fluctuations at Norwich
(UK) from 18-23 August, 1975.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg151>
APPENDIX I--Contd.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
2
4
---------------------------------------------------------------------------183. XVI General Assembely meeting of
the International Union of Geodesy
and Geophysics (IUGG), Scientific
Session, Symposia and Seminar held
France from 18 August to 9 September
75.
184. Small Industries, Consultants Advanced
training Course held in Japan from

Official

Do.

6,753.76

1,155.00

20 Aug. to 5 Dec. 75.
185. 8th International Congress Plant Protection, Moscow (21-27 Aug. 75.)

Do.

2,753.95

186. IUGG General Assembly at Grenoble
France from 23 August to 13 Sept. 75.

Do.

2,626

187. FAO/NORAD Round Table Discussion on Expanding Utilization of
Marine Fishery Reserves Norway
(24 Aug. to 4 Sept. 75.)

Do.

188. Second meeting of the Preparatory
Committee for the HABITAT New
York (25-29 August 75).

Do.

189. Delegation to participate in the
on
Commonwealth Telecommunications
baggage
.
Financial Arrangements (CTFA)
was

Do.

200.00 (Appox)
excess
The

Seminar, in Colombo during 25 to 31

rest

borne by CTB.

Aug. 75.
190. To attend 1st session of the ESCAP
Committee on Agricultural Development Djakarta (Indonesia) (25 Aug.
to 1 Sept. 75.)

Do.

2,851.95

191. XVI General Assembly of IUGG at
Grenoble (France) from 25 August to
September 1975.)

Do.

3,974

192. Commonwealth Finance Ministers
Meeting held in Guyana (26-28 Aug.
75).

Do.

25,206

193. To negotiate the purchase of Trawlers
Mexico (26Aug to 4 Sept 1975).

Do.

7,694.60

194. 35th Session of the International ConDo.
4,805.22
ference on Education & 12th Session
of the Council of International
Bureau of Education held at Geneva
from 26 August to 5 Sept. 75.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg152>
APPENDIX I-contd.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------2
3
4
----------------------------------------------------------------------------

195. ILO /NORAD Asian Regional Symposium on Industrial Relations at
Manila (26 Aug. to 6 Sept, 75).

Official

196. Visit to Australia under Australian
Cultural Exchange Programme for
six weeks from August to October, 75.

Do.

197. 6th FFHC/AD Conference, Rome
(1-5 Sept., 75)

Do.

Nil.

198. Participated in XVI International
Conference of Round Table of
Archives held at Kiev (USSR) on
1-5 Sept., 75 sponsored by the International Council on Archives and the
UNESCO.

Do.

1,085.00

199. Annual Meetings of IMF/BED held
in Washington (1-5 Sept., 75)

Do.

Nil.

200. ECE Seminar in German Democratic
Republic on Collection, disposal,
treatment and recycling of solid wastes
from 1 to 6 Sept., 75.

Do.

201. IAEA Advisory Group on a training
course syllabus of Nuclear Power
Project Construction and Operation
management in Vienna (1 -6 Sept., 75)

Do.

202. Regional Conference for Asia &
Western Pacific of the I.C.S.W. Hong
Kong (1-6 Sept., 75)

Do.

2,424.00

203. 40th Session of the International
Statistical Institute, Warsaw (Poland)
from 1-9 Sept., 75.

Do.

3,765.00

204. Meeting of the Group of Governmental Experts on The Role of the
Patent System in the Transfer of
Technology held in Geneva from 1-22
Sept., 75.

Do.

378.00

205. Fifth United Nations Congress on
the Prevention of Crime and Treament
of offenders held in Geneva from
1-12 Sept., 75

Do.

46,441

206. Discussion on the "The Rejection of
Do.
2,849.00
(Appro
x.)
Western Models of Government and
Politics Search for Alternatives"
held in San Francisco from 2-6
Sept., 75.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

<pg153>
APPENDIX I--contd.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
---------------------------------------------------------------------------207. Fourth International Remote Sensing
Workshop in U.S.A. on 2 Sept. to 9
Oct., 75.

Official

208. 8th Symposium on Remote Sensing
held at California on (2 Sept. to 18
Oct. 75.)

Do.

209. Regional Seminar on Agricultural
Cooperative marketing with special
emphasis on distribution methods at
Tokyo from 2 to 22 St pt., 75 organised
by ICA

Do.

210. Meeting of the UNDP Expert Group
for Planning the Regional Centre for
the transfer of Technology held at
Bangkok (Thailand) on 3-5 Sept.,
75.

Do.

211. International Women's Year Seminar
on Women in Contemporary Society
held in Bulgaria from 3 to 6 Sep.,
1975. organised by Bulgarian Committee of Women's Association.

Do.

433.12

212. Diplomatic Conference convened by
ICAO in Montreal from 3 to 25 Sept.,
75 combined with some promotional
work at New York and London for discussion with leading tour operators
and travel agents concerning tourism
for 5 days.

Do.

10,300.00

213. ACDA and UN meeting at Kuala
Lumpur from 4 to 6 Sept., 75.

Do.

214. For Selection of Marino Sheep from.
USSR 4 to 11 Sept., 75.

Do.

215. Study Tour arranged by FAO,
London (4-11 Sept., 75)

Do.

216. Meeting of Commission of I.C.A. held
at Swansea on 5 to 6 Sept., 75.

Do.

217. Participated in the Executive Committee meeting of International Council of Archeives held at Varna
(Bulgaria) from 6 to 8 Sept., 1975.
218. 12th General Assembly of IUCN
and 13th Technical meeting, Zaire

Do.

Do.

1,341.00

7,024.00

(7-19 Sept., 75).
---------------------------------------------------------------------<pg154>
APPENDIX I-Contd.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
---------------------------------------------------------------------------219. Meeting of the General Assembly
of the international Union for conservation of Nature and Natural
Resources held at Kinshasa (Zaire)
from 7 to 19 Sept., 75)

Official

220. Meeting of Executive officers of
National FFHC Committee and
Leading Bonn (8-12 Sept., 75).

Do.

221.

Do.

Exhibition on Lasers and Optics

held at London during 8-12 Sept., 75.

Expenditure
known

222. Fourth International Conference of
Women Engineers and Scientists
held in Cracow from 8 to 13 Sept., 75.

Do.

4,6000

223. As state quest of Govt. of Hungary at
the invitation of that Govt. for discussion of bilateral economic relations
and also to sign protocol in the field
of agriculture and irrigation Paris
(8-9 Sept., 1975) Budapest (9-14
Sept., 75.)

Do.

5,846.86

224. Symposium on Geodynamic of SW
Asia and Joint Meeting of working
groups 3a & 3b of IUGG at Tehran
from 8-15 Sept., 75.
225.

3rd Session of RA-II/WGT at Colo-

not

Do.

Nil

Do.

7,000 (Estimated)

226. Seminar on Electric Optics held at
r
egistraLondon on 10 Sept., 1975.

Do.

(pound) 10.00 as

227. Seminar on Effective Coordination
of Public Enterprises Organised by
the Asian Centre for Development
Administration Kuala Lumpur,
Malaysia, from 10 to 17 Sept., 1975.

Do.

228. Regional Field Operational Seminar
on Curriculum Development for

Do.

mbo (Sri Lanka) from 1-5 September
and 6th Session of RA-II from 8-19
Sept., 75

tion Fee

Nil

work oriented Education in Asia
organised by the National Institute
for Educational Research of Japan
i.e. cooperation with the UNESCO's
Asian Centre of Educational Innovation for Development in Tokyo
from 10 Sept. to 17 Oct., 1975.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------20 M of EA/75-11,

<pg155>
APPENDIX I--contd.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
---------------------------------------------------------------------------229. WHO Travelling Seminar for Plague
control held at Moscow (USSR) from
11 to 27 Sept. 1975.

Official

Nil.

230. 4th Session of FAO Technical Working Party on Coconut Production
Protection and Processing, Jamaica
(14-25 Sept. 1975)

Do.

231. Third Round Table on Financial
Cooperation among developing countries held in Belgrade (14-25 Sept. 1975)

Do.

1698

232. Meeting of the Indo-Yugoslav Joint
Sub-Committee held in Belgrade
(14 Sept. to 1 Oct. 1975.)

Do.

5997

233. Meeting of Computer experts group
Convened by 'United Nations at
Geneva (15-19 Sept. 1975.)

Do.

200

234. 15th Session of IMCO Sub-Committee
on Radio Communications held in
London from 15-19 Sept. 1975.

Do.

2510.00

235. UNESCO Meeting of Experts on the
Diversification of methods and techniques for teaching a second language
at Paris from 15-20 Sept. 1975.

Do.

236. First Session of the Escap Committee
on Industry, Housing and Technology
held at Bangkok (Thailand) from
15-22 Sept. 1975.

Do.

8,260

237. Annual General Meetings of International Electrotechnical Commission. The Hague from 15-27 September 1975.

Do.

5358.00

238. 98th Session of the Executive Board
of UNESCO held at Paris from 15 Sept.

Do.

3,000.00

to 10 Oct. 1975.
239. WHO Export Panel and Committee
on Resistance of Vectors and Reserviors of Pesticides held in Geneva
(Switzerland) from 16-23 Sept. 1975.

Do.

Nil

240. Ninth Session of Iron and Steel ComDo.
2,000.00
mittee of ILO Geneva from 16 to 26
Sept. 1975.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------<pg156>
APPENDIX I-contd.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
---------------------------------------------------------------------------241. Delegation to attend the meeting of
Standing Committee of Commonwealth Telecommunications Council
held in London from 17 to 22 Sept.
1975 and to attend the meeting of the
CCIT World Plan Committee from
23 Sept. to 2 Oct. 1975.

Official

4,310.25

242. Working Group on IFAD, Geneva
(19 to 28 Sept. 1975)

Do.

5,700.00

243. Meeting of General Assembly of
International Foundation for Science
held at Stockholm (Sweden) from
21-25 Sept. 1975.

Do.

5,920

244. 59th Session of IDF Austria 21-26,
Sept. 75.

Do.

5,736.00

245. (a) ISO/TC 69/SC 2 Interpretation of
Statistical Date, Vienna.
(b) ISO/TC 69/WGA Sampling by
Attributes, Vienna
(c) ISO/TC 69 Application of Statistical Methods, Vienna (22-24
Sept. 1975)

Do.

246. IAEA/FAO-Research Coordination
meeting on Isotopic tracer aided
studies of chemical residues in cotton
seed feed, oil and related products
(22-26 Sept. 1975.)

Do.

247. UNESCO Meeting on the Preservation of Moving Images in Berlin from
22-26 Sept. 1975.

Do.

248. FAO Export Consultation on Developing capability of Forecasting Crop.
Production based on Agro-Meteoro-

Do.

Nil.

7,000 (Estimated)

logical and Remotely sensed dated
at Rome from 22-26 Sept. 1975.
249. XIII International Silk Congress held
in Tlemoen (Algeria) from 22 to 28
Sept. 1975.

Do.

18,990.00

250. ESCAP Workshop on Shipper's
Do.
Cooperation Calculation of Ocean
Transport Costs held in Bangkok
from 22 Sept. to 3 Oct. 1975.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg157>
APPENDIX I--contd.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
---------------------------------------------------------------------------251. IAEA-Working Group meeting on
Operation Safety Guide on Staffins,
selection, Training and Examination
of personnel held in Vienna (22 Sept.
to 3 October, 1975).

Official

252. Meeting of the WIPO Coordination
Committee, the Executive Committee
of the Berne Union and the WIPO
Working Group on Scientific Discoveries was held in Geneva from 23 to
30 Sept. 1975.

Do.

253. Meeting of the Study Directors of the
Multinational Study in Methodologies
for Setting Family Planning Targets
in ESCAP region, held at Bangkok
from 24 to 30 Sept. 1975.

Do.

254. Working Party on World Plan &
World Plan Committee meetings of
the International Telegraph & Telephone Consultative Committee
Geneva (25 Sept. to 2 Oct. 1975)

Do.

255. Tool Engineering Training Course
held in Japan from 25 Sept. to 5 Nov.
1975.

Do.

8,800.00

5,630.00

1925.00

256. Regions MAB Meeting on Integrated
Ecological Research & Training
Needs in Southern Asian Mountain
System Nepal (26 Sept. to 2 Oct.
1975.)

Do.

257. Meeting of the Working Group on
Agriculture held in Washington (28
Sept. to 4 October 1975.)

Do.

9000

258.

Do.

2,045.64

19th Session of FAO Desert Locust

Control Committee Rome, (29 Sept.
to 4 Oct. 1975.)
259. First Open World Conference on
Cooperative Fisheries at Tokyo from
29 Sept. to 4 Oct. 1975.

Do.

260. APC Symposium on Economics of
Do.
Foodgrains Distribution Tokyo from
29 Sept. to 5 Oct. 1975.
------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg158>
APPENDIX I--Contd.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
---------------------------------------------------------------------------261. 9th Meeting of the Commonwealth
4616.00(Estimate
d)
Air Transport Council held at Ottawa
Canada from 29 Sept. to 5 Oct. 1975.

Official

262. FAO/UNEP Expert Consultations on
Impact Monitering of Residues
from the Use of Agricultural Pestificides, Rome (29 Sept to 30 Oct. 75)

Do.

263. Symposium on Economic of foodgrains distribution held in Japan from
30 Sept. to 6 Oct. 1975.

Do.

264. International Conference on 9th Revision of the International Classification of diseases from 30 Sept. to 6
Oct. 1975. held in Geneva.

Do.

265. Eight Asian Regional Conference of
ILO Colombo from 30 Sept to 9
Oct, 75.

Do.

266. Fourth General Assembly of Asia
Electronics Union and Eighth Asia
Electronics Conference held at Mel
bourne (Australia) from 1-7 Oct.1975.

Do.

267. 2nd Regional Workshop on Acquaculture Planning Bangkok, (1-17 Oct.
1975.)

Do.

268. 2nd Session of LF/MF Broadcasting
Geneva (1 Oct. to 22 Nov. 1975)

Do.

96,512.00

269. 19th Session of FAO Intergovernmental Group on Grains Rome (6-10

Do.

2045.00

385.00

Not available

21,032.60

Oct. 1975.)
270. IAEA Research coordination meeting
on the use of Aneuplcide for Wheat
Protein Improvementat Vienna (6-10
Oct. 1975.)

Do.

271. International Association on Geochemistry and Cosmochemistry USSR
International Symposium on Interelation between Water and Living Matter
at USSR (6-10 Oct. 1975.)

Do.

272. ISO/TC11/WGO Boilers and Pressure
Do.
Vessels/Sheel Boilers (6--10, Oct. 1975)
London.
----------------------------------------------------------------------<pg159>
APPENDIX I--contd.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
------------------------------------------------------------------------273. Conference of the National Social
Science Research Councils held in
Paris from 6 to 9 Oct. 1975.

Official

274. Symposium on 10th Intl, Remote
Sensing of Environment at Michigan.
U.S.A. from 6-10 Oct. 75.

Do.

275. The 43rd Executive meeting of the
International Commission on Large
Dams held in Tehran (Iran) from 6
to 8 Oct. 1975 and followed by a
Study tour from II to 16 Oct. 1975.

Do.

276. IAEA-Technical Review Committee
meeting on Designs at Vienna (7-9
Oct. 1975.)

Do.

277. IAEA-Annual Consultative meeting
of INIS Liaison Officers at Vienna
(7-9 Oct. 1975.)

Do.

278. Meeting of the Expert Group of the
Inter-disciplinary Project the Inter.
national Order held in Rotterdam
from 7 to 10 October 75 under the
auspices of the Club of Rome (Netherlands).

Do.

279. Meeting of Experts on Appraisal
of Development projects held in
Copenhagen from 8 to 10 Oct. 75
under the auspices of the organisation
for Economic Co-operation & Development.

Do.

1,810.00

420.00

489.36

-

280. Second International Symposium on
Orthopaedic Training from 8 to 10
Oct. 75.

Do.

281. Consultative Working Party on Food
Policy Development and Administration Kuala-Lumpur from 9-11
Oct. 75.

Do.

282. ISO/TC 45 Rubber and its working
Groups, Kaula Lumpur (9-18 Oct.
75.)

Do.

3348.00

283. 45th Annual International Meeting
Do.
5022.50
of the Society of the Exploration
Geophysicists held at Denver, Colorado (USA) from 12-16 Oct. 75.
--------------------------------------------------------------------<pg160>
APPENDIX I-contd.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
---------------------------------------------------------------------------284. XV World Road Congress of the
permanent International Association
of Road Congresses held at Mexico
from 12 -19 Oct. 75.

Official

285. FAO Ad Hoc Consultation on
improvement & Development of
Mango Industry in Asia and FAR
East Bangkok (13-15 Oct. 75.)

Do.

286. FAO/UNE/Consultation on Pest Control Management System for Control
of Cotton Pests, Karachi (Pakistan)
(1 3-16 Oct. 75.)

Do.

287. Second Preparatory Meeting for the
Conference on International Economic
Cooperation (13-16 Oct. 1975.)

Do.

288. Preparatory Meeting of the Conference between Industrialised and the
Developing countries held in Paris
from 13-16 Oct. 1975.

Do.

289. IAEA-Advisory Group meeting on
Facilities and Techniques for (U. pu)02
Fuel Fabrication at Belgium (13-17
Oct. 1975).

Do.

290. IAEA-International Symposium on
the Safeguarding of Nuclear Materials at Vienna (13-17 Oct. 1975.)

Do.

21,618.00

838.92

26,218.51

291. IAEA-International Symposium on
Gas Cooled Reactors with Emphasis
on Advanced Systems held in Jullich,
FRG (13-17 Oct. 1975.)

Do.

292. UNISIST Steering Committee Meeting (UNESCO) Paris from 13-17
Oct. 1975.

Do.

293. Ninth meeting of the Asian Coconut
Community Panel on Coconut techno
economic studies held at Jakarta
Indonesia (13 to 18 Oct. 1975.)

Do.

294. Symposium on the Planning and DeveDo.
4158.00
lopment of the Tourist Industry in
E.C.E. region in Dubrov (Yugoslavia) (13-18 Oct. 1975.)
-----------------------------------------------------------------------<pg161>
APPENDIX I-contd.
------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
------------------------------------------------------------------------295. International Seminar on Mixed Economy held in Antalaya from 13-20
Oct. 75 under auspices of Hacettepe
University Turkey (Anakara).

Official

9,017.40

296. Preparatory Technical Maritime Conference of ILO Geneva from 13 to 24
Oct. 1975

Do.

297. 50th Session of CCP, Rome (13-24
Oct. 1975).

Do.

4,226.56

298. Symposium on Export Processing
Zones in Seoul from 14-18 Oct. 1975.

Do.

385.00

299. Second Session of ESCAP Committee
on Natural Resources Development
held in Bangkok (Thailand) from
14 to 20 Oct. 1975.

Do.

300. World Conference on Credit for farmers, Rome (14-21 Oct. 1975.)

Do.

7,768.64

301. UOP Conference on modern trends
and development in Petroleum &
Petro-Chemicals processing Technology held at Zagreb (Yugoslavia) on
(16-17 Oct. 1975.)

Do.

2,522.00

302. Colombo Plan Seminar on Industry
expendi-

Do.

Nil, as all

Safety and Health held at Japan from

ture was home by

16 October to 22 Nov. 1975.

the Colombo Plan
Authority.

303. Meeting of Experts on SPINES System (UNESCO) Paris from 17-18
Oct. 1975.

Do.

304. Inter Govt. Oceanographic Commission of UNESCO Ninth General
Assembly Session from 18 Oct. to 10
Nov. 75 at Paris.

Do.

3,800.00 approx.

305. 4th Session of IMCO Marin Environement Protection Committee held
in London from 19-25 Oct. 75.

Do.

3,960.00

306. Working Group meeting of the StatisDo.
tical Experts of ESCAP Bangkok
from 20-21 Oct. 1975.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg162>
APPENDIX I-contd.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
---------------------------------------------------------------------------307. World Congress for the International
Women's Year held at Berlin (GDR)
from 20 to 24 Oct. 1975 organised by
the International Preparatory Committee for the World Congress for
International Women's Years.

official

308. FAO/SIDA Export Consultation on
Policies and Institutions for integrated
RD Sri Lanka (20-30 Oct. 1975.)

Do.

309. PAO/DANIDA Workshop on Fish
Handling Plant Sanilation, Quality
Control and Fish Inspection Bangkok
(20 Oct. to 28 Nov. 1975.)

Do.

310. International Symposium on Sportsby
men Nutrition held at Warsaw during
of
21-23 Oct. 1975.

Do.

311. For finalising demurrage despatch
cases in respect of fertilizer shipments
from Japan (Tokyo) (24 to 31 Oct.
1975.)

Do.

312. International Symposium on Information Systems on ongoing research
jointly organised by Smithsonian
Science Information Exchange and
UNESCO Paris from 26-29 Oct.

Do.

2,689.40

362.00

Registration fee
the organisers
the Symposium.
6,129.20

1975.
313. 16th Session of the Executive Committee of AARRO Manila (26-31
Oct. 1975.)

Do.

4,206.00

314. Meeting of the Inter-Sessional
Working
Group of the Conference on
Establishment of an International
Maritime Satellite System, London,
(27 to 31 Oct. 1975.)

Do.

3,526.70

315. CCPS Meeting of the UPU held at
Berne from 27 Oct. to 9 Nov. 1975.

Do.

11,563.20

316. UNIDO Round Table Meeting of
Do.
7,130.00
Ministers responsible for Industrial
Development from developing countries held in Sofia, Bulgaria from 27
Oct. to 11 Nov. 1975.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg163>
APPENDIX I-contd.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
---------------------------------------------------------------------------317.

Two-day International Conference on

Official

Off High Way Vehicles Tracter and

1,200.00 approx. as
registration fee.

their Equipment held at UK during
28-29 Oct. 1975.
318. Shri N.S. Vardan, Deputy Director,
deputed to Poland as a Leader of the
Indian Team from 28 October 1975
onwards for 2 week on Co-operation
in the field of Irrigation and Water
Resources under the Indo-Polish Programme of Science and Technology
1975-76.

Do.

Nil.

319. UNDP/UNEP Panel Experts Meeting
of Desertification Geneva (29-31
October 1975).

Do.

320. The Inter-governmental Expert Group
meeting on Asian Highways and International Road Transport held at Bangkok from 20 October to 3 November
1975 arranged by ESCAP authorities.

Do.

1,735.00

321. International Lead & Zinc Study
Group's ninteenth session held in
Geneva from 30 October to 8 Nov.
1975.

Do.

11,688.00

322. 67th Session of FAO Council Rome
(3-7 Nov. 1975.)

Do.

323. IAEA-International Symposium on
Biological effects of Low Level Rediation Partinent to Protection of Man
and His Environment at (USA 3-7
Nov. 1975)

Do.

324. 12th Informal Meeting of Directors
(Approx).

Do.

2,744.00

of Civil Aviation in Asia and Pacific
held at Papeete (Tahiti) from 3 to 7
Nov. 1975.
325.

Regional Working group meeting on

Do.

Nil. All expenses

Stratigraphic Correlation in the
were met by
ESCAP region at Bangkok from 30
ESCAP.
Nov. to 13 Dec. 1975.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg164>
APPENDIX I-contd.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
---------------------------------------------------------------------------326. Meetings of the Governmental Experts convened by UNESCO at Paris
from 3 to 12 Nov. 1975 to prepare a.
draft International Convention designed to avoid the double taxation of
copyright royalties remitted from one
country to another.

Official

327. 9th Session of IMCO Assembly and
Council session held in London from
3-14 Nov. 1975.

Do.

328. Senior Level Seminar on Industrialisation strategies and growth Pole
approach to Regional Planning & Development at Nagoya (Japan) from
4-13 Nov. 1975.

Do.

3,740.00

15,015.00

-

329.
APC Working Party for Food Processing Survey, Tokyo from 5-7 Nov.
1975.

Do.

-

330.
Working Party for Food Processing
Survey held in Tokyo from 5-8 Nov.
1975,

Do.

385.00

331.
(a) ISO/TC 17/SC 2 Terminology,
Classification and Designation of
Steels, Madrid.

(b) ISO/TC 17/SC 8/WG 1 Hot
Rolled Sloping Flange I-Beam.
Column and Channel Sections,
Madrid.
(c) ISO/TC 17/SC B Dimensions, of
Hot Rolled Steel Sections, Madrid. (6-14 Nov. 1975).

Do.

9,090.00

332.
18th Session of FAO Conference
Rome (8-16 Nov. 1975, 8-27 Nov.
1975).

Do.

75,175.00

333. IAEA Advisory Group Meeting on
Fuel Cycle Demand, Supply and
Cost Trends at Vienna 10-14 Nov.
1975.

Do.

2,149.00

334.
IAEA-Advisory Group Meeting on
Do.
the Management of Radioactive
Wastes at Nuclear Power Plants at
Vienna (10-14 Nov. 1975).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg165>
APPENDIX I--contd.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
---------------------------------------------------------------------------335. (a) ISO/TC 8/SC 7 Inland Navigation, Tallinn.
(b) ISO/TC 8/SC 11
Terminology
Symbols, Drawings etc. Tallinn.
(c) ISO/TC S/SC 9/WG 3 Solid Lifesaving Apparatus Tallinn. (11-15
Nov. 1975).

Official

2,255.00

336.
UNESCO Expert Meeting on the
theme of the causes of Violence held
at Paris from 12-15 Nov. 1975.

Do.

-

337.
7th Session of UNCTAD Committee
on Shipping held in Geneva from
14-21 Nov. 1975.

Do.

-

338.
198th Session of the Governing Body
of ILO and Group Meeting and
Twenty Second Session of the Board
of the International Centre for
Advanced Technical and Vocational
Training held in Geneva from 15-21
Nov. 1975.

Do.

-

339.
To assist the trainees of NDDB
already in Thailand in formulating
project proposal Bangkok (16-21
No. 1975).

Do.

-

340.

Do.

-

Meeting of the Expert Group on a

system of Demographic & Social
Statistics, organised by the United
Nations at New York from 17-21
Nov. 1975.
341.
ECR Seminar on Protection of Coastal
water against pollution from land based
source (17-21 Nov. 1975).

Do.

-

342. International Symposium on Small
Business held at Tokyo, Japan from
17-21 Nov. 1975.

Do.

-

343. IAEA-Technical Committee Meeting
on Recognition and Evaluation of
Uraniferous Areas at Vienna (17-21
Nov. 1975).

Do.

-

344. LAEA-Technical Review Committee
Do.
meeting on "Siting" at Vienna (17-28
Nov. 1975.
------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg166>
APPENDIX I-contd.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
--------------------------------------------------------------------------345. 3rd Conference of the AOPU held at
Melbourne (Australia) from 17-29
November.

Official

346. 68th Session of FAO Council (19-28
Nov. 1975 Rome).

Do.

347. Workshop on Population Education
ou
t
in the Inter-Service Staff Training
95/
Programme of Rural Development

Do.

3,714.12

380.00 (Aprox.)
of which Rs.
were utilised.

Agencies in Asia and the Far East
Gamnovuwa, Pevadeniya. Sri Lanka
Organised by the Food and Agriculture Organisation of the UN at Sri
Lanka from 19-28 Nov. 1975.
348. Fourth Session of the International
Coordinating Council of the Programme on Man and Bio-Sphere
(UNESCO) held in Paris (France) and
12th meeting of Scientific Council of
International Centre for Theoretical
Physics, Trieste (Italy) 22-26 Nov.

Do.

1,575.00

1975.
349. Participation in "Experts Mission" to
Mauritius organised by the ICA from
23-29 Nov. 1975.

Do.

350. Asian regional Seminar on Occupational Safety and Health in relation to
productivity Singapore (23 Nov. to 4
Dec. 1975).

Do.

351. 24th Session of ESCAP Transport and
Communications Committee held in
Bangkok from 24 Nov. to 1 Dec. 1975.

Do.

352. First Session of the Committee on
Transfer of
Technology of the
UNCTAD held at Geneva from (24
Nov. to 5 Dec. 1975).

Do.

353. 8th Conference of Commonwealth
Statisticians Barbados (West Indies)
from 24 Nov. to 5 Dec. 1975.

Do.

-

Nil.

8,234.00

-

4,845.00

354. 25th Meeting of the Colombo Plan
Do.
14,000.00
Consultative Committee held in Colombo (24 Nov. to 6 Dec. 1975.)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg167>
APPENDIX I-contd.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
---------------------------------------------------------------------------355. 28th Session of IMCO Legal Committee held in London from 24 Nov.
1975.

Official

356. Meeting of senior officials of ESCAP
countries held at Bangkok from 25
Nov. to 29 Nov. 1975. for review and
appraisal.

Do.

357. Asian Regional Seminar on the Role
of Labour Administration in Population Education and Family Planning
in the organised sector held at Bangkok
(Thailand) from 26 Nov. to 1 Dec.
1975.

Do.

358. Meeting of the U.N. University expert group on natural resources held
at Tokyo.

Do.

(b) Executive Board Meeting of
the I.U.C.N. held at Morges

504.00

(Switzerland) and
(c) UNEP Meeting held at Paris
(France) from 29 Nov. to 11 Dec.
1975.
359.
75th Session of International Wheat
Council held in London from 1-4
December, 1975.

Do.

360.
FAO Expert Consultation on Seed
Industry Development Rome (1-5
Dec. 1975.)

Do.

361.
IAEA-Senior Advisory Group Meeting
on the preparation of codes of Practice
and Safety Guides in Vienna (1-5
Dec. 1975.)

Do.

362.
2nd Workshop on Productivity
Measurement held in Bangkok from
1-5 Dec. 1975.

Do.

6,297.23

770.00

363.
Meeting of the later-sessional (WorkDo.
Details are not
ing Group of Inter-Governmental
known.
Maritime) Consultative Organisation
from 1-5 Dec. 1975.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg168>
APPENDIX I --- contd.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
---------------------------------------------------------------------------364. International Conference on improving
performance in Public Enterprises in
Eastern and Southern Africa, organised by UNDP at East African
Community Management Institute at
Arusha, Tanzania from 1-6 Dec.
1975.

Official

365. Meeting of the Consultative Committee of the Asian Development Bank
held at Manila (Philippines) in the
first week of Dec. 1975 for up todating the Asian Agricultural Survey.

Do.

366. UNIDO-6th Session of Permanent
Committee of I.D.B. held in Vienna
from 1-10 Dec. 1975.

Do.

367. APO Symposium on Diversification
of Agri. Livestook and Poultry,
Philippines (2-8 Dec. 1975.)

Do.

368.

Do.

Symposium on Diversification of Agri-

4,090.00

385.00

culture-Livestock and Poultry Production held in Manila from 2-8
Dec. 1975.
369. Experts Consultation on Trends, Problems and Changing Needs of Cooperative Movements in South East
Asia and the Role of the ICA at
Manila from 5-6 Dec. 1975.

Do.

370. Meeting of the interim Committee
and Development Committee of the
IMF/IBRD held in Kingston (7 Dec.
1975 to 10 Jan. 1976.)

Do.

371. IAEA-Standing Advisory Group meeting on Safeguards Implementation
8-10 Dec. 1975.

Do.

372. United States Geological SurveyMeeting on Uranium and Thorium
Research and Resource Conference at
U.S.A. (8-10 Dec. 1975.)

Do.

16,000.00

2,767.00

373. IAEA-Advisory Group meeting of
Do.
experts on Modification of Radiosensitivity of Biological systems at Vienna
(8-11 Dec. 1975.)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg169>
APPENDIX I-Contd.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
---------------------------------------------------------------------------374. UNCTAD meeting on Transfer of
Technology held in Geneva (Switzer.
land) from 8-12 Dec. 1975.
375. 7th Session of IMCO Sub-Committee
on Standards of Training and Watchkeeping held in London from 8-12
or Dec. 1975.

Official

Do.

376. 11th Session of FAO Commission for
controlling Desert Locust in Eastern
Region, Karachi (8-12 Dec. 1975.)

Do.

377. IAEA-International Seminar on Diagnosis and Treatment of Incorporated
Radionuclides at Vienna (8-12 Dec.
1975.)

Do.

378. IAEA-Regional Seminar on Use of
induced Mutations in improvement of
Grain Legume Production in SouthEast Asia held in Sri Lanka (8-12
Dec. 1975.)

Do.

4,722.00

379. IAEA-Advisory Group meeting on
"Site Selection Factors for the Disposal of Solidified High Level and
Alpha-Bearing wastes in Geological
Formations" at Vienna (8-12 Dec.
1975.)

Do.

380. IAEA Advisory Group meeting on
Strategies for improving Maintenance
of Nuclear Medicine Instruments in
Developing Countries at Vienna (8-12
Dec. 1975.)

DO.

381. UNESCO Regional Seminar on Planning Production and distribution of
books for children and Young People
in Asia, Kuala Lumpur, from 8-13
Dec. 1975.

Do.

382. Inter-regional Seminary on the Revised System of National Accounts
at Caracas (Venezuela) from 8-19
Dec. 1975.

Do.

383. FAO/DANIDA Seminar on AgriculDo.
tural Extension Youth Programmes
for sons and Daughters of Small
Farmers & Agril. Labourers, Philippines (9-18 Dec. 1975.)
-----------------------------------------------------------------------<pg170>
APPENDIX I--contd.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
---------------------------------------------------------------------------384. Meeting on Metropolitan Planning
Management in Bangkok from 10 to
12 Dec. 1975.
385.

2nd Meeting of the Association of

Official

Do.

Military Surgeons of United States at
Washington (USA) from 10 to 15
Dec. 1975.

386. Joint Meetings of the Executive Committee of the Berne Union and the
Inter-Governmental Copyright Committee established under article SI of
the Universal Copyright Convention in
Geneva from 10 to 16 Dec. 1975.

2,000.00

(Approxi-

mately. The deputation is not yet.
over and actual
expenditure incurred has no
been worked out.)
Do.

10,550.00 (Approx.)

387. Joint FAO/WHO Food standards Regional Conference for Asia held in
Bangkok on 15 Dec. 1975.

Do.

388. The Consultative Meeting on Population and Labour Policies Programme
Geneva from 15 to 19 Dec. 1975.

Do.

389. Meeting of Ad-Hoc Group of Governmental Experts for Revision of the
Paris Convention held in Geneva from
15 to 22 Dec. 1975.

Do.

390. Conference on International Economic
Cooperation held in Paris from 16 to
18 Dec. 1975.

Do.

391. Conference on International Economic
Cooperation (16 to 19 Dec. 1975).

Do.

392. South Asia Regional Travel Commission Meeting Colombo (Sri Lanka)
16 to 20 Dec. 1975.

Do

1,000.00 (Approx.)

315.00

2,610.00

393. Mobile Experts Team for Book ProDo
duction Training Course under the
auspices of the Asian Cultural Centre
for UNESCO, Tokyo in order to
organise on the spot training course
in Bangla Desh and Sri Lanka during
the dates noted against each countries.
Bangladesh-28 Dec. 75 to 6 Jan. 1976.
Sri Lanka-24to 31 January 1976.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------20 M of EA/73-12
<pg171>
APPENDIX I--contd.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
---------------------------------------------------------------------------394. Meeting of the Washington Group on
I-FAD, Rome Dec. 1975.

Official

395. World Banks Credit for Integrated
Cotton Project, Washington Dec.
1975.

Do.

396. 'Group of Nineteen' meeting held in
Paris from 5 January 76 in connection with the work of the four Commissions which the Conference on International Economic Cooperation decided to set up.

Do.

397.

Do.

Indian delegation to the 7th Session

4,300.00
5,400.00

-

4,755.00

of UNCITRAL Working Group on
the International Sale of Goods held
in Geneva from 5 to 16 January 1976.
398.

Training Programme in Quality Con-

Do.

Not yet finalised.

trol in Food Processing held in Tokyo
from 6 January to 13 Feb. 1976.
399. XVI Workshop meeting of heads of
National Productivity Organisation
held in Singapore from 13 to 16 January
1976.

Do.

1,073.00

400. 21st Session of the UNDP Governing
Council held in New York (15 to 31
Jan. 1976.)

Do.

16,000.00

401. Regional Symposium for Asia and
Pacific on the Production and Promotion of Pesticides and on Sub-Regional
Cooperation in the Pesticide Industry
held in Bangkok, Thailand from
26 to 31 January, 1976.

Do.

402.

Do.

Not yet finalised.

Do.

20,200. 00 (Approx).

Feasibility Study Training Course to

be held in Manila and Japan from
26 January to 13 March 1976.
403.

Conference of Government Experts on

Weapons held in Lugaho from 28 Jan.
to 26 February, 1976.
404. Intergovernmental Planning Meeting
on the First GARP Global Experiment
at Geneva from 2 to 8 Feb, 1976.

Do.

8,500.00

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg172>
APPENDIX I--Contd.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
---------------------------------------------------------------------------405. Deputation of Indian delegation to the
meeting of UNCITRAL Working Group on International Negotiable
Instruments Fourth Session to be held
in New York from 2 to 13 Feb. 1976.
406. Thirty Second Session of Commission
of Human Rights in Geneva from
2 Feb. to 5 March, 1976.

Official

Do.

6,955.00

407. Symposium on Productivity Agreements Workers Motivation and Sharing
the Gains of Productivity held in
Singapore from 16 to 20 Feb., 1976.

Do.

408. Third Session of Inter-governmental
Preparatory Group on a Convention of
International Inter-Model Transpprt
held in Geneva from 16 Feb., 1976.

Do.

409. The International Workshop on Policies and Techniques for mobilizing
personal savings in developing countries to be held in Santa Marta,
Colombia in Feb., 1976.

Do.

410. Second Session of the Commission
Transnational Corporations of UN to
be held in LIMA (Peru) from 1 to 12
March, 1976.

Do.

411. Session of WMO-CHBS W/Group on
Global Data Processing System at
Geneva from 22 March to 2 April,
1976.

Do.

412. Three day Conference on Braking Off
Road Vehicles to be held at UK during
23 to 25 March, 1976.

Do.

413. Visit to Romania (to be undertaken)
under Indo-Rumanian Cultural Exchange Programme for 1975-76 for
3-4 weeks in March, 1976.

Do.

414. IAEA-International symposium on
Radiological Impacts of Releases from
Nuclear Facilities into Aquatic Environments held in Helsinki.

Do.

1,348.00

1,600.00

No Foreign Exchange involved.

415. Workshop on standards and LegislaDo.
tion for Social Welfare Service.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg173>
APPENDIX I-contd.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
---------------------------------------------------------------------------B. IN INDIA
1. FACO/IUFRO World Technical Consultation on internationally dangerous
forest insects and 'diseased held in
New Delhi from 3-19 April, 1975,

Official

Nil.

2. India-Indonesia Seminar held in Delhi
(23-25 April, 1975.)

Do.

Nil.

3. ILO Regional Technical Workshop
Functions and Organisation of Labour
Ministries Services dealing with Employment questions organised by the
Labour Ministry. Govt. of India at
New Delhi from 5-16 May, 1975.

Do.

Nil.

4. Sub-Committee meeting on International and Commercial Crime held
between India, Sri Lanka and Pakistan
(Pakistan did not participate) from
25-26 June, 1975.

Do.

Nil.

5. Workshop on biogas Technology and
if
application held from 28 July to 2

Do.

Foreign Exchange,
any was borne by

August, 1975 at Vigyan Bhavan, New
Delhi.

ESCAP.

6. 28th Session of WHO Regional Committee for South East Asia New Delhi,
from 25-30 Aug., 1975.

Do.

Nil.

7. Conference on Narcotics between Sri
Lanka and India on 11-13 Sep., 1975
at Madras.

Do.

Nil.

8. FAO-Short course in Fruit and Vegetable Technology held at the FAO
Institute of Food Technology, Mysore
from 6 October to 22 November, 1975.

Do.

Nil.

9. Seminar on Construction Management
sponsored by ILO SIDA 20 October
to 1 November, 1975.

Do.

Nil.

10. Commonwealth Parliamentary ConDo.
Nil.
ference held in New Delhi from 26
October to 7 Nov., 1975. (An Exhibition was arranged for the Delegates
by the Directorate of Extension indicating the Progress in the field of
Agriculture).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg174>
APPENDIX I-contd.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
---------------------------------------------------------------------------11. Third meeting of National Co-ordinators Survey 4, ESCAP Region held

Official

Nil.

from 27 to 30 October, 1975 at New
Delhi, to discuss plans for Asian Telecommunication Net work.
12. Sixth Regional Conference
of
UNESCO National Commissions of
Asia and Oceania held at New Delhi
from 10-15 Nov., 1975.

Do. $15,000 was to be
given by UNESCO
and the remaining
expenditure to be
borne by Govt. of
India. Ministry of
Education & S.W.
In Indian Rupees.

13. Fourth International Training and
Development Conference (Organised
by the India Society for Training and
Development in Collaboration with
International Federation of Training
and Development Organisations) held
during 16-20 Nov., 1975 at Vigyan
Bhavan, New Delhi.

Do.

Nil.

14. APO Training Course on Fuel Efficiency (17 Nov. to 6 Dec.. 1975.)

Do.

Nil.

15. WHO Consultative meeting held in
South East Asia Regional Office, New
Delhi, from 18-26 Nov., 1975.

Do.

Nil.

16. WHO 2nd Regional Seminar on Epidemiological Surveliance of communicable Dieseases; at WHO House, New
Delhi from 19-26 Nov., 1975.

Do.

Nil.

17. Fourth Afro Asian Housing Congress
held from 24-30 November. 1975
organised by the National Building
Organisation.

Do.

Nil.

18. Seminar on organic materials as Fertilizers under the auspices of FAO/
SIDA in New Delhi in NovemberDecember, 1975.

Do.

Nil.

19. Commonwealth Defence Science OrDo.
Nil.
ganisation Conference held in India
during 2-19 Dec., 1975.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg175>
APPENDIX I-contd.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
---------------------------------------------------------------------------20. ESCAP Workshop on Shippers Cooperation: Calculations of Ocean Transport Costs held in New Delhi from

official

Nil.

8-19 Dec. 1975.
21. Second World Congress on Water
Resources at New Delhi from 12-16
Dec., 1975.

Do.

Nil.

22. IAEA-Advisory Group Meeting to
prepare a Manual of Guidance on the
Radiological Safety requirements for
Fuel Fabrication Plants 15-19 Dec.,
1975.

Do.

Nil.

23. World Book Fair in New Delhi
organised by National book Trust,
India from 16-25 Jan., 1976.

Do.

Nil.

24. International Seminar on 'World
Publishing in the Eighties at New
Delhi from 17-20 Jan., 1976.

Do.

25. International Seminar on 'Uses of Soil
Survey of Classification in Planning
and implementing Agricultural
Development in the Tropics held at
Hyderabad from 18-23 Jan., 1976.

Do.

Nil.

Expenditure to be
borne by the Organising Committee
of the Seminar.

26. Sub-Committee Meeting on Law of
Do.
Nil.
the Sea of the Asian African Legal
Consultative Committee, held in Delhi
from 2 to 6 February, 1976.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg176>
INDIA
USA AUSTRIA SWITZERLAND MEXICO ITALY FRANCE UNITED KINGDOM IRAQ
AUSTRALIA RUSSIA GERMANY MALAYSIA BELGIUM KENYA SRI LANKA PHILIPPINES
JAMAICA HONG KONG POLAND IRAN YUGOSLAVIA NEPAL JAPAN EGYPT SPAIN
BANGLADESH CANADA KOREA INDONESIA CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC VENEZUELA
GABON MONGOLIA PERU DENMARK PAKISTAN GUINEA REPUBLIC OF SINGAPORE
BRAZIL LATVIA TANZANIA NORWAY GUYANA UKRAINE THAILAND BULGARIA ZAIRE
HUNGARY SWEDEN ALGERIA TURKEY CROATIA ESTONIA MAURITIUS COLOMBIA OMAN
ROMANIA FINLAND
Mar 03, 1975

Appendix II International organisations

Jan 01, 1975
APPENDIX II

International organisations of which India became a Member or ceased to be
a Member during the year 1975-76.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------S. No. Name of international OrganisaName of International Organition of which India became a
sation of which India ceased
Member during the year 1975-76
to be, a member during the year
1975-76.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
---------------------------------------------------------------------------1. Ex-Officio Associate of International
Institute for VITAL Registration and
Statistics, U.S.A.

Ceased membership from International Agriculture Aviation
Centre, The Hague, as the
Centre has since dissolved.

2. Ex-Officio member of the International Statistical Institute, The Hague
(Continuation of Membership).
3. Member of International Union for
Scientific Study of Population Liege,
Belgium, (Continuation of membership).
4. Membership of Association of Development Research and Training Institutes of Asia and the Pacific under
the auspices of UN. Asian Development Institute, Bangkok.
5. International Sun flower Association
Voorburg. Netherland, Amstordam.
6. International Record Management
Federation.
7.

Association of Canadian Archivists.

8. Central Water Commission is an Institutional Member of the I.W.B.A.
w.e.f. 1974-75.
9. Permanent Council of World Petroleum Congress, in May, 1975.
10. Commission for the Geological Map
of the World, 60bd Saint-Michel,
75272 Paris Cedex 06.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg177>
APPENDIX I--contd.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
---------------------------------------------------------------------------11. International Association of Enginearing Geology, Geologisches

Landesamt, NW, D415 Krefeld I,
de-Greiff-Str 195, Postfach 1080, FR
Germany.
12. International Subcommission on
Stratigraphic Classification, Princeton, University, 118 Library Avenue,
Princeton, NJ 08540 USA.
13. WHO Expert Advisory Panel on
Malaria for a period of five years
from 1975.
14. Codex Alimenterius Commission of
Joint FAC/WHO Food Standards
Programme.
------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg178>
INDIA
USA BELGIUM

FRANCE

GERMANY

Jan 01, 1975

Appendix III Treaties/Conventions/Agreements/Concluded or renewed by India

APPENDIX III
Treaties/Conventions/Agreements/Concluded or renewed by India with other
Countries in 1975*
(*This list is not exhaustive)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------Sl.
Title of Convention/
Date of
Date of
Date on
No.
Treaty/Agreement
signature Ratifiwhich
Recation/
entered
marks
Accepinto
tance/
force
Confirmation
---------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
5
6
---------------------------------------------------------------------------Multilateral:
European Economic Community
(E.E.C.) :
1. Agreement between the Re-

18-7-75

-

18-7-75

-

public of India and the European Economic Community on Cane Sugar.
Agreement Establishing the Association of Iron Ore Exporting
Countries (A.I.E.C.) :
2. Agreement Establishing the
Association of Iron Ore Exporting Countries (Final Act
signed on Apr 03, 1975 at Geneva).

4-7-75

-

12-10-75

-

-

-

International Sugar Agreement
3. Extension of the International
Sugar Agreement, 1973.

22-12-75

-

Bilateral:
Australia:
4. Agreement between the Go26-2-75
26-2 75
vernment of the Republic of
India and the Government
of Australia on Cooperation
in the field of Science and
Technology.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg179>
APPENDIX II-contd.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
5
6
---------------------------------------------------------------------------5. Exchange of letters between
the Government of India and
the Government of Australia for food grant of 30,000
metric tonnes.

2-12-75

2-12-75

2-12-75

6. Exchange of letters between
the Government of India and
the Government of Australia for grant of 23,779 metric
tonnes of wheat.

4-12-75

4-12-75

4-12-75

7. Agreements on capital repayment, 1975 between the Government of India and the
Austrian Federal Government for 50.86 million Austrian Schillings.

6-3-75

-

6-3-75

8. Agreement between the Government of India and the

6-3-75

-

-

-

Austria :

6-3-75

-

-

Austrian Federal Government on financial assistance
for 19.5 million Austrian
Schillings.
9. Credit Agreement between
the Government of India and
the Republic of Austria for
Austrian Schillings 19.5 million for the purchase of capital
good from Austrian firms.

12-5-75

-

-

-

Bangladesh :
10.

Agreement between the Go-

25-1-75

-

25-1-75

-

vernment of India and the
Government of the People's
Republic of Bangladesh relating to the registered letter
post.
Canada :
11.

Exchange of Letters between

28-2-75

28-2-75

-

-

the Government of India and
the Government of Canada
to amend the Canadian Development Loan Agreement
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg180>
APPENDIX I-contd.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
5
6
---------------------------------------------------------------------------for C $7.5 million signed on
16-3-73
for
Synthetic
Rubber Project of I.P.C.L.
12. Exchange of Notes between
the Government of India and
the Government of Canada
for the import of rape-seed
from Canada.

26-3-75

26-3-75

13. Exchange of Notes to amend
the plan
of operations
for technical cooperation
signed on 25-8-70 between
the Government of India and
the Government of Canada
regarding Ground Water
Exploration and Training.

20-3-75

20-3-75

26-3-75

-

-

-

(Canadian Assisted Ground
Water Project in Hyderabad,
Andhra Pradesh).
14. Exchange of Notes between
the Government of India and
the Government of Canada
proposing an amendment to
the existing loan agreement
dated 6-12-74.
(This note shall form part of
the Loan Agreement dated
6-12-74 concerning the purchase of potash fertilizer in
the territory of Canada.)

31-3-75

31-3-75

15. Rescheduling Agreement between the Government of
India and the Government of
Canada in respect of the
Loan for Rajasthan Atomic
Power Project, Stage I.

25-4-75

25-4-75

-

31-1-74

-

-

16. Rescheduling
Agreement
25-4-75
25-4-75
28-2-74
between the Government of
India and the Government of
Canada in respect of the
Loan for Diesel Locos for
Indian Railways.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg181>
APPENDIX I--contd.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
5
6
---------------------------------------------------------------------------17.
Exchange of Notes between
the Government of India and
the Government of Canada
regarding amendment of Article 4.03 of Canadian Development Loan Agreement
for C.$10 million signed on
6-12-74 for import of Potash
Fertilizer from Canada.
18.
Exchange of Letters between
the Government of India and
the Government of Canada
for amending the Canadian
Development Loan Agreement dated 7-4-71 for import
of equipment for oil and gas
exploration and development.

20-6-75

1-8-75

20-6-75

1-8-75

-

-

-

-

19.
Exchange of letters between
the Government of India and
the Government of Canada
regarding the supply of Rape
seed/oil during the financial
year 1975-76 worth eight
million Canadian dollars
(C.$ 8.0 million).
20. Exchange of Letters between
the Government of India and
the Government of Canada
for amending the Canadian
Development Loan Agreement dated 20-4-66 for the
purchase of 13 diesel Locomotives for the Calcutta
Port Authority.
21.
Agreement between the Government of India and the
Government of Canada for
Canadian
Development
Loan of C.$10.00 million or
import of fertilizers from
Canada.

5-8-75

8-8-75

16-8-75

16-8-75

-

8-8-75

-

-

-

-

24-10-75

-

22. Exchange of Letters between
28-11-75
28-11-75
28-11-75
the Government of India and
the Government of Canada
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg182>
APPENDIX I-contd.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
5
6
---------------------------------------------------------------------------for the import of wheat from
Canada
under Canada's
International Development
Assistance Programme.
23. Exchange of Letters between
the Government of India and
the Government of Canada
regarding amendment to
the Loan Agreement dated
2-9-70 for C.$ 6. million for
the purchase of Locomotive
Components, materials and
services for Diesel Loco
Works, Varanasi.

1-12-75

1-12-75

7-2-75

-

-

-

France
24.

Financial Protocol between

7-2-75

-

the Government of the Republic of India and the Government of the Republic of
France relating to French
credits meant to finance the
Development Plan of India.
25.
-

Financial Protocol between

7-2-75

-

7-2-75

the Government of the Republic of India and the Government of the Republic of
France relating to French
Credits meant to finance the
goods and services for the
Indian Atomic Energy and
Space Departments.
26.
-

Convention between the Go-

6-5-75

-

6-5-75

-

-

vernment of India and the
Credit National Limited of
France for financing expenses in France relating partly
to industrial projects and
partly to the purchase of consumer goods, light equipment, raw materials and fertilizers.
27.
-

Convention between the Go-

-

vernment of India and the
Credit National Limited of
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg183>
APPENDIX I-contd.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
5
6
---------------------------------------------------------------------------France for financing expenditure in France for atomic
energy and space programme
of
Indian
Departments
of Atomic Energy and
Space.
28. Credit Agreement between
the Government of India and
the BANQUE NATIONALE
DE PARIS and the BAN-

27-8-75

-

-

-

QUE FRANCAISE DU
COMMERCE
EXTERIEUR to finance the purchases in France of goods
and services for projects of
Indian Atomic Energy and
Space Departments for a
minimum of FF 60,000,000
(sixty million French Francs)
and the balance of FF
30,000,000 (thirty million
French Francs) for financing
the purchases in France of
enriched Uranium.
29. Credit Agreement between
the Government of India
and the BANQUE NATIONALE DE PARIS and
the BANQUE FRANCAISE
DU COMMERCE EXTERIEUR for financing the
supply contracts concerning
consumer goods, light capital equipment, raw material
and fertilizers.

27-8-75

-

-

-

Germany, Federal Republic of
30. Loan Agreement between the
30-1-75
4-2-75
Government of India and the
KREDITANSTALT FUR
WIEDERAUFBAU for Dm.
57,000,000 (fifty seven million Deutsche Mark) for the
Tata Engineering and Locomotive Company Ltd., Bombay.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg184>
APPENDIX II-contd.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
5
6
---------------------------------------------------------------------------31. Arbitration Agreement between the
Government of
India and the KREDITANSTALT FUR WIEDERAUFBAU with reference to the
provisions
of Article
IX, paragraph (6), of the
Loan Agreement dated 4th
February, 75.
32.

Project Agreement between

30-1-75

-

4-2-75

-

4-2-75

-

-

-

the TATA Engineering and
Locomotive Co. Ltd., Bombay and KREDITANSTALT FUR WIEDERAUFBAU on the basis of the
Loan
Agreement dated
4-2-75.
33.
Arbitration Agreement between the TATA Engineering
and Locomotive Co. Ltd.,
Bombay and KREDITANSTALT FUR WIEDERAUFBAU with reference to the
provisions of Article VI,
paragraph (5) of the Project
Agreement.
34. Exchange of Letters between
the Government of India and
the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany
regarding the release of
amount under the Financial
Assistance Agreement dt.
26-4-75.
35. Exchange of Letters between
the Government of India and
the Government
of the
Federal Republic of Germany
concerning debt service relief.

4-2-75

26-4-75

26-4-75

-

-

-

26-4-75

26-4-75

-

26-4-75

26-4-75

-

36. Agreement
between the
26-4-75
26-4-75
Government of India and
the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany
concerning Financial Assistance in 1975 for DM
----------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg185>
APPENDIX I--contd.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
5
6
---------------------------------------------------------------------------365,000,000 (three hundred
and sixty live million Deutsche Mark).
37. Loan Agreement between the
Industrial Finance Corporation of India and KREDITANSTALT FUR WIEDERAUFBAU for DM

27-5-75

-

-

-

11,000,000 (eleven million).
38. Arbitration Agreement between the Industrial Finance
Corporation of India and
KREDITANSTALT FUR
WIEDERAUFBAU with
reference to Article X,paragraph (6) of the Loan Agree.
ment dated 27-5-75

27-5-75

-

-

-

-

39. Guarantee Agreement between the Government of
and KREDITANSTALT
FUR WIEDERAUFBAU
with reference to Loan Agree.
ment dated 27-5-75.

12-5-75

-

27-5-75

40. Arbitration Agreement between the Government of India
and
KREDITANSTALT
FUR WIEDERAUFBAU
with reference to Article IV.
paragraph (7) of the Guarantee
Agreement dated
27-5-75.

12-5-75

-

27-5-75

-

41. Loan Agreement between
the Industrial Credit and
Investment Corporation of
India
Ltd. and KREDITANSTALT FUR WIEDDERAUFBAU for DM
7,000,000 (Seven million).

6-6-75

-

-

-

42. Arbitration Agreement bet6-6-75
ween the Industrial Credit
and Investment Corporation of India Ltd. and KREDITANSTALT FUR WIEDERAUFBAU with reference to Article X, paragraph
(6) of the Loan Agreement
dated 6 June, 1975.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg186>
APPENDIX III-Contd.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
5
6
---------------------------------------------------------------------------43. Guarantee Agreement between the Government of
India and KREDITANSTALT FUR WIEDERAUFBAU with reference to
Loan
Agreement dated

6-6-75

-

-

-

6 June 1975.
44. Arbitration Agreement between the Government of India
and
KREDITANSTALT
FUR WIEDERAUFBAU
with reference to Article IV,
paragraph
(7)
of the
Guarantee Agreement dated
6 June 1975.

6-6-75

-

45. Exchange of Letters between
the Government of India
and the Government of the
Federal Republic of Germany for the supply of 5,500
tons of fertilisers
to the
Indo-German Kangra Project.

28-7-75

-

46. Loan Agreement between
KREDITANSTALT FUR
WIEDERAUFBAU and the
National Small Industries
Corporation Ltd., for DM
7,000,000.

25-9-75

47. Arbitration Agreement between KREDITANSTALT
FUR WIEDERAUFBAU
and the National Small Industries Corporation Ltd.

25-9-75

-

-

28-7-75

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

48. Guarantee Agreement bet25-9-75
ween KREDITANSTALT
FUR WIEDERAUFBAU
and India to the Loan Agreement (dt. 25th September,
1975) between KREDITANSTALT FUR WIEDERAUFBAU and the (National
Small Industries Corporation Ltd., New Delhi).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------20 M of EA/75-13
<pg187>
APPENDIX III-contd.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
5
6
---------------------------------------------------------------------------49. Arbitration Agreement with
reference to the provisions
of Article IV, paragraph (7)
of the Guarantee Agreement

25-9-75

-

-

-

between
KREDITANSTALT FUR WIEDERAUFBAU and India dated 25th
September, 1975.
50. Exchange of Letters between
the
Government of India
and the Government of the
Federal Republic of Germany for the extension of the
Agreement for the Indo-German Project, Kangra.

9-10-75

-

9-10-75

51. Exchange of Notes between
the
Government of India
and the Government of the
Federal Republic of Germany
for the extension of the IndoGerman Technical Cooperation Agreement on Firemen
Training Institute, Bangalore.

17-11-75

-

17-11-75

52. Exchange of Letters between
the Government of India and
the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany
for the supply of 2850 metric
tons of fertilizers to Nilgiris
Project.

16-12-75

-

16-12-75

53. Exchange of Notes between
the Government of India
and the Government of the
the Federal
Republic of
Germany for food grant of
26,000 metric tons of wheat.

19-12-75

-

-

-

-

19-12-75

-

54. Protocol pursuant to para19-12-75
19-12-75
graph 3 (b) of the Arrangement arrived at by Exchange
of Notes dated 19th December, 1975 between the Government of India and the Government of the Federal Republic
of Germany concerning the
supply f.o.b. of soft wheat.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg188>
APPENDIX III-contd.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
5
6
---------------------------------------------------------------------------55. Loan Agreement between the

30-12-75

-

-

-

Government of India and
KREDITANSTALT FUR
WIEDERAUFBAU for DM
90,000,000 (Commodities
XVII).
56. Arbitration Agreement with
reference to the provisions of
Article IX, paragraph (6) of
the Loan Agreement between
the Government of India and
KREDITANSTALT FUR
WIEDERAUFBAU dated
30th December, 1975.
57. Loan Agreement between
the Government of India and
KREDITANSTALT FUR
WIEDERAUFBAU for DM
140,000,000 as Supplementary Agreement for Debt
Relief 1975-76.
58. Arbitration Agreement with
reference to the provisions
of Article VIII, paragraph
(5) of the Additional/Agreement Supplementary between
the Government of India
and KREDITANSTALT
FUR WIEDERAUFBAU.

30-12-75

30-12-75

30-12-75

-

-

-

-

30-12-75

-

-

-

-

-

Japan
59. Exchange of Notes between
the Government of India and
the Government of Japan pertaining to the Debt Relief Aid
from Japan for the year
1974-75.

31-1-75

31-1-75

-

60. Exchange of Notes between
the Government of India and
the Government of Japan
pertaining to the Commodity Aid from Japan for the
year 1974-75.

31-1-75

31-1-75

-

-

61. Loan Agreement between
5-3-75
the Government of India and
the Export-Import Bank of
---------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg189>
APPENDIX III-contd.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
5
6
----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Japan with reference to exchange of notes dated 31-1-75
between the Government of
India and the Government
of Japan concerning the
financial
assistance for
India's economic development - seven billion Yen
(Y 7,000,000,000).
62. Rescheduling Agreement the
between
Government of
India and the Export-Import
Bank of Japan with reference
to exchange of notes dated
31-1-75 between the Government of India and the Government of Japan concerning a
debt relief measure in accordance with the understanding on concerted debt relief
action reached among the
Aid India Consortium members on 30-10-74.
63.
Loan Agreement between
the Government of India and
the
Export-Import Bank
of Japan with reference to
exchange of notes dated
28-3-75 between the Government of India and the Government of Japan concerning
the financial assistance for
the Panipat Fertilizer Project (Y 11,000,000,000) 11
billion Yen.

5-3-75

-

-

-

10-4-75

-

-

-

-

-

-

Libyan Arab Republic
64. Memorandum of Understanding reached between the
Government of Indian and
the Libyan Arab Republic
regarding roads construction.

2-7-75

Malaysia
65. Agreement between the
22-5-74
23-5-75
23-6-75
Government of India and the
Government of Malaysia
relating to Air Services.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg190>
APPENDIX III-contd.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------

1
2
3
4
5
6
---------------------------------------------------------------------------Mauritius
66. Cultural Agreement between
the Government of the
Republic of India and the
Government of Mauritius.

6-2-73

67. Credit Agreement between
the Government of India and
the Government of Mauritius
for Rs. 50 (fifty) million.

9-1-75

3-1-75

68. Agreed Minutes of discussions 9-1-75
between the Government of
India and the Government of
Mauritius regarding Economic Assistance.

3-1-75

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

Pakistan
69. Protocol on resumption of
shipping services between
India- and Pakistan.

15-1-75

-

15-1-75

-

70. Trade Agreement between the
Government of India and the
Government of Pakistan.

23-1-75

-

23-1-75

-

71. Memorandum of Under23-1-75
standing between the Government of India and the Government of Pakistan for the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of Article 7 of the Trade
Agreement and ensuring expeditious settlement of trade
transactions. (This Memorandum of Understanding
will constitute an integral
part of the Trade Agreement
signed on 23rd January,
1975).

-

23-1-75

-

Poland
72. Protocol between the Go24-1-75
vernment of India and the
Government of Poland regarding Second Meeting
of the Indo-Polish Joint
Commission for Economic,
Trade, Scientific and Technical Cooperation.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg191>

APPENDIX III-contd.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
5
6
---------------------------------------------------------------------------Portugal
73. Treaty between India and
Portugal on Recognition
of India's Sovereignty over
Goa, Daman, Diu, Dadra
and Nagar Haveli and Related Matters.

31-12-74

3-6-75

3-6-75

-

11-6-75

-

11-6-75

-

26-4-73

9-4-75

9-4-75

Romania
74. Protocol between the Government of India and the
Government of the Socialist
Republic of Romania on
technical and scientific cooperation in the field of
Agriculture, Food, Industry
and Water Management.
Saudi Arabia
75. Agreement between the Government of India and the
Government of the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
for air services between and
beyond their respective territories.

-

Sri Lanka
76. Credit Agreement between
the Government of India
and the Government of Sri
Lanka for Rs. 100 million.

4-11-75

-

-

-

77. Exchange of Letters between
the Government of India
and Sweden with reference
to the record of Understanding
regarding Debt
Relief to India,
1974-75
which was signed in Washington on 30-10-74

20-1-75

3-2-75

-

-

78. Exchange of Letters between
the Government of India
and the Government of
Sweden regarding the food
grant of 50,000 tonnes of
wheat.

5-3-75

5-3-75

-

Sweden

5-3-75

---------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg192>
APPENDIX III-contd.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
5
6
---------------------------------------------------------------------------79. Agreement between the Government of India and the
Government of Sweden regarding Development Cooperation for 1975.

21-5-75

-

21-5-75

-

Sudan
80. Cultural Agreement between the Government of
the Republic of India and
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Sudan.

28-11-74

13-8-75

13-8-75

United Kingdom
The United Kingdom Food
Aid Grant : India Agreement
81. Exchange of Letters between
the Government of India
and the Government of the
United Kingdom regarding
the Food Aid Grant.

11-3-75

-

82. Exchange of Letters between
the Government of India
and the Government of the
United Kingdom regarding
United Kingdom/India
Maintenance Loan, 1975.

11-3-75

-

83. Exchange of Letters between
the Government of India and
the
Government of the
United Kingdom regarding
Capital Investment Loans,
1971, 1972, 1973 and 1974
(together called the relevent
loans).

15-4-75

16-5-75

11-3-75

-

-

-

-

-

84. Exchange of Letters between
23-4-75
23-4-75
the Government of India
and the Government of the
United Kingdom regarding
amendment of United Kingdom India Capital Investment Loan, 1974.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------

<pg193>
APPENDIX III-contd.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
5
6
---------------------------------------------------------------------------85. Exchange of Notes between
the Government of India,
and the Government of the
United Kingdom regarding
grant of 10,600,000 (ten
million six hundred thousand pounds sterling) for
the purpose of assisting in
financing certain development projects.

27-6-75

27-6-75

-

-

86. Exchange of Letters between
the Government of India
and the Government of the
united Kingdom regarding
the procedure to be followed
for 10.6 million United
Kingdom/India Mixed Project Grant, 1975.

27-6-75

27-6-75

-

-

87. Exchange of Notes between
the Government of India
and the Government of the
United Kingdom regarding
development aid for ten
million pounds sterling
(10,000,000) to India to
enable the purchase of certain goods and services in
the United Kingdom.
(U.K.--India Sectoral Grant,
1975).

27-6-75

27-6-75

-

-

88. Exchange of Letters between
the Government of India
and the Government of the
United Kingdom regarding
U.K.-India Sectoral Grant,
1975.

27-6-75

27-6-75

-

-

89. Exchange of Notes between
the Government of India
and the Government of the
United Kingdom regarding
arrangements and procedures dealing with Capital Investment Grant, 1975.

27-6-75

27-6-75

-

-

90. Exchange of Notes between
the Government of India
and the Government of the

27-6-75

27-6-75

-

-

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg194>
APPENDIX III-contd.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
5
6
---------------------------------------------------------------------------United Kingdom regarding
arrangements and procedures dealing with U.K./
India Capital Investment
Loans 1971, 1972, 1973,
1974 and U.K./India Capital
Investment Grant, 1975 and
such similar loans or grants
as may be made available in
future and specified as such
by the Government of the
United Kingdom.
91. Exchange of Notes between
the Governments of India
and the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern
Ireland regarding debt refinancing Grant, 1975.

2-12-75

2-12-75

-

-

92. Exchange of Notes between
the Government of India
and the Government of the
United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland regarding India Mixed
Project Grant 1975 (No. 2)
for a sum not exceeding
10,000,000 (ten million
pounds sterling) for the purpose of assisting in financing
certain development projects.

2-12-75

2-12-75

-

-

93. Exchange of Letters between
the Government of India
and the Government of the
United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland regarding application of
paragraph 10(c) to the Indian Mixed Project Grant-1975 dated 2nd December
1975.

2-12-75

2-12-75

-

-

94. Exchange of Notes between
the Government of India
and the Government of the
United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ire-

2-12-75

2-12-75

-

-

land regarding India Sectoral
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------20 M of EA/75-14

<pg195>
APPENDIX III-contd.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
5
6
---------------------------------------------------------------------------Grant 1975 (No. 2) for a
sum not exceeding
 10,000,000 (ten million
pounds sterling).
95. Exchange of Letters between
the Government of India
and the Government of the
United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland regarding availability
of the grant for the development of the Coal Mining
sector in India.

2-12-75

2-12-75

-

-

96. Exchange of Notes between
the Government of India
and the Government of the
United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland regarding India Maintenance grant of  60,000,000
(sixty million pounds sterling).

2-12-75

2-12-75

-

-

97. Exchange of Letters between
the Government of India
and the Government of the
United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland regarding grant of
60,000,000 (sixty million
pounds sterling) dated
2-12-75 to be made available
for the full range of maintenance imports, components,
commodities, capital balancing items, minor items and
related
services necessary
to the economic development of India.

2-12-75

2-12-75

-

-

24-1-75

24-1-75

24-1-75

United States of America
98. Exchange of Letters between

-

the Government of India
and the Government of
U.S.A. concerning the Lend
Lease Settlement Agreement
signed at Washington on
16-5-46.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg196>
APPENDIX III-contd.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
5
6
---------------------------------------------------------------------------99. Agreement between the Government of India and the
Government of the United
States of America for sales
of agricultural commodities.
100. Agreed Minutes of the Meeting between the Government
of India and the Governmeat of the United States of
America regarding Food
Assistance Agreement.
101. Agreement between the Government of the United
States of America regarding
the Consolidation and Rescheduling of Certain Debts
owed to the United States
Government and its agencies.

20-3-75

20-3-75

20-3-75

2-5-75

Yemen
102. Agreement for the exchange
of Money Orders between
the Government of India
and the Government of the
People's
Democratic Republic of Yemen.

1-4-75

1-4- 75

Joint Communiques
103. Pakistan
Joint Communique issued in New Delhi on 20th May, 1975 on the Conclusion of the Foreign Secretary's level talks between the Foreign Secretary of India (Shri Kewal Singh) and Foreign Secretary of Pakistan (H.E.
Mr. Agha Shahi).
<pg197>

INDIA
USA SWITZERLAND AUSTRALIA AUSTRIA BANGLADESH CANADA FRANCE GERMANY
JAPAN LIBYA MALAYSIA MAURITIUS PAKISTAN POLAND PORTUGAL OMAN ROMANIA
SAUDI ARABIA SRI LANKA SWEDEN SUDAN UNITED KINGDOM IRELAND YEMEN
Apr 03, 1975

Appendix IV Important Industrial/Construction Projects secured by Indian Firms
Abroad

Jan 01, 1975
APPENDIX IV
Important Industrial/Construction Projects secured by Indian Firms Abroad
on Turnkey/Sub-Contracting Basis
---------------------------------------------------------------------------St. Name of the firm
Country
Value of
Details of project
No.
where
contract
contract
secured
---------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
5
---------------------------------------------------------------------------1. M/s. Shah ConsQatar
Rs. 13.50
Construction of intertruction Co.

crores

Bombay

national Airport (Terminal Building) at Doha

2. M/s. Puri Const.
(P) Ltd. New
Delhi

Saudi
Arabia

Rs. 21.6
crores

1000 houses to
built

3.

Dubai

Rs. 60.00

1710 residential units

crores

to be built

Rs. 5.77

Construction of a palce

crores,

complex

Rs. 2.80

Construction of Kuwait

crores

International

Rs. 8.00

Hydro-electric

M/s. Siporex Co.

Ltd. Poona
M/s. Shapurji

Muscat

Pallonji Co.
Bombay
5.

M/s. Engineering

Kuwait

Projects (India)
Ltd.
6.

be

Airport

Now Delhi

M/s. Patel Engi-

Sri Lanka

project

neering Co. Ltd.
Bombay

crores

7. M/s. Patel Engineering Co. Ltd.
Bombay

Srilanka

Rs. 5.40
crores

Bowatenna Power Project ADB Financed
Project

8. M/s. Triveni
Structurals
Project

Sri Lanka

Rs. 0.50
crores

Bowatenna Power Project
ADB Financed

9. M/s. Continental
Construction Pvt.
Ltd. New Delhi

Iraq

Rs. 5.00
crores

Construction of Fibre
Board Factory at Abu
Sukhair, Iraq.

<pg198>
APPENDIX IV-Contd.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
5
---------------------------------------------------------------------------10. M/s. Kaveri
fo
r
Structurals
Pr
o-

Iran

11. M/s Engineering
super
Construction
Fertiliser

Qatar

Rs. 0. 80

Pressure

crores

Fertiliser Refiners
ject

Rs. 4.71

construction and

crores

vision

India Ltd.
12. M/s. Engineering
Projects India Ltd.

vessels

of

Project Doha
Yugoslavia

Rs. 5.7
crores

Supply of equipment
and material for Coke
oven and By-Product
Plant

13. M/s. Richardson
Kuwait

Kuwait

& Cruddas Ltd.
Airport
.
Bombay

Rs. 2.7

Construction of

crores

International

14. M/s. Crompton
Engineering Co.

Bangladesh

Rs. 1. 5
crores

Gas Turbine
Station

Power

15. M/s. Engineering
reheat
Projects India
Soid's

Iraq

Rs. 0.36

Construction of

crores

ing furnace for

Semi Integrated Steel
Plant
16.

M/s. Backau

Malaysia

Wolf (India)
17. Water & Power
Dev. Consultancy

Iraq

Rs. 8.00

Construction

of 2000

crores

tonnes sugar plant

us $ 5
million

Ground Water survey
of Western desert,

Services (India)

Block V. The

letter

Ltd. (WAPCOS)
and

of intent received
contract to be

signed.
Iraq

US $ 0.4
million

Bagh-

Setting up of Water
Research Centre,
dad.

signed.
Burma

Philippines

Burma

Philippines

Contract

US $

Rangoon Water Supply

600,000

Project.
project.

ADD loan

US $

Mindanao

Irrigation

450,000

Study. ADD
project.

Stage I

Sedawgyi

$ 32,250
Stage II
$ 15,580

pose project. ADD
assistance project.

$ 300,000

Supply

Multi-pur-

of individual

consultants

irri
-

loan

for

gation projects.

ADB

loan project.
<pg199>
APPENDIX IV-contd.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
5
----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Nepal

18. Rail India Tech-.

Syria

nical & Economic
Services Ltd.

Iran

$ 100,000

Dhangarhi Ground Water Development Project. ADD Assistance
Project.

Rs. 25

Preliminary Feasibility-

lakhs

cum-cost survey together with economic
study of three new
railway lines in Syria
totalling 450 kms.
Preliminary feasibility-

Rs. 23
lakhs

cum-cost study of a
new railway line in
Iran between Kerman
and Shurgaz for a total
length of 350 kms.

<pg200>
INDIA
USA QATAR OMAN KUWAIT SRI LANKA IRAQ UNITED KINGDOM IRAN
BANGLADESH MALAYSIA BURMA LATVIA PHILIPPINES NEPAL SYRIA

YUGOSLAVIA

Jan 01, 1975

Appendix V Statement showing the umber of Indian Experts

APPENDIX V
Statement showing the umber of Indian Experts deputed to various
countries under ITEC Programme
---------------------------------------------------------------------------1970
1971
1972
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------Name of
Sent ReStill
Sent ReStill
Sent
ReStill
Country
turworkturworkturworkned
ing
ned
ing
ned
ing
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------Afghanistan
4
1
3
21
14
7
30
21
9

Abu Dhabi
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
Burma
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
Bhutan
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
Ethiopia
5
5
..
2
2
..
2
2
..
Fiji
..
..
..
1
1
..
1
1
..
Guyana
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
Ghana
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
Iran
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
Iraq
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
Kenya
..
..
..
..
..
..
2
2
..
Maldives
6
6
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
Malyasia
7
7
..
1
1
..
..
..
..
Mauritius
3
3
..
9
4
5
3
1
2
Morocco
3
..
3
..
..
..
..
..
..
Oman
..
..
..
..
..
..
1
1
..
Nigeria
..
..
..
4
4
..
..
..
..
PDRY (Aden)
13
13
..
4
4
..
2
..
2
Senegal
..
..
..
2
..
2
..
..
..
Somalia
13
12
1
..
..
..
4
..
4
Sri Lanka
..
..
..
..
..
..
1
1
..
Tanzania
..
..
..
..
..
..
1
..
..
UAE
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
Zanzibar
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
Cyprus
..
..
..
..
..
..
1
1
..
Malta
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------Total
54
47
7
44
30
14
48
31
17
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg201>

APPENDIX V-Contd.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------Statement showing the number of Indian Experts deputed to various
Countries under ITEC Programme
Upto Sep 01, 1975
---------------------------------------------------------------------------1973
1974
1975
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------Name of
ent
ReStill Sent Re- Still Sent Re- Still
Country
turworktur- worktur- Workned
ing
ned ing
ned
ing
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------Afghanistan
37
7
30
32
5
27
29
5
2
4
Abu Dhabi
..
..
..
..
1
..
..
..
.
.
Burma
..
..
..
8
8
..
2
2
.
.
Bhutan
2
2
..
..
..
..
..
..
.
.
Ethiopia
1
..
1
..
..
..
..
..
.
.
Fiji
5
..
5
3
3
..
1
..
1
Guyana
..
..
..
8
..
8
..
..
..
Ghana
..
..
..
3
..
3
..
..
..
Iran
4
4
..
7
7
..
..
..
..
Iraq
1
1
..
4
4
..
..
..
..
Kenya
2
2
..
..
..
..
1
..
1
Maldives
4
4
..
6
6
..
..
..
..
Malaysia
1
1
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
Mauritius
18
3
15
14
1
13
5
..
5
Morocco
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
Oman
1
1
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
Nigeria
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
PDRY (Aden)
3
..
3
15
6
9
11
6
5
Senegal
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..
..

Somalia
..
Sri Lanka.
..
Sudan
1
Tanzania
..
Tongo
1
UAE
..
Zanzibar
..
Cyprus
..
Malta
1

1

..

1

2

1

1

..

..

3

3

..

14

14

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

1

..

8

8

..

10

10

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

1

..

..

..

..

2

2

..

..

..

11

10

1

5

5

..

3

3

1

..

1

1

1

..

..

..

..

..

..

1

..

1

1

..

-------------------------------------------------------------------Total
103
46
57
136
74
62
55
39

16

-------------------------------------------------------------------Total:
Deputed
440
Returned
246
Still working
194
<pg202>
---------------------------------------------------------------------------APPENDIX V-contd.
ITEC PROGRAMME
---------------------------------------------------------------------------Number of foreign Trainees in India
Sl.
NO.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.

Name of country
Afghanistan
Cyprus
Ethiopia
Ghana
PDRY.
Maldives
Sri Lanka
Sudan
Tanzania &
Zanzibar
Zambia
Burma
DRVN
Laos
Trinidad &
Tobago
Thailand
Egypt

Number
5
1
2
1
2
12
12
7
140*
4
5
6
5
1
6

Total
211
---------------------------------------------------------------------------*(129 of these trainees are financed from a grant received by Tanzania
from Sweden, although all arrangements for training have been done
by us).
<pg203>
INDIA
USA AFGHANISTAN UNITED ARAB EMIRATES BURMA BHUTAN ETHIOPIA FIJI GUYANA
GHANA IRAN IRAQ KENYA MALDIVES MAURITIUS MOROCCO OMAN NIGER NIGERIA
SENEGAL MALI SOMALIA SRI LANKA TANZANIA CYPRUS MALTA MALAYSIA SUDAN
ZAMBIA LAOS THAILAND EGYPT SWEDEN
Sep 01, 1975

Appendix VI Indian Joint Ventures Abroad

Jan 01, 19751
APPENDIX-VI
Indian Joint Ventures Abroad
---------------------------------------------------------------------------Sl.
Country
In
Under
Approved
No.

Production

implementa-

but not
yet imp-

tion

lemented

---------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
5
---------------------------------------------------------------------------1.
Afghanistan
3
2
2.
Australia
1
3.
Canada
1
2
4.
Columbia
1
5.
Ceylon
3
8
6.
Cyprus
1
7.
Dubai
4
8.
Ethiopia
2
5
9.
Fiji
1
1
10. Ghana
1
11. Greneda
1
12. Hong Kong
1
1
13. Indonesia
2
6
7
14. Iran
1
3
5
15. Iraq
1
16. Ireland
1
1

17. Libya
1
18. Kenya
7
1
4
19. Lebanon
1
20. Mauritius
3
5
3
---------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg204>
APPENDIX VI-contd..
---------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
5
---------------------------------------------------------------------------21. Malaysia
24
20
11
22. Nigeria
3
1
7
23. Nepal
1
24. Phillippines
1
3
25. Qatar
1
26. Singapore
1
6
1
27. Saudi Arabia
1
3
28. Senegal
1
29. Thailand
3
3
1
30. Togo
2
31. Tanzania
3
32. Trinidad
1
33. Uganda
1
34. USA
4
2
1
35. United Kingdom
3
1
2
36. West Germany
1
1
37. YAR
1
38. Zambia
2
3
---------------------------------------------------------------------------Total
63
66
82
---------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg205>
INDIA
AFGHANISTAN AUSTRALIA USA CANADA CYPRUS ETHIOPIA FIJI GHANA HONG KONG
INDONESIA IRAN IRAQ IRELAND LIBYA KENYA LEBANON MAURITIUS MALAYSIA
NIGER NIGERIA NEPAL QATAR REPUBLIC OF SINGAPORE SAUDI ARABIA SENEGAL
THAILAND TANZANIA UGANDA GERMANY ZAMBIA
Jan 01, 1975

Appendix VII Countrywise distribution of Reserved Medical and Engineering
Seats

Jan 01, 1975
APPENDIX-VII
Countrywise distribution of Reserved Medical and Engineering Seats

During 1975-76
---------------------------------------------------------------------------Sl. Name of the Country
Engineering Medical
No.
Seats
Seats
allotted
allotted
------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
------------------------------------------------------------------------1. Ethiopia
1
2. Kenya
5
4
3. Malawi
1
1
4. South Africa
2
4
5. Tanzania
12
4
6. Uganda
7. Zambia
1
8. Angola
1
1
9. Sudan
1
-----------------------------------------------------------------------TOTAL
23
15
-----------------------------------------------------------------------(II) West Asia
10. Afghanistan
3
1
11. Aden
1
12. Iran
21
6
13. Iraq
8
1
14. Jordan
20
1
15. Kuwait
8
1
16. Saudi Arabia
1
17. Arab Republic of Egypt
Nil
1
18. Lebanon
1
19. Syria.
3
Nil
------------------------------------------------------------------------TOTAL
66
11
------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg206>
APPENDIX VII-contd.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
---------------------------------------------------------------------------(III) South East Asia
20. Burma
21. Fiji Is.
3
2
22. Malaysia
36
19
23. Mauritius
14
15
24. Singapore
1
25. Thailand
4
3
---------------------------------------------------------------------------TOTAL
58
39
---------------------------------------------------------------------------(IV) Other Countries
26.
27.
28.

Bahrain
Sri Lanka
Guyanka

1
23
1

4
2

29. Nepal
41
3
30. Bhutan
8
31. West Indies
1
32. Bulgaria
1
33. Hungary
34. Poland
1
35. Bangladesh
1
1
36. Maldives Is
2
---------------------------------------------------------------------------TOTAL
77
13
---------------------------------------------------------------------------GRAND TOTAL
224
78
---------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg207>
ETHIOPIA
KENYA MALAWI SOUTH AFRICA TANZANIA UGANDA ZAMBIA ANGOLA SUDAN
AFGHANISTAN IRAN IRAQ JORDAN KUWAIT SAUDI ARABIA EGYPT LEBANON SYRIA
BURMA FIJI MALAYSIA MAURITIUS USA REPUBLIC OF SINGAPORE THAILAND
BAHRAIN SRI LANKA NEPAL BHUTAN BULGARIA HUNGARY POLAND BANGLADESH
MALDIVES
Jan 01, 1975

Appendix VIII Expenditure on Headquarters and Missions/Posts Abroad

APPENDIX-VIII
Expenditure on Headquarters and Missions/Posts Abroad during 1975-76
The expenditure during 1975-76 on Headquarters of this Ministry is
of the order of Rs. 429.60 lakhs a sum of Rs. 172.27 lakhs is towards
Establishment Charges, a sum of Rs. 55.53 lakhs for Dearness allownace,
a sum of Rs. 127.33 lakhs for publicity, cables, diplomatic bags services
etc.,
a sum of Rs.74.03 lakhs for travelling expenses and a sum of Rs. 0.44 a lakhs
for Departmental Canteen.
The expenditure on Missions/Posts abroad including special Mission
in Thimpu and Gangtok (which was finally closed on Nov 16, 1975) is Rs. 1739.
5
1
lakhs out of which a sum of Rs. 8 38. 76 lakhs is spent on Establishment
Charge
s
including Foreign and other Compensatory allowances, a sum of Rs. 143.36
lakhs on passages for transfers and Local tours, Rs. 47.63 lakhs for Publicity
contingencies and Rs. 709.76 lakhs on official and residential accommoda-

tion, P & T charges and other office contingencies.
ture per Mission comes to Rs. 13.80 lakhs.

The average expendi-

The expenditure mentioned above (viz Rs. 2169. 11 lakhs) as per details
below on Headquarters and Missions/Posts abroad includes expenditure on
External Publicity programme/activities. The break-up of this expenditure
is as under:-(Rs. (in lakhs)
(a) Headquarters
(i) Salaries (Officers 28, staff 53)
(ii) Travelling Expenses .
(iii) Publicity Contingencies Charges

9.97
3.08
31. 57
44.62

(b) Missions/Posts abroad
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)

Salaries (Officers 52, staff 260)
Foreign Allowance, Compensatory allowance
Passages and Travelling Expenses
Publicity Contingencies

44.63
26.26
3.85
47.63

<pg208>
APPENDIX VIII-contd.
(v) Other charges including renting of residential
dation and other office contingencies

accommo-

17.46
139.83

Total EXTERNAL PUBLICITY

184.45

The expenditure on External Publicity as detailed above comes to 8.5 %
of the expenditure on Headquarters and Missions/Posts abroad.
(in lakhs of rupees)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------EstabTraOffice Other
Total
lishment
velling Ex- exCharcharges
penses
penses ges
---------------------------------------------------------------------------Secretariat
Headquarters
External Publicity Division

217.83
9.97
227.80

70.95
3.08
74.03

96.20
31.57

384.98
44.62

127.77

429.60

Overseas Eastablishment
(a) Missions/Posts abroad
(excluding
Publicity
Wings)
(b) Publicity Wings

767.87

70.89

139.51

3.85

692.30

1599.68

65.09

139.83

---------------------------------------------------------------------------836.76
143.36
757.39
1739.51
---------------------------------------------------------------------------GRAND TOTAL
1066.56
217.39
885.16
2169.11
---------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg209>

Nov 16, 1975

Appendix IX List of Indian Missions/Posts

APPENDIX-IX
List of Indian Missions/Posts opened in the year 1975-76
---------------------------------------------------------------------------Country
Location
Remarks
---------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
---------------------------------------------------------------------------Portugal
Lisbon
Embassy
Mozambique
Maputo
Embassy
Egypt
Port Said
Consulate General
Jamaica.
Kingston
H.C.I.
Bhutan
Phuntsholing
Liaison Office
---------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg210>
MGIPRRND-20 M of EA/75-IV-N.S.-Mar 31, 1976--3100

INDIA
PORTUGAL
Mar 31, 1976

MOZAMBIQUE

EGYPT

JAMAICA

BHUTAN


