1965-66

Contents
Jan 01, 1965
CONTENTS
CHAPTER

PAGE

I.

India's Neighbours

1-22

II.

States in Special Treaty Relations with India

23-26

III.

South East Asia

27-32

IV.

East Asia

33-35

V.

West Asia and North Africa

36-39

VI.

Africa south of the Sahara

40-43

VII.

Eastern and Western Europe

44-58

VIII. The Americas

59-62

IX.

United Nations and International

Conferences

X.

Disarmament

79-82

XI.

External Publicity

83-88

XII.

Technical and Economic Cooperation

89-92

XIII. Passport and Consular Services
XIV.

Organisation and Administration

63-78

93-101
102-110

111 E.A.-1.
APPENDICES
PAGE
APPENDIX

I.

APPENDIX II.

APPENDIX III.

Tashkent Declaration

111-112

International Conferences, Congresses
and Symposia etc. in which India
participated

113-117

International Organisations of which

India is a Member

118-121

APPENDIX IV.

Commonwealth Prime Ministers' Meeting,
June 1965 : Final Communique

122-130

APPENDIX V.

Foreign Diplomatic Missions in India

131-132

APPENDIX VI.

Foreign Consular Offices] in India

133-136

APPENDIX VII.

List of Distinguished Visitors from
abroad

137-139

APPENDIX VIII. Visits of Indian Dignitaries to foreign
countries and other Deputations/Delegations sponsored by the Ministry

140-143

APPENDIX IX.

144-152

List of Indian Missions/Posts abroad
(ii)

INDIA
UZBEKISTAN
Jan 01, 1965

India's Neighbours
CHAPTER I
INDIA'S NEIGHBOURS
BURMA
At the invitation of the President of India, the Chairman of the
Revolutionary Council of the Union of Burma, General Ne Win paid
a state visit to India from Feb 05, 1965 to 12 February, 1965. The Chairman ha
d
talks with the President and the Prime Minister of India. The talks
were held in an atmosphere of friendliness and mutual understanding. A common outlook on international issues resulting from the
pursuit of the policy of non-alignment has helped in the development of close relations between the two countries. The visit helped to reaffirm the close identity of approach to various international
problems and paved the way for a better understanding of the
problems facing the two countries.
At the invitation of the Government of India, a Burmese Air
Force delegation headed by Brigadier Thaung Dan, Burma's Vice Air

Chief and Minister for Information and Culture, visited India in
June, 1965. The delegation visited the Hindustan Aeronautics Plant
at Bangalore.
A delegation of officials led by Shri B. K. Kapur, Secretary,
Ministry of External Affairs, visited Burma in August, 1965 to discuss
the question of the assets of Indian nationals. Various aspects of
the problem were discussed in a cordial and friendly atmosphere.
There may have to be further meetings before a final solution can
be reached.
At the invitation of General Ne Win, Chairman of the Revolutionary Council of the Union of Burma, the late Prime Minister of
India, Shri Lal Bahadur Shastri, paid a good-will visit to the Union
of Burma from 20 to 23 December, 1965. He was accompanied by
Shrimati Lalita Shastri, Shri Swaran Singh, Minister of External
Affairs and high ranking officials.
The late Prime Minister and party were accorded a warm welcome
by the people and the Government of the Union of Burma. During
the visit, the Chairman and the late Prime Minister held talks on
Indo-Burmese relations and exchanged views on international matters
<pg1>
<pg2>
of common interest. These talks were held in an atmosphere of great
cordiality and mutual understanding. This visit has further
strengthened the friendly relations existing between the two countries.
CEYLON
India's relations with the new Government of Ceylon headed by
Mr. Dudley Senanayake have continued to be close, cordial and
friendly. During the hostilities between India, and Pakistan in
August and September 1965, Ceylon remained strictly neutral and
banned flights of Pakistan aircraft carrying armed personnel and
military supplies to and from East Pakistan.
Shri Dinesh Singh, the then Deputy Minister for External Affairs
paid a goodwill visit to Ceylon from 16 to 19 October, 1965 and had
cordial discussions with Mr. Senanayake, Prime Minister of Ceylon
and other prominent persons, on subjects of mutual interest.
There has been further progress towards the implementation of
the Indo-Ceylon Agreement of October 1964. A Joint Committee
comprising Ceylonese and Indian officials has been set up with headquarters at Colombo. There have been regular fortnightly meetings
of the Committee. It is expected that the notices inviting applications for Indian/Ceylonese citizenship will be issued shortly and that
the return of repatriates under the agreement will commence by the
middle of 1966.

CHINA
Throughout the year under review, the Chinese Government
maintained, in an intensified form, its hostility towards India.
Developments during the year revealed, even more clearly than before, that the India-China border question was not merely a territorial issue but an instrument forged by China to bring about a political
confrontation between the two countries and to apply protracted
military pressure on India. It was clear that conflict with India was
an integral part of China's foreign policy and its revolutionary
objectives in Asia and Africa. While keeping the border question
pending and tension on the frontier alive and often dangerously
active, the Chinese Government and its organs of propaganda hurled
threats and abuses at India and subjected India's domestic and foreign
policies to intemperate criticism and outright condemnation.
<pg3>
In the domestic field China's opposition was directed to India's
experiment in the development of its economy through peaceful
democratic methods. The Chinese press and radio tried to present a
lurid picture of conditions in India describing the Indian economy as
a semi-colonial economy dependent on foreign aid and the Indian
experiment in economic development a failure and "a negative example for the advancing people in Asia, Africa and Latin America".
This brought to the surface some of the ideological bitterness and
sense of rivalry the Chinese Government has been harbouring towards India. The Chinese aim was to hold up to Asia and Africa the
Chinese example as the only model worthy of imitation, ignoring
the fact that what the Afro-Asian countries want is not to copy the
example of 'the big brother' but to develop their economies and
political systems in the light of their own particular conditions, set of
values and national requirements.
India's foreign policy of non-alignment and peaceful co-existence
was another major target of Chinese criticism and condemnation.
Even though it was only India which was criticised, it was clear that
the Chinese were attacking the policy of non-alignment and peaceful
co-existence in general. For them this policy stood in the way of
their war-like theory of uninterrupted struggle and confrontation
with "the imperialists" and "the revisionists". The fact that India's
foreign policy played some part in bringing about relaxation in the
cold war and in the detente between the two power-blocs was particularly disliked by China. During the year under review the Chinese
tried hard to link India with the United States and the Soviet Union
imagining that there was some kind of collusion between these three
powers against China. The Chinese incessantly talked of "the U.S.
imperialists", "the Russian revisionists" and "the Indian reactionaries", fitting the three countries into a preconceived and maliciously
neat ideological pattern framed up in Peking. Reviewing the situation in India in 1965 the New China News Agency said that "during
the outgoing year, the Indian reactionaries, while serving American

imperialists and modern revisionists in international affairs, tried to
undermine the Afro-Asian solidarity in the struggle against imperialism, worked in the vanguard of their anti-China policy and committed
aggression against their neighbour-Pakistan".
In the Asian-African world, and especially in connection with the
Algiers Conference the Chinese attempted to damage the image of
India and to isolate her. In the outcome, however, it was China who
<pg4>
found herself isolated. China wanted to convert the second AfroAsian Conference into a political bloc dominated by her, and to
exclude the Soviet Union. India, on the other hand, looked at the
conference as a cooperative endeavour by the community of AfroAsian nations for eliminating the remnants of colonialism, ensuring
world peace, and developing constructive cooperation amongst the
countries of the two continents. India also believed that the Soviet
Union as a great Asian power and a champion of Afro-Asian causes
had a right to participate in the conference. In June, 1965, when It,
India together with a substantial number of Afro-Asian countries
proposed the postponement of the conference, China criticised it as
a sabotage of the conference. However, in October when the conference was to meet as scheduled, the Chinese, who discovered that
the majority of Afro-Asian countries were not in favour of the
extremist and destructive line propagated by them, demanded postponement of the conference and blamed India for taking a positive
and helpful stand at Algiers. It was widely recognised that China's
attempt to set herself up as the leader of the Afro-Asian world and
her policies towards that region received a rebuff at Algiers. The
consensus of Afro-Asian opinion at Algiers favoured Soviet participation. This was a vindication of the Indian approach and a defeat
of the Chinese stand. All this made the Chinese Government only
more belligerent towards India.
The most dramatic demonstration of China's hostility to India
took place in September during the Indo-Pakistan conflict when the
Chinese Government gave "out and out support" to Pakistan and
threatened to create a second front against India. The Chinese
threat and ultimatum was in certain respects even more significant
than the massive Chinese invasion across the border in 1962. These
events showed that China was acting not merely in pursuit of the
border dispute but in line with its new doctrine of the right of intervention in Asian quarrels and in its self-assumed role of "the protector" of smaller nations of Asia. The Chinese aim was to promote
conflict between India and Pakistan and to frustrate attempts by the
United Nations and other third parties to bring about cease-fire and
peace between the two countries. The ultimatum to India in the
middle of September was, however, the most dramatic and infamous
incident of the year. Since the nineteen-thirties the world had not
witnessed such an ultimatum by one country to another.
<pg5>

When in early August Pakistan sent its arm.......................
the cease-fire line in Kashmir, Chinese press a....................
echo Pakistani propaganda and the Chinese Government began to
level baseless allegations of border intrusions by Indian troops. In
a note dated 27 August, a number of false allegations were made
of Indian troops intruding across the Sikkim border. It also revived
an old and concocted allegation that Indian troops had built military
structures on the Tibetan side of Sikkim, and had kidnapped Tibetan
inhabitants and seized livestock belonging to Tibetan shepherds.
Some days later, on 4 September, Marshal Chen Yi, the VicePremier and Foreign Minister of China, paid an unscheduled visit to
Karachi where he had talks with Mr. Bhutto, the Pakistani Foreign'
Minister. At a press conference in Karachi Mr. Chen Yi expressed
full sympathy and support to what he described as the people's
struggle in Kashmir against Indian rule and as Pakistan's action in
hitting back at Indian provocations. On 1 September Pakistan
launched a large-scale attack in Chhamb across the international
border of Jammu and Kashmir. The Chinese came out with an official statement on 7 September accusing India of 'criminal aggression', and stating that the Chinese Government was 'closely following
the development of India's acts of aggression and strengthening its
defences and heightening its alertness along its border'. Implying
China's right of intervention in the conflict the statement said:
"India's aggression against any one of its neighbours concerns all its
neighbours. Since the Indian Government has taken the first step
in committing aggression against Pakistan, it cannot evade responsibility for chain consequences arising therefrom." The next day the
Chinese Government sent a note to India alleging intrusions by
Indian troops into Tibet across the Sikkim boundary and also across
the 'line of actual control' in the Western sector. On 12 September
the Government of India in a well-reasoned and moderately worded
reply repudiated the charge of intrusions and of building military
structures on Chinese soil and said that "since the Chinese
Government has been making these allegations and demands over
and over again the Government of India are willing to allow an
independent and neutral observer to go to the border in this sector
to see for himself the actual state of affairs. Nothing could be fairer
than this." The note also deplored China's attempt to connect the
events in Kashmir with fictitious charges of Indian intrusions into
Tibet.
The Chinese reply to India on 16 September elaborated its concocted allegations, pledged its Support to Pakistan and ended with
<pg6>
................... hat "the Indian Government dismantle all its
military works for aggression on the Chinese side of the ChinaSikkim boundary or on the boundary itself within three days of the
delivery of the present note, and immediately stop all its intrusions
along the Sino-Indian boundary and the China-Sikkim boundary,
return the kidnapped Chinese border inhabitants and the seized
livestock and pledge to refrain from any more harassing raids across

the boundary. Otherwise, the Indian Government must bear full
responsibility for all the grave consequences arising therefrom." The
Chinese note also dismissed India's reasonable proposal to send an
independent observer to the Sikkim border by blandly describing it
as 'pretentious'. It was clear that China was levelling all these
allegations against India solely as a casus belli. It appeared that
China was bent upon opening a second front on the Indian frontier.
The Soviet News Agency Tass issued a statement on 13 September
warning China, without naming it, against incendiary statements
and the fanning of the flames of war. Also on the same day, Mr. Dean
Rusk, the U.S. Secretary of State, issued a warning to China expressing the concern of the U.S.A. at the Chinese threats against India.
These warnings to China by the two great powers was a vindication
of India's policy of non-alignment and peaceful co-existence.
India's reaction to the ultimatum was dignified and restrained.
In a note dated 17 September the Government told China that even
though they are convinced that Indian troops have not built military
structures in Tibetan territory they have no objection to a joint
inspection. By this India accepted a proposal which the Chinese
Government had repeatedly advanced in the past and had also
mentioned in its note of 16 September. India did this not because
there was any substance in the Chinese charges but because it wanted
to avoid a conflict and to establish its bona fides to the whole world.
The Indian note also told China that the charges made by the
Chinese Government, like kidnapping a few inhabitants and seizing
their sheep and yaks, were false and at any rate minor matters
which could be settled through peaceful procedures and which did
not justify threatening language and an ultimatum. At the same
time it was made clear by the Prime Minister in Parliament that if
the Chinese took advantage of the situation and attacked India "we
shall fight for our freedom with grim determination".
India's readiness to agree to joint inspection appeared to have
caught the Chinese Government unawares and knocked the bottom
out of its major allegation that India had built military structures
<pg7>
on Tibetan soil. In its note of 19 September the Chinese Government argued somewhat childishly that by accepting joint inspection
India was "playing for time" and that there was "now no longer any
need for investigation". The note then extended the time-limit of
the ultimatum by another three days and demanded that the socalled military works be dismantled before the midnight of
22 September. It also demanded the return of "the four Chinese
border inhabitants who have been kidnapped and the eight hundred
sheep and fiftynine yaks that have been seized by Indian troops on
the China-Sikkim border". The note was also accompanied by a
belligerent reassertion of China's vast claims to Indian territory and
a brazen declaration of China's right to intervene in Asian conflicts
under the pretext of defending other countries against "aggression".
The note also said that the Chinese Government gave all-out support

"to the people of Kashmir in their struggle for the right of national
self-determination" and "to Pakistan in her just struggle against
Indian aggression" and fully supported "the desire of the neighbours
of India to safeguard their independence and neutrality and protect
their internal affairs from interference". Prime Minister Lal Bahadur
Shastri, speaking in Parliament on 20 September, repudiated the
Chinese pretension to be 'a guardian of Asian countries' and asserted
that "no self-respecting nation in Asia, large or small, strong or weak,
will accept the dominance of the Chinese". He also rejected "China's
claim to tell us anything about what we should or should not do
about Kashmir which is an integral part of India". Regarding the
renewal of the Chinese ultimatum the Prime Minister remarked that
it was no more than a device to gain time to watch what came out of
the discussions in the Security Council on the Indo-Pak problem.
He also said that the allegations made by China were "such that they
would hardly justify any civilized Government in having recourse
to force". In a note dated 21 September the Government of India
refuted point by point the Chinese allegations and also pointed out
that if there were any Indian military structures on the Tibetan side
of the border, the Chinese Government would not have waited for
India's consent to demolish them or asked us to do so by sending
our personnel across the border. The note also urged the Chinese
Government "to forsake the path of belligerence and intimidation
and to return to the path of peace and reason in its relations with
India".
The Chinese threats were accompanied by intrusions and armed
provocations all along the border. Even while the time-limit for
the ultimatum was extended Chinese troops started firing at our
<pg8>
border posts both in Sikkim and Ladakh and across the Sikkim
border at Nathula and Dongchuila. On 19 September in the first
major incident since Chinese massive invasion of 1962 three civilian
personnel of an Indian patrol on duty in the vicinity of an Indian
checkpost in Tsaskur in Ladakh well to the west of the 'line of actual
control' were ambushed and kidnapped and killed by intruding
Chinese troops. Simultaneously, Chinese forces indulged in provocative intrusions at several points in the Western and Middle sectors
and also across strategic passes on the Sikkim-Tibet border. At the
border pass of Dongchuila and Nathula Chinese troops violated the
Sikkim border on 20 and 21 September and took up positions well
within the Sikkim territory. The Indian patrols withdrew a few
hundred yards so as not to provoke any incident.
With Pakistan's acceptance of the cease-fire on 22 September and
India's refusal to kunckle down before the Chinese threats, it was
now necessary for the Chinese Government to retreat from the
ultimatum. China's official news agency claimed on 23 September
that the Indian troops in response to the Chinese ultimatum had
already withdrawn from Tibetan territory; it was thus claimed that
the purpose of the ultimatum was fulfilled. This was obviously a

pathetic attempt to save face. Such was the farcical end of China's
impertinent ultimatum to India.
For about a week after the collapse of the ultimatum Chinese
activity on the border continued on a reduced scale. On the PunjabHimachal Pradesh sector of the border the Chinese patrols came
right up to our forward pickets for reconnaissance; on the Sikkim
border while they withdrew slightly from the farthest point of theirintrusion across Nathula they continued to occupy the pass and on
26 September Chinese troops crossed the border at Dongchuila and
forcibly kidnapped three Indian army personnel who were patrolling
well within Sikkim territory. In the Ladakh sector also intrusions,
continued both at Demchok area and at Tsaskur post.
From 13 November a fresh wave of Chinese intrusions began
across the border. On that date, Chinese troops opened fire upon
two Indian outposts situated well within Sikkim territory across
Dongchuila and attempted to over-run them, killing one Indian
soldier. In the next few days Chinese troops carried out deliberate
intrusions into the north Sikkim area on 19, 20, 21 and 24 November,
intruding in some cases as much as one and a half miles into Sikkim
territory.
<pg9>
Chinese intrusions in the Eastern sector were especially significant because they were in violation of China's own cease-fire declaration under which she had solemnly agreed to respect the 'line of
actual control' and to establish a 20-km dimilitarized zone in the
Eastern sector of the border. Several Chinese intrusions took place
in the Thagla Ridge area and Longju area in violation not only of
China's own proposal but also of the Colombo proposals and the
Chinese Government's categorical and specific assurances. Both
Premier Chou En-lai and Foreign Minister Chen Yi had included
Thagla Ridge and Longju as one of the four areas which were to be
left vacant and had given unambiguous undertakings that not even
civilian posts would be established there. On 24 November the
Chinese troops intruded across another point in the Eastern sector,
across Domla pass, and ambushed, kidnapped and killed an Indian
patrol consisting of three persons. Apparently intent on establishing
some kind of "presence" in the Thagla Ridge area and Longju,
Chinese troops carried out construction and entrenchment activity
and remained in illegal occupation of these areas for a considerable
period of time, going back only in the face of adverse climatic conditions. Similarly, during the months of December and January,
Chinese provocative intrusions across the so-called 'line of actual
control' in Ladakh and the demilitarization of the 20-km zone continued incessantly,
From 10 to 12 December the Chinese Government staged yet another series of provocations in the Sikkim area culminating in a
clash in Sikkim territory in the Sese la area in which six Indian
personnel were killed and two kidnapped by intruding Chinese

troops; about 30 Chinese soldiers were also killed in this engagement.
In Ladakh the Chinese Government carried out a series of unprovoked intrusions across the 'line of actual control', further
remilitarized the 20-km demilitarized zone, and continued their
intrusions in Daulat Beg Oldi area in undisputed Indian territory.
On 6 January, 1966, in a note to the Government of India, the
Chinese Government virtually admitted their repeated military
intrusions into the Thagla Ridge area and Longju as well as remilitarization of the 20-km zone in Ladakh. The Chinese Government sought to justify their deliberate disregard and violation of
their own assurances and undertakings, as well as their contravention
of those very provisions of the Colombo proposals which they had
earlier claimed to have accepted, with insincere arguments about
"self-defence". As India pointed out in her reply of 8 February, the
<pg10>
world, which has not forgotten the memory of China's massive
aggression on Indian territory in 1962 in the name of 'self-defence',
was only too painfully aware of what China meant when she talked
of her 'right of self-defence'. It was also pointed out that India has
scrupulously observed the provisions of the Colombo proposals and
not even the Chinese Government have been able to dispute this.
It added: "It is evident, therefore, that the Chinese violations and
intrusions were not 'measures in self-defence' but naked and
unprovoked acts of aggression". The Government of India also
rejected China's pretentious claims to 90,000 sq. km of Indian
territory in NEFA.
The aggressive military activities on our border by Chinese troops
were intimately connected with Sino-Pak collusion. Pakistan, on
her part, was constantly violating the cease-fire ordered by the U.N.
so that the present conditions in Jammu and Kashmir and in the
Punjab do not become frozen. The Chinese appeared to have decided to identify themselves with this Pakistani stand. By creating
incidents across the Indian border they wanted to bring home to
Pakistan and to India that the area of conflict is not merely Jammu
and Kashmir and the international boundary between India and
Pakistan, but also India's entire border with China. While Pakistan
was keeping the flame of war alive on the India-West Pakistan front,
the Chinese were creating a parallel situation on the India-Tibet
border and hoped to encourage the Pakistanis to take an intransigent
stand at the Tashkent meeting thereby frustrating the Soviet Union's
efforts to establish peace and goodwill between India and Pakistan.
At the same time China was furthering its own expansionist designs
against India. The intrusions in the Eastern sector and the establishment of its aggressive presence in the Thagla Ridge and Longju areas,
were especially intended to reassert China's fantastic claim to the
vast area of the North East Frontier Agency of India. Thus while
trying to help Pakistan, China was pursuing her own mischievous
scheme of keeping the sub-continent divided against itself and also
asserting its aggressive territorial claims against India.

The Chinese Government was about the only nation to have been
displeased with the accord reached at Tashkent. A commentary in
the official newspaper, The People's Daily on 2 February, 1966 attacked the Tashkent talks as "a product of joint US-Soviet planning"
and charged that the Soviet Union "instigated and encouraged the
Indian aggressor and brought crude pressures to bear on Pakistan
which was acting in self-defence to safeguard its own sovereignty".
It is evident that the Chinese Government considered the restoration
<pg11>
of peace on the Indian sub-continent as a setback to their own plans
and designs.
The question of China's representation in the United Nations was
brought before the General Assembly in the form of two resolutionsone sponsored by 12 States calling for the recognition of the People's
Republic and the other a procedural motion urging the reaffirmation
of an earlier Assembly decision that the Chinese representation is an
important question and as such requires a two-third majority. As in
the past years India, consistent with her basic policy, voted for the
first resolution and voted against the second.
The Tibetan question also came before the United Nations in the
form of a resolution condemning the violation by the Chinese authorities of human rights in Tibet. India supported the resolution. It
may be recalled here that earlier in the year the Tibet question was
raised by China herself in her note to India dated 22 September
when she accused India for having instigated the Tibetan rebellion
of 1959 and for having granted refuge to the Dalai Lama and the
thousands of Tibetan refugees. These refugees, she held, were a debt
which India owed to China. In our note date 1 October we reminded
the Chinese Government that "rebellions do not take place under
enticement or coercion. Where there is oppression, there is rebellion.
It is futile to blame India for the troubles in Tibet." As for the
Tibetan refugees in India, the note pointed out they were not a debt
which India owed to China but "a debt which China owes to the
people of Tibet for making it impossible for them to live in freedom,
and dignity in their own motherland".
During the U.N. debate on the Tibetan resolution the Indian
delegate Dr. Zakaria said: "In the name of introducing "democratic
reforms" and of fighting a "counter revolution", the Chinese have
indulged in the worst kind of genocide and the suppression of a
minority race." The Indian delegate pledged that India would
continue to give all facilities to Tibetan refugees in India and do her
best to alleviate their sufferings and hardships. He also pointed out
how, "even though the Chinese regime has given us and continues
to give us provocation we have refused to use the Tibetan refugees,
as pawns in our conflict with China".
<pg12>

Tibetan Refugees
There was further influx of refugees during 1965-66 from Tibet
across the India-Tibet border. Besides, about 900 Tibetans crossed
over into India from Nepal during this period. The total number
of Tibetan refugees in India now is about 50,000. About 10,000
refugees have been settled in five land settlements comprising an
area of about 10,000 acres.
Eight hundred Tibetans have been settled on agriculture in
Bhutan. A scheme for settling another one thousand refugees in
Bhutan on land provided by the Government of Bhutan is under
consideration.
The Government of Mysore have offered another piece of
land measuring about 4,500 acres. It is proposed to set up another
agricultural settlement to rehabilitate about 4,000 Tibetan refugees
in Karwar District, Mysore.
Since cultivable land is rather scarce, eight industrial schemes
which are likely to provide employment to about 3,000 Tibetans are
under active consideration of the Government of India and the
Central Relief Committee (India). A charitable society, named the
Tibetan Industrial Rehabilitation Society, has been set up to manage
these industries.
Vocational training is also imparted to Tibetan refugees in
various trades, social welfare and nursing. Besides three handicraft
centres mainly for carpet weaving set up at the three settlements
at Bylakuppe, Chandragiri and Mainpet under an agreement between the Government of India and Swiss Technical Cooperation.
There is a handicraft centre at Darjeeling and another at Dalhousie.
An autonomous body, named the Tibetan Schools Society, with
Tibetan representatives, has been set up under the Chairmanship
of the Union Education Minister, to make arrangements for the
education of Tibetan children. Residential schools have been
opened by this Society at Darjeeling, Kalimpong, Simla, Mussoorie,
Dalhousie, Mount Abu and Pachmarhi. A vocational training
school has also been started at Pachmarhi to provide training to
Tibetan refugee boys who are over-age for normal schools run by
the Tibetan Schools Society. Day schools have also been set up in
<pg13>
various settlements and temporary camp schools are being run at
various other places where Tibetan refugees are temporarily employed as labourers. Twenty-four Homes for children have been
set up at Mussoorie. These Homes are partially financed by the
Government of India and are managed by the Tibetan Homes
Foundation which is a registered, non-official body.

Hospitals and dispensaries have been opened in all settlements
and other camps. Arrangements have been made for the screening
of all Tibetans to detect chest and other diseases; those suffering
from T.B. are sent to sanatoria.
On the request of the Dalai Lama, the Government of India are
maintaining about 2,000 Lamas at Buxa in West Bengal and
Dalhousie and another 1,500 aged and infirm refugees, are being
provided with free rations and free medical treatment.
Various voluntary agencies have also been rendering limited
assistance to Tibetan refugees with food, clothing, medicines, stipends
for training and hospital facilities.
Grant-in-Aid to the extent of Rs. 30,000 was given during 1965-66
to the Central Relief Committee (India), a non-official body set up
for the co-ordination, clearance and distribution of relief assistance
received from foreign agencies for Tibetan refugees in India.
The Committee is also running the entire medical programme in the
Tibetan settlements in Mysore, Orissa and Madhya Pradesh and an
out-door hospital at Dalhousie. The total expenditure incurred by
the Committee in 1965 on its medical programme was Rs. 5,92,468.
The Central Relief Committee (India) provided tents worth
Rs. 1,20,000 to Tibetan refugees and subsidized small projects to the
extent of Rs. 1,30,000. The Committee keeps the foreign agencies
informed about the requirements of the Tibetan refugees in India
through its bulletin, which is published every month. As a result of
its appeals, four Allis Chalmer heavy Bulldozer-tractors have been
obtained from foreign donors for reclamation of land in Tibetan
refugees settlements. Six ploughing tractors, which are being run
<pg14>
by the Committee from the funds provided by foreign agencies,
have also been obtained.
The total aid received by the Committee from foreign countries
during 1965 amounts to Rs. 45 lakhs.
NEPAL
The cordial and friendly relations existing between India and
Nepal were further strengthened during the year.
At the invitation of the Minister of External Affairs, Sardar
Swaran Singh, His Excellancy Shri Kirti Nidhi Bist, Vice-Chairman
of the Council of Ministers and Foreign Minister of Nepal paid a
visit to India from 25 January to 7 February, 1965. During his.
initial stay in Delhi, the Vice-Chairman had an informal exchange
of views with the Prime Minister, the Home Minister, the Foreign
Minister and the Commerce Minister. Afterwards he visited some
development projects and industrial establishments and other

places of interest in India.
During the talks in New Delhi, which related to the international
situation, with special reference to developments in Asia and SouthEast Asia, a broad measure of unity and identity of purpose and
approach in the policies pursued by the two countries was revealed.
New avenues of fruitful cooperation between the two countries were
explored with a view to harnessing the natural resources of which
India and Nepal are joint beneficiaries.
His Majesty the King of Nepal inaugurated the Indian Exhibition "Bharat Darshan" in Kathmandu on 8 January, 1965. The
exhibition remained open till 15 February, 1965. The CommerceMinister visited Kathmandu on the occasion of the inauguration.
The exhibition in which about 281 firms participated, was a great
success and was visited by over 3 lakh people.
During the Commerce Minister's visit an agreement was also
reached with His Majesty's Government of Nepal regarding transit
facilities for Nepalese trade with East Pakistan via Radhikapur.
These facilities have been provided with effect from 1 February,
1965.
At the invitation of His Majesty the King of Nepal, India's Minister
of State for External Affairs, Shrimati Lakshmi Menon, paid a goodwill visit to Nepal from 15 to 19 February, 1965. She witnessed the
National Day Celebrations of Nepal, and visited the Trisuli HydroElectric Project being constructed with Indian aid. The Minister
<pg15>
had friendly discussions and exchange of ideas with senior Ministers
and also with the King of Nepal.
A Nepalese delegation headed by Shri Krishna Bom Malla,
Secretary, Ministry of Commerce of the Government of Nepal,
visited India from 11 to 13 March and had talks on IndoNepal trade with the representatives of the Government of India at
New Delhi.
Agreements relating to the exchange of letter posts, insured letters
and postal parcels between India and Nepal came into force with
effect from 13 April, 1965, from which date, the Indian Embassy
Post Office ceased to function.
At the invitation of Their Majesties the King and Queen of Nepal
the late Prime Minister and Shrimati Shastri paid a goodwill visit
to Nepal from 23 to 25 April, 1965. The Prime Minister was accorded
a warm and affectionate welcome in Nepal. The visit provided an
opportunity for a frank and cordial exchange of views with the King
on matters of mutual interest to the two countries on world situation
in general and developments in Asia in particular. The King, the
Chairman of Nepal's Council of Ministers and the Prime Minister

of India, visited the Kosi Barrage, which His Majesty inaugurated oil
24 April. The Prime Minister laid the foundation of the Western
Kosi Canal.
A number of Nepalese students sought admission to various institutions in India for higher studies in engineering, medicine and
other fields both on scholarship and on self-financing basis. Admissions were arranged for most of them. Facilities for the training of
Nepalese military personnel in various, defence establishments continue to be provided.
The Indian mountaineering team made a successful assault on
Mount Everest in May, 1965.
A delegation from India, consisting of the Salt Commissioner for
India, a representative of the State Trading Corporation and a few
representatives of the salt manufacturers, visited Kathmandu to
negotiate a new agreement with the Salt Corporation of Nepal for
the supply of salt to Nepal during 1965. A three year agreement
between the State Trading Corporation and the Salt Corporation of
Nepal for supplying 55,000 tonnes of standard quality salt annually
was signed on 14 July, 1965.
An agreement relating to the air services between India and
Nepal came into force with effect from 29 September, 1965 as a result
<pg16>
of exchange of instruments of ratification between the Governments
of India and Nepal at New Delhi.
On an invitation of the Governor of U.P., the King and Queen
accompanied by Princess Sharda Shah and Princess Shanti Shah
paid a private visit to Nainital between 11 and 18 October, 1965.
The following month, at the invitation of the President, the King
and Queen paid a State visit to India from November 25 to December 20, 1965. Their Majesties were accompanied by the Rt. Hon'ble
Kirti Nidhi Bist, Vice-Chairman of the Council of Ministers and
Foreign Minister and Shrimati Bist, and others. The Royal Party
visited places of economic, cultural and religious interest in the
country and a number of important development/industrial projects. The Benaras Hindu University conferred an honorary degree
of Doctor of Letters on His Majesty at a special convocation. On the
conclusion of their visit, a joint communique was issued. in which
His Majesty and the late Prime Minister re-affirmed their faith in
the principles of non-alignment and peaceful co-existence and also
restated that the principle of self-determination can apply only to
dependent and trust territories and cannot be extended to integral
parts of sovereign states. His Majesty and the late Prime Minister
also agreed that Indo-Pakistan differences should be resolved between the two countries in a peaceful manner without interference
from third parties. His Majesty extended an invitation to the

President of India to visit Nepal at any convenient time. The President thankfully accepted the invitation. The date of the President's
visit to Nepal would be decided in due course.
The Government of India continued to grant aid for economic
development to the Government of Nepal. The following Agreements were signed during the year:
(i) Development of Irrigation, Drinking Water Supply.
Power and Drainage-Rs. 40 lakhs.
(ii) Maternity Home and Child Welfare Centre-Rs. 3 lakhs.
(iii) Construction of road between Janakpur Airport and
Janakpur Town-Rs. 2-8 lakhs.
The Indian-aided projects continue to make satisfactory progress
and there has been an overall increase in the tempo of work and the
utilization of aid in keeping with the increased quantum of assistance given to Nepal by India. The second meeting for the preview of
the progress made by Indian-aided projects Was held in Kathmandu
<pg17>
in May 1965. Shri B. K. Kapur, Secretary, Ministry of External
Affairs, led the Indian delegation. The Government of Nepal expressed both their appreciation of India's contribution to Nepal's
development and their satisfaction at the progress made by our
projects.
As agreed to at the First Aid Review talks, the Central Engineering Division and the Aviation Division were transferred to
the Administrative control of the Government of Nepal from
1 August, 1965. The maintenance of the Tribhuvan Rajpath has also
been transferred to the Government of Nepal from September 1965.
India has agreed to construct the East-West Highway in Nepal. The
major part of this 640 mile long road connecting Jhapa in the east
with Nepalgunj and Tanakpur on the Western border of Nepal is to
be constructed by India. The Government of India have also undertaken to build on the River Kamala a barrage over which the EastWest Highway will pass. The Godavri and Khotku Khola irrigation
schemes were inaugurated during the year. The I.A.M. participated
in two largely-attended exhibitions held by Nepal Government in
December 1964-January 1965 and June, 1965.
At the invitation of the Government of Nepal, Dr, P. M. Bhandarkar, Surgeon-General, Maharashtra visited Nepal in October, 1965
to advise on the establishment of a Medical College in Nepal.
At the request of the Government of Nepal, Shri C. S. Chandrasekhar, Town and Country Planner, Ministry of Health, visited
Nepal in order to outline a Master Plan for the development of
Pokhara town.

A delegation consisting of Senior Officers of the Panchayat
Ministry of the Government of Nepal, visited India in December,
1965 to see and study the working of Panchayat projects in India.
Under the Colombo Plan Technical Co-operation Scheme, 150
reservations were arranged by the Government of India and 124
candidates from Nepal were deputed for studies in India.
General Surindra Bahadur Shah, Commander-in-Chief of the
Royal Nepal Army accompanied by Rani Surindra Bahadur Shah
and officers of the Nepalese Army visited India from 3 to 18 January,
1966 in response to an invitation from General J. N. Chaudhuri,
Chief of the Army Staff. The party visited various industrial establishments, development projects and places of interest in India
during their tour.
<pg18>
The King of Nepal sent the Chairman of the Council of Ministers
to represent him and the Government of Nepal at the funeral of the
late Shri Lal Bahadur Shastri. The Government of Nepal also
closed their offices for two days as a mark of respect to Shri Shastri.
PAKISTAN
The year 1965 witnessed Indo-Pak relations descending to the
lowest ebb. However, the signing of the Tashkent Declaration on
10 January, 1966 opened a new chapter in the prospects of peaceful
neighbourly relations between the two countries.
Dahagram
During March-April, 1965, the borders of Dahagram, the largest
of the 74 Pakistani enclaves in India which are to be exchanged
with 123 Indian enclaves in Pakistan in terms of the Nehru-Noon
Agreement of 1958, and which is separated from Pakistan mainland
by a small strip of Indian territory known as Tinbigha, were the
scene of intense firing and other provocative incidents by Pakistan.
The West Bengal Government took preventive measures. The Chief
Secretaries of West Bengal and East Pakistan later met and entered
into an agreement relating to the egress and ingress into the enclaves
of each country in the territory of the other.
Kutch-Sind Border Issue
From February onwards, Pakistan started a series of violations
of the Indian border in Kutch. In March, 1965 there was serious
violation of Indian territory by Pakistani Rangers in Kanjarkot,
nearly 1300 yards within Indian territory. Meetings of border officials
were held to try and settle such border incidents but without any
results, because of the Pakistani officials' highly exaggerated and
unfounded claims regarding patrolling by Pakistan Police in the

Rann of Kutch.
On 9 April, 1965, the Pakistan Army launched a planned attack on
our border post at Sardar, followed by further attacks south of the
Indo-Pakistan border in the Rann of Kutch and occupation of certain
posts which, on Pakistan's own admission, had never been in its
possession. Pakistan's Foreign Minister, on 15 April, 1965, admitted,
"It must be remembered that this is a dispute over territory which
lies roughly north of 24 parallel. The dispute has arisen not because
the boundary is undemarcated, but because the disputed territory is
in India's adverse possession". In spite of grave provocations, as an
earnest of its desire for good neighbourly relations with Pakistan,
<pg19>
and in response to the mediatory efforts of the British Prime Minister,
India entered into agreement with Pakistan on 30 June, 1965, which
provided for: (i) Cease-fire from 1 July, 1965, (ii) Restoration of the
status quo as it prevailed on 1 January, 1965, and (iii) Resort to
agreed processes for determining the Sind-Kutch border. Under this
agreement, a Tribunal whose decisions would be final and binding,
has been constituted. The Chairman of the Tribunal, Judge Lagergren of Sweden was nominated by the U.N. Secretary General, and
its two other members, Dr. Ales Bebler of Yugoslavia and
Mr. Nasrollah Entezaim of Iran were nominated by India and
Pakistan respectively. The Tribunal commenced its meeting at
Geneva on 15 February, 1966.
Invnsion of Kashmir
Hardly had the Kutch border conflict ended when by 5 August,
1965, Pakistan launched a fresh attack, this time in Kashmir. The
invasion in Kashmir was at first carried out surreptitiously, by
sending thousands of armed infiltrators, in civilian disguise and in
uniform, to sabotage and paralyse the administrative machinery of
Kashmir. The U.N. Secretary-General in his report dated 3 September, 1965, to the Security Council, pointed out the observation of
General Nimmo "that the series of violations that began on 5 August
were to a considerable extent in subsequent days in the form of
armed men; generally not in uniform, crossing the Cease Fire Line
from the Pakistan side for the purpose of armed action on the Indian
side". When its expectations of any uprising in Kashmir to overthrow the Government did not materialise, Pakistan embarked upon
an open military invasion on 1 September by attacking the Chhamb
area across the established international border and threatened the
life-line of communications between Jammu and Kashmir and the
rest of India. In exercise of its legitimate right of self-defence,
India was forced to take counter measures of a purely defensive
nature. The Indian Army had to move across the Punjab frontier
into West Pakistan with the object not of occupying Pakistan territory, but of relieving the pressure from Pakistan forces in the Chhamb
area through which ran India's vital lines of supply and communications to Kashmir and Ladakh.

The United Nations Security Council considered the problem
created by the conflict and called for a cease-fire. The SecretaryGeneral of the U.N. visited India and Pakistan in this connection
during the second week of September, 1965, and India immediately
<pg20>
made a positive response to the appeal for cease-fire. After some
delay, Pakistan also responded favourably. Although the 22-day
conflict ended in response to the Security Council's Resolution of
20 September, at 3-30 A.M. on 23 September, 1965, Pakistan made
attempts to occupy territory afterwards in several areas including
Rajasthan. The Indian armed forces were able to frustrate such
attempts.
Tashkent Declaration
On 17 September, the Chairman of the U.S.S.R. Council of Ministers, Mr. Kosygin, wrote to the Prime Minister of India and the
President of Pakistan offering his good offices and proposing a meeting in Tashkent for the restoration of peaceful relations between India
and Pakistan. India promptly accepted the offer. Pakistan with
some reservations also subsequently agreed to the proposal.
The Prime Minister of India and the President of Pakistan met
in a plenary session in the presence of Mr. Kosygin, Chairman of
the Council of Ministers of the U.S.S.R. on 4 January, 1966, to discuss
the existing relations between India and Pakistan and to evolve
peaceful methods to promote mutual understanding and friendly
relationship between the two countries. Thereafter, a series of informal, talks took place between the Prime Minister and the President.
Premier Kosygin remained in close touch with both Heads of Government. A Declaration was formally issued on 10 January, 1966,
signed by the Prime Minister of India and the President of Pakistan
(Text is annexed-see Appendix I).
Some points of central: importance in the Tashkent Declaration are:
the renunciation of force and agreement to settle disputes through
peaceful means, withdrawal of all armed personnel to the positions
they held prior to 5 August, 1965, observance of cease-fire terms on
the ceasefire line and recognition of the principle of non-interference in the internal affairs of each other.
Situation in the Eastern Region
From the first quarter of 1965, Pakistan created continuing incidents on the eastern border particularly in the districts of CoochBehar and Jalpaiguri in West Bengal. These were intensified
during and immediately after the September, 1965 hostilities. However, the situation suddenly eased after the signing of the Tashkent
Declaration on 10 January, 1966.
In pursuance of 22 January, 1966 Agreement on disengagement

and withdrawal of forces and reduction of border tensions, between
<pg21>
the Chief of Staff, Indian Army and the Commander-in-Chief,
Pakistan Army, the Army Commanders of the Eastern regions of
India and Pakistan met on 10 February and agreed to further measures
aimed at eliminating border tensions in the Eastern sector.
Minorities in Pakistan
As the continued influx of refugees from Pakistan posed major
problems of rehabilitation for the border states of India and as
Pakistan's minorities were its own responsibility, it was decided that
from 1 April, 1965 only deserving migrants who had travel documents,
would be allowed to cross the border into India. Subsequently, the
rate of influx abated somewhat. Nevertheless, during 1965, a total of
1,41,501 refugees from East Pakistan had migrated to India. It is
hoped that with the return to normalcy particularly in the wake of
the Tashkent Declaration, migrations will be reduced further.
Pakistan's Anti-Indian Propaganda
During the year, the Pakistani Press and leaders kept up an
incessant campaign of vilification of India. Indeed Pakistan's hostile
propaganda against India reached unprecedented depths, which
merely served to further poison the already bitter atmosphere
between the two countries.
Following the Tashkent Declaration under which both India and
Pakistan agreed to "discourage any propaganda directed against the
other country" and to "encourage propaganda which promotes the
development of friendly relations", hostile radio and press campaigns
of the old style ceased. The general tone and content of the Pakistani press have improved, though there have been some lapses from
the requirements of the Tashkent Declaration.
Shrines, Holy Places and Pilgrimages
During the year, eight officially sponsored pilgrim parties
from India, comprising 1,196 pilgrims went to, West Pakistan;
similarly, 13 parties from Pakistan comprising 902 pilgrims, visited
Muslim Shrines in India.
Visits of Indian/Pakistan Nationals to Pakistan/India
During the period January, 1965, to August, 1965, 62,900 Indian
nationals visited East Pakistan and 61,300 visited West Pakistan-a
total of 1,24,200. Some 2,18,000 Pakistan nationals visited India1,36,400 from East Pakistan and 81,600 from West Pakistan. Visits
of the nationals of one country to the other were suspended consequent
upon the outbreak of Indo-Pakistan hostilities. However, in view

<pg22>
of the Tashkent Declaration the restrictions have been relaxed, and it
is expected that with the return of normalcy the restrictions will be
removed further by both Governments.
INDIA
BURMA USA LATVIA PAKISTAN CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC SRI LANKA CHINA RUSSIA
MALI ALGERIA PERU UZBEKISTAN NEPAL BHUTAN SWEDEN YUGOSLAVIA IRAN
SWITZERLAND
Feb 05, 1965

States in Special Treaty Relations With India
CHAPTER II
STATES IN SPECIAL TREATY RELATIONS WITH INDIA
SIKKIM
As in previous years, the Government of India have been releasing necessary funds for the implementation of Sikkim's Second Five
Year Plan. A sum of Rs. 175 lakhs would be released during the
financial year 1965-66. The Government of India also continued to
assist in the implementation of the Plan by making available the
services of engineers, agricultural experts and other technical
personnel.
Sikkimese students already in several schools and colleges in
India under the Government of India's scholarship Scheme continued to receive financial assistance. Assistance was also rendered
in regard to the placement of Sikkim's nominees in several educational and/Dr technical institutions.
In deference to the wishes of the Ruler of Sikkim, the Government of India have agreed to refer to him as His Highness the
Chogyal of Sikkim instead of as the Maharaja of Sikkim. The
Ruler's consort is similarly referred to now as Her Highness the
Gyalmo of Sikkim.
At the Ser Thri Ngasol (installation) ceremonies formally inaugurating the rule of His Highness the Chogyal held on 4 and 5
April, the Government of India were represented by an official
delegation led by Smt. Lakshmi Menon, the then Minister of State.
The honorary rank of Major General in the Indian Army was con-

ferred on H.H. the Chogyal by the President on this occasion.
The Chogyal and Gyalmo of Sikkim paid short visits to New Delhi
from 1 to 6 March, and from Aug 31, 1965 to 8 September, 1965. On
both the occasions they were treated as guests of the Government of
India. The main purpose of the visits was to hold discussions with
the Government on various matters of mutual interest including
Sikkim's Third Five Year Plan for which a draft has already been
prepared.
Synchronising with Pakistan's aggression in September 1965 in
the Kashmir and Punjab sectors, the Chinese massed troops on
<pg23>
<pg24>
Sikkim's frontier and issued an ultimatum for the removal of military structures which China alleged India had put up on their side
of the Sikkim-Tibet frontier. The Chinese did not ultimately
pursue the threat, made in the ultimatum and gave their own
explanation to the effect that India had removed the offending military structures. Due to India's defensive preparedness on the
Sikkim-Tibet frontier, the general morale in Sikkim was high.
The Government of India have agreed to conduct preliminary
investigations and survey of stage 3 of the Lagyap Hydroelectric
Scheme in Sikkim. The Central Water and Power Commission have
been entrusted with the work and a sum of about Rs. 3.37 lakhs has
been sanctioned for the purpose.
The Chogyal of Sikkim was present at the funeral of Shri Lal
Bahadur Shastri.
BHUTAN
The mother and the step-mother of the King of Bhutan, accompanied by a party went on a pilgrimage in January 1965 to Bodh
Gaya, Varanasi, Rajgir, Nalanda and Kushi Nagar. The Government of India made all the necessary arrangements for the Pilgrimage, and by all accounts, the Queen-Mothers were pleased with
the reception and hospitality accorded to them.
In May, 1965, the King of Bhutan sent his half-brother, Namgyal
Wangchuk, the Paro Penlop (Governor of Paro), to New Delhi.
The purpose of the visit was to establish contacts with the President,
Prime Minister and other Ministers, the C.O.A.S. and officials in the
Ministry of External Affairs. Apart from holding the highest civilian post of Paro Penlop, the King's brother is also in-charge of the
Army in Bhutan. The Paro Penlop was accompanied by a few
officials of the Government of Bhutan. The Paro Penlop paid
another visit to Delhi in October, 1965.

On 31 July, 1965, an attempt was made on the life of the King
of Bhutan while he was camping at a monastery near Paro in
Bhutan. The conspirators threw a hand-grenade, and also fired at
the King. Fortunately the King escaped unhurt though the conspirators escaped in the darkness. The President and the Prime
Minister sent messages to the King expressing their shock at the
attack and relief that the King was unhurt. The Political Officer
left immediately for Bhutan to convey in person the offer of assistance
by the Government of India in apprehending the criminals. Several
<pg25>
arrests were made. The Government of Bhutan are continuing the
investigations.
The Bhutanese defectors, who had fled to Nepal, in December
1964, issued a statement on 8 August, 1965, accusing India of having
instigated the assassination of the late Prime Minister of Bhutan
in 1964 and also of responsibility for the attempt on the life of the
King. The King, however, dismissed the statement as "fantastic
nonsense".
Consequent on the demise of the Chief Secretary (Shri Thinley
Dorji), and the appointment of a new Chief Secretary, the Government of Bhutan re-organised their Secretariat in July, 1965. The
following are the members of the new Secretariat :
(i) Chief Secretary-Dasho Tamji Jagar.
(ii) Deputy Chief Secretary-Dasho Sangya Penjore
(iii) Thimphu Thrimpon-Dasho Jafa Dorji.
(iv) Punakha Thrimpon-Dasho Wangtup Tseering.
(v) Assistant of the Head Lama with one Lama representative.
(vi) Representative of Nepalese from Southern Bhutan--Kani
Amar Singh Gurung.
(vii) Bhutan Agent Mr. Lawrence D. Sitling.
(viii) One representative of the people.
The King of Bhutan has supported India in her action against
Pakistani aggression. On 9 September, 1965, the King sent a message to the Prime Minister expressing his full sympathy and
willingness to render whatever assistance may be required. The
Prime Minister, in reply, was appreciative of the King's unreserved
sympathy and support.
The Government of India are continuing to assist the Government of Bhutan in their development schemes. It will be recalled
that a team from the Planning Commission had visited Bhutan in
1961 and drawn up, for the Government of Bhutan, a Five Year
Development Plan. The Government of Bhutan are carrying out
their development programme according to this plan, with funds
provided by the Government of India. Upto the end of March, 1965,
the Government of India have given Rs. 800 lakhs for Bhutan's
development schemes. In the budget for the year 1965-66, provision

has been made for a sum of Rs. 275 lakhs for this purpose. The
Development Plan covers every phase of the country's economy.
<pg26>
The outlay has been largest on roads, education, transport and communications, health, forestry and industry.
Apart from financing the Development Plan, the Government of
India have been sending technical personnel as desired by the Government of Bhutan, to help them in the implementation of their
development schemes.
The Government of India are also assisting Bhutan in other ways.
A team from the Government of Bihar has been sent to Bhutan for
the eradication of malaria. They have set up several centres all
over the country for this purpose. A BCG team from West Bengal
carried out an intensive BCG vaccination campaign in Bhutan.
Another BCG team from Assam is expected to proceed to Bhutan
shortly.
An Investigation Division of the Central Water and Power Commission on completion of its earlier assignment has now taken in
hand the investigation of six additional hydel schemes. The construction work of these hydel schemes is being done by the Government of Bhutan with the assistance of the Central Water and Power
Commission. The first scheme being taken up by the Bhutan Hydel
Directorate is the construction work on the Thimphu Hydel Scheme.
A team from the Geological Survey of India to study the resources
of Bhutan has carried out detailed investigations for dolomite,
limestone, copper, gypsum and graphite. These investigations have
revealed the presence of inferred reserves of 133 million tonnes of
high-grade dolomite and about 57 million tonnes of limestone in
the country.
It has been decided to transfer to the Government of Bhutan all
the hydro-meteorological stations of the Government of India which
are in Bhutan. These stations would be maintained by them, and
the meteorological data would continue to be relayed as hitherto.
Bhutanese students have been given scholarships for studies in
India. During 1965, 35 scholarships for schools and 5 scholarships
for colleges were granted.
The King of Bhutan sent a representative for the funeral of
Shri Lal Bahadur Shastri and ordered prayers to be said in the
monasteries in Bhutan for two days.
INDIA
USA PAKISTAN CHINA BHUTAN UNITED KINGDOM NEPAL CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC

Aug 31, 1965

South East Asia
CHAPTER III
SOUTH EAST ASIA
MALAYSIA AND SINGAPORE
Despite efforts at mediation by some countries, the dispute between
Malaysia and Indonesia continued. India reiterated its support to
Malaysia in its efforts to preserve its sovereignty and territorial
integrity. India also continued to support the admission of Malaysia
as a participant in the Afro-Asian Conference. In the fighting
between India and Pakistan, the Malaysian Government displayed
understanding and sympathy for India's point of view, and refused
to consider it as a religious question. The Government of India
expressed its appreciation to the Malaysian Government for its sympathetic understanding and the helpful attitude of its Permanent
Representative during the discussions in the Security Council on the
subject.
The Malaysian Minister for Information and Broadcasting, Enche
Senu bin Abdul Rahman, attended the inauguration of the Plutonium
Plant at Bombay. The Minister of Transport, Shri Raj Bahadur,
visited Kuala Lumpur and Singapore in May, 1965. At the invitation
of the Malaysian Government Shri Fakhruddin Ahmed, the then
Minister of Finance, Assam Government, and Shri Brijraj SinghKotah, Member of Parliament, visited Malaysia as representatives of
the Government of India at the inauguration of National Mosque in
Kuala Lumpur, the opening of the International Air Port at Subang
and the Malaysia Day Celebrations in August, 1965. A silver chair
was presented by the Government of India for installation in the
Malaysian National Mosque.
Malaysian Army officers continued to receive training in Indian
Defence establishments. There were also exchanges of visits by
students, sports teams etc.
On Aug 09, 1965, as a result of mutual agreement with Malaysia,
Singapore seceded from the Malaysian Federation and became an
independent State. The Government of India immediately recognised
the new state and established diplomatic relations at High Commission level. India supported Singapore's admission to the Commonwealth and the United Nations and to the Afro-Asian Conference.

<pg27>
<pg28>
The Deputy Minister of External Affairs paid a visit to Singapore
and Malaysia in October, and a Singapore Government delegation
led by the Deputy Prime Minister of Singapore, and including the
Foreign Minister, visited India as guests of the Government in November, 1965.
A goodwill delegation led by Shri D. P. Karmarkar, M.P., visited
Malaysia and Singapore to explain to the leaders in those countries
the Indian stand on the Indo-Pakistan conflict.
THAILAND
During the year relations between India and Thailand have been
cordial and friendly. A direct radio-telephone link was established
between the two countries. India took part in the Bangkok International Trade Fair and various Indian trade delegations visited
Bangkok for the purpose of exploring possibilities for exports. India
bought nearly 200,000 tons of rice from Thailand and is also slowly
emerging as an important market for Thai jute. The Deputy Minister
for External Affairs visited Bangkok and had talks with Thai leaders.
A parliamentary delegation led by Shri D. P. Karmarkar, on a visit
to Thailand, explained the Indian stand on the Indo-Pakistan conflict
to the Thai leaders.
INDONESIA
At the beginning of the year, Indonesia announced its withdrawal
from the United Nations. Its confrontation policy against Malaysia
was intensified, and India came in for considerable criticism in
Indonesia because of her support to Malaysia. In regard to the IndoPakistan conflict, the Indonesian Government expressed its support
to Pakistan. Several demonstrations were held before the Indian
Embassy in Djakarta culminating in a violent attack on the Chancery
on 9 September, 1965, causing extensive damage. Similar violent
demonstrations were held in front of the Indian Consulate in Medan.
On 16 September. it was announced that Indian properties had been
brought under the supervision of the Indonesian Government. It was
explained that though the Indians continued to own their properties,
they would not be free to sell or transfer them to others.
A delegation led by the Minister of Food and Agriculture, Shri
C. Subramaniam represented India at the tenth anniversary of the
Bandung Conference.
PHILIPPINES
The Government of India Presented books to the University of
the Philippines to inaugurate the Jawaharlal Nehru Library. An

<pg29>
Indian parliamentary delegation visited the Philippines in May, 1965.
The Deputy Minister for External Affairs, visited Manila in June.
The Ramon Magsaysay Award for Public Service was given to
Shri Jai Prakash Narayan.
A delegation led by Shri Humayun Kabir, the then Minister for
Petroleum and Chemicals, attended the inauguration of the new
President of the Philippines, Mr. Ferdinand Marcos, on 30 December.
AUSTRALIA AND NEW ZEALAND
The Australian Government continued to take a sympathetic view
of efforts to build up the Indian economy. In view of India's difficult
food situation, Australia made an outright gift of 150,000 tons of
wheat. Shri Subramaniam, the Minister of Food and Agriculture,
visited Australia at the invitation of the Commonwealth Government
In April, 1965. Shri Manubhai Shah, the Commerce Minister Visited
Australia in March, 1965. Mr. McEwan, Australian Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister of Trade and Industry visited Delhi in October,
1965 and had discussion on matters of trade and economic interest.
The Chief Justice of India led the Indian delegation to the third
Commonwealth and Empire Law Conference in Australia.
Relations between India and New Zealand continued to be cordial
and friendly. An Indian Parliamentary delegation attended the
Commonwealth Parliamentary Association meeting in Wellington.
Shri Morarji Desai visited Australia and New Zealand as Personal
Envoy of the Prime Minister.
CAMBODIA
The International Commission for Supervision and Control in
Cambodia again sent towards the middle of July, 1965 a Special
Report to the Co-Chairman of the Geneva Conference on Indo-China,
about 8 more incidents on the borders of Cambodia and South Vietnam, involving violations of Cambodian territory. The Commission
reported that it had found conclusive evidence in all the incidents
that the armed forces of the Republic of South Vietnam were responsible for the violations and that it was also convinced that none of these
incidents was provoked by the Royal Government of Cambodia.
Also, in view of the prevailing circumstances and in particular
the wish of the Cambodian Government, the attention of the CoChairman was drawn by the Commission to the fact that there might
be advantages in convening a Geneva-type conference to consider the
<pg30>
question of Cambodia's neutrality and territorial integrity. Such a
conference could take place provided there was general willingness

on the part of all concerned to participate. This Report was sent to
the Co-Chairmen with the unanimous approval of the Indian,
Canadian and Polish Commissioners.
The Government of India have full sympathy for Cambodia's
concern, for its neutrality and territorial integrity. As Chairman of
the International Commission in Cambodia, India has steadfastly
worked for the correct implementation of the provisions of the Geneva
Agreement.
In the second week of May 1965, H.R.H. Prince Norodom Sihanouk
dedicated one of the roads of Phnom Penh city to the memory of
the late Prime Minister of India, Shri Jawaharlal Nehru. Expressing
great warmth and depth of emotion in praising the late Prime Minister
Nehru as one of the purest symbols of Asian renaissance, Prince
Sihanouk said that the boulevard was a testimony to the eternal
friendship which Cambodia had for the illustrious departed leader.
A parliamentary delegation led by Shri D. P. Karmarkar, visited
Cambodia.
His Excellency Mr. Son Sann, Vice-President of the Council of
Ministers of the Royal Government of Cambodia and Madam Son
Sann visited India as guests of the Government of India from 6 to
14 January, 1966. Mr. Son Sann called on the President and the
Vice-President. He also had talks with the Home Minister and
Minister for External Affairs and Deputy Minister in the Ministry
of External Affairs. Mr. Son Sann also represented his Government
at the funeral of the late Prime Minister Lal Bahadur Shastri.
LAOS
In the beginning of February 1965, General Phoumi Nosavan and
his supporters staged an abortive coup to overthrow the coalition
Government of Prince Souvanna Phouma. The coup, however,
failed and troops which remained loyal to the Government were able
to push back the rebel forces. General Phoumi himself escaped
to Thailand. The exit of General Phoumi left a vacuum within the
Rightist party.
In an effort towards reconciliation between the Loatian factions,
Prince Souvanna Phouma asked the Pathet Lao in early 1965 to
accept a general cease-fire and to return to the Government in
Vientiane where conditions were secure. The Pathet Lao also
<pg31>
strongly reiterated the demand for an immediate reconvening of
another Geneva-type Conference. Prince Souvanna Phouma agreed
to the holding of an International Conference on Laos, but on condition that all Vietnamese first leave the Laotian territory and that
the International Commission be given increased powers to police
the boundaries of Laos to ensure that all interference was vacated.

Prince Souvanna Phouma, Prime Minister of Laos, visited India
between 26 and 28 July, 1965. In his talks with the Prime Minister,
Foreign Minister and the Deputy Minister, the Prince emphasised
that the Geneva Conference of 1954 should be re-convened to discuss
the problems of Laos, Cambodia, and Vietnam. He was of the view
that the problem of Laos could not be settled without settling the
Vietnam question. Earlier, India's Deputy Minister, Shri Dinesh
Singh had visited Laos between 11 and 13 June, 1965.
A parliamentary delegation under the leadership of Shri D. P.
Karmarkar visited Laos.
VIETNAM
In the second week of February 1965, after a serious attack on
an American military camp at Pleiku, military action was taken
jointly by the Americans and the South Vietnamese against military
installation in the Democratic Republic of Vietnam, which created
the danger of a full-scale war. Consequently the International
Commission for Supervision and Control in Vietnam sent a Report
to the Co-Chairmen of the Geneva Conference drawing their attention to the serious development in Vietnam and requesting them
to consider the desirability of issuing an immediate appeal to all
concerned with a view to reducing tension and preserving peace in
Vietnam. Unfortunately the situation continued to deteriorate and
the end of hostilities in the embattled land of Vietnam is not in
sight.
Although not a signatory to the Geneva Agreement of 1954, the
Government of India have always supported the basic principles of
the Agreement and would like to see the people of Vietnam enjoy
their freedom and independence without interference from outside.
The Government of India joined 16 other non-aligned countries
in issuing a joint appeal to the. parties concerned to start negotiations so that a political situation to the problem of Vietnam may be
found. The Government of India's views on the question of Vietnam were also expressed in various joint communiques issued during
111 E.A.-3.
<pg32>
Indian Prime Minister's visit to the Soviet Union, Canada and
Yugoslavia.
The Government of India are convinced that the achievement of
an enduring settlement of Vietnam is feasible only through peaceful
methods and that in order to get nearer to the goal, the parties
should strictly observe the positions of the Geneva Agreement and
that warlike acts and foreign interventions should cease. It is also
the view of the Government of India that :

(i) there cannot and should not be a military solution of the
problem;
(ii) a political solution should be attempted through a Genevatype Conference;
(iii) aerial bombing of North Vietnam should be stopped;
(iv) there should be a cessation of fighting in Vietnam and the
withdrawal of American forces from South Vietnam; and
(v) the ultimate aim should be a united Vietnam created by
peaceful methods, free of foreign troops and military
alliances.
The pause in the bombing of North Vietnam, which resulted
from the 30-hour Christmas cease-fire, had raised expectations that
in the resulting calmer atmosphere efforts to find ways and means
for a peaceful solution in Vietnam might meet with success. It was
the Government's hope that the gap in the positions of the DRVN
and the U.S.A. could be bridged by both sides showing flexibility of
approach and an earnest desire to resolve peacefully the dangerous
situation in Vietnam. The resumption of the bombing of North
Vietnam caused deep concern to India.
MALAYSIA
REPUBLIC OF SINGAPORE INDIA INDONESIA PAKISTAN USA THAILAND PHILIPPINES
AUSTRALIA NEW ZEALAND CAMBODIA CHINA SWITZERLAND VIETNAM UNITED KINGDOM
LAOS CANADA YUGOSLAVIA
Aug 09, 1965

East Asia
CHAPTER IV
EAST ASIA
JAPAN
India's relations with Japan have been developing steadily during
the period under review both in the economic and political- fields.
On Apr 12, 1965, India's Ambassador, Shri Badr-ud-Din Tyabji
met the Japanese Prime Minister and extended to him an invitation,

on behalf of the Prime Minister, to visit India.
The Japanese Prime Minister's special envoy, Mr. Kawashima,
visited India in September, 1965. The Indo-Pakistan conflict took a
serious turn when Mr. Kawashima was in Delhi. The Indian point
of view was explained to Mr. Kawashima by the President, the
Prime Minister, the Foreign Minister and others whom he met. At
the end of his visit, Mr. Kawashima said at a press conference, "the
whole world knows from the UN report that Pakistan initiated the
present hostilities by sending infiltrators across the cease-fire line in
Kashmir within a few months of the Kutch Agreement". The
Japanese Government, however, maintained an attitude of neutrality
in the Indo-Pakistan conflict.
Negotiations for the 5th Yen Credit Agreement for 1965-66 were
concluded satisfactorily in June, 1965. Towards the latter part of
1965, however, there was a slowing down of economic aid as a result
of Japan's desire to remain strictly neutral in the Indo-Pak conflict.
Six Indian scholars went to Japan under the Japaese Government
scholarship scheme for 1964-65. Six more scholarships have been
offered by the Government of Japan under this scheme. In addition,
four Indian officials visited Japan for training under the Asian Productivity Organisation Programme.
A number of dignitaries from India, official as well as non-official,
including Shri Jayachamaraja Wadiyar, Governor of Madras,
Dr. Karan Singh, Governor of Jammu and Kashmir, Shri Dharam
Vira, Cabinet Secretary, Shri C. P. Ramaswami Aiyar, Vice-Chancellor of Annamalai University, Shri P. C. Sen, Chief Minister of West
Bengal, and the then Deputy Minister in the Ministry of External
Affairs, Shri Dinesh Singh, visited Japan. Shri P. C. Sen and
Shri Dinesh Singh, had discussions with the Government of Japan
<pg33>
<pg34>
on various economic and political issues. The Deputy Minister's
talks paved the way of cooperation between the Indian and Japanese
delegations at Algiers.
In addition to Mr. S. Kawashima, several Members of the Japanese
Parliament also visited India.
Mr. Osumu Itagaki, the new Japenese Ambassador to India, presented his credentials on 23 March, 1965. Shri Badr-ud-Din Tyabji,
who presented his credentials in March, 1965, succeeded Shri Lalji
Mehrotra, as India's Ambassador to Japan.
On request from the Japanese Embassy, permission was granted
by India for opening a Japanese Consulate General in Madras.

THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF MONGOLIA
India's friendly relations with Mongolia continued to develop
further during the year under review.
Shrimati Indira Gandhi, the then Minister of Information and
Broadcasting and Shrimati Lakshmi N. Menon, the then Minister
of State for External Affairs, were among the prominent Indian
visitors of Mongolia. Shrimati Gandhi had been invited by the
Prime Minister of Mongolia to visit Mongolia in July, 1965 at the
time of its National day celebrations. Shrimati Lakshmi N. Menon
visited Ulan Bator in August, 1965, to attend the United Nations
seminar on Participation of Women in Public Life.
During the Indo-Pak conflict in August/September, 1965, the
Mongolian Government and Press expressed themselves in favour of
a settlement by peaceful means. They particularly expressed themselves against intervention or interference in the dispute by any
third party.
THE DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF KOREA
The new Consul General of the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea, Mr. Li Jang Hwa arrived in India on 29 December, 1964, and
started functioning in the new year.
THE REPUBLIC OF KOREA
The new Consul General of the Republic of Korea, Mr. Ben C.
Limb, took charge of office on 1 January, 1965.
In the educational field. the Government of India gave training
facilities to two South Korean students at the International Statistical
Educational Centre, Calcutta, under the Colombo Plan Technical
Co-operation Scheme. Training facilities for three South Korean
<pg35>
students were arranged by the Government of India at the Indian
Institute of Hygiene and Public Health, Calcutta, under W.H.O.
Fellowship scheme. South Korean scholars have been provided
training facilities under some other schemes as well. An offer of a
South Korean scholarship was accepted by India and an Indian
scholar will proceed shortly to South Korea for research in modern
Korean history.
At the 14th annual Conference of the Pacific Area Travel Association, held in Seoul in March/April, 1965, India was represented by
Maharani Gayatri Devi, M.P., and the Deputy Director General of
Tourism of the Government of India. A number of experts from
India visited South Korea in connection with the Family Planning
Conference and to study the IUCD programme.

A parliamentary delegation from the Republic of Korea visited
India from 15 to 18 November, 1965.
THE KOREAN QUESTION IN THE UNITED NATIONS
India voted for the draft resolution on the procedural aspect of
the Korean question, sponsored by the United States and Other
countries, inviting a representative of the Republic of Korea to take
part in the discussion and noting that the Democratic People's Republic of Korea has rejected the right of the United Nations to
consider and to take action on the Korean question. India abstained
on the alternate resolution submitted by Guniea and four others,
inviting both North and South Korea.
India also voted for the substantive resolution on the Korean
question, sponsored by the United States and 12 others. India's
position continues to be that Korea should be unified and that a
United Korea should find its rightful place in the United Nations.
Such unification should be achieved in conformity with the principles
of the Charter, through agreement between the two states and through
democratic processes, followed by the withdrawal of all foreign troops
and elements from the country.
JAPAN
INDIA PAKISTAN USA ALGERIA MONGOLIA KOREA SRI LANKA
Apr 12, 1965

West Asia and North Africa
CHAPTER V
WEST ASIA AND NORTH AFRICA
1965 was a testing time for India's policy towards countries in
West Asia and North Africa. In the context of the Indo-Pakistan
hostilities in August-September, 1965 and the reaction of West Asian
and North African countries thereto, it was but natural that the
parliament, press and public in India should demand whether or
not India's policy towards countries in this area was geared to her
legitimate national interests. While this was a legitimate demand,
Pakistani propaganda, as might well have been expected, endeavoured to demonstrate to these countries that all India's protestations
of goodwill and support to them were a matter of expediency and
that, in the final analysis, 'Hindu India' was against the interests
and aspirations of the Muslim world. Pakistani propaganda alleged

that India was plotting, in collusion with Israel, against the Arab
world.
There is no doubt that among the more conservative countries of
West Asia and North Africa, religious sentiment does play an important part in forming public opinion. It is also true that political
leaders in such countries have got to take such opinion into consideration when formulating their foreign policy. On the other hand,
religious sentiment is but one factor which affects the attitudes in
such countries. There are other factors like inter-state rivalries
and suspicions, the influence of countries like China, the USA and
the United Kingdom; a lurking suspicion, which is fortunately dissipating, that India has not yet said the last word regarding the
Kashmir issue.
AFGHANISTAN
In the Indo-Pakistan conflict, Afghanistan maintained an attitude
of friendly neutrality. The Afghan Foreign Office categorically
assured the Indian Ambassador that the Pakistan Foreign Minister's
reference in the United Nations General Assembly debate to assurances of support given by the King of Afghanistan to President
Ayub Khan were without foundation. Otherwise also, Indo-Afghan
relations developed satisfactorily. The Prime Minister of Afghanistan H.E. Dr. Mohammed Yusuf, paid a state visit to India from
<pg36>
<pg37>
Feb 18, 1965 to 20 February, 1965. Instruments of Ratification of the IndoAfghan Cultural Agreement were exchanged in New Delhi during
the year. As in the past, India participated in the Afghan Independence celebrations in August, 1965.
In October 1965, the first popular elections were held in Afghanistan and Dr. Mohd. Hashim Maiwandwal was appointed as the new
Afghan Prime Minister.
Khan Abdul Ghaffar Khan, who was in Kabul, was informed
that he would be most welcome to visit India at any time convenient
to him.
IRAN
Until the Indo-Pakistan hostilities in 1965, Indo-Iranian relations
were developing satisfactorily and there were indications that Iran
wanted closer cooperation with India. However, at the time of the
Indo-Pakistan conflict. the Prime Minister of Iran, in a joint communique with the Prime Minister of Turkey, referred to the special
obligations of Turkey and Iran to Pakistan "not only within the
framework of CENTO but also within the framework of deep
friendly and close partnership relations which bind the three coun-

tries together". In a letter to the Indian Prime Minister, the Prime
Minister of Iran expressed on behalf of the government and people
of Iran "grave concern and deep anxiety regarding the crossing by
Indian forces of the internationally recognised borders of Pakistan
and the violation of Pakistan's territorial integrity". Besides, there
were persistent press reports that Iran had provided aviation oil
as gift to Pakistan and was intending to help Pakistan with arms
and ammunition also. The Iranians, however, categorically assured
the Government of India that Iran had given only humanitarian aid
(nurses and medicines) to Pakistan.
Though Iran like Jordan had adopted a partisan stance during
the Indo-Pakistan conflict, subsequently there seem to be indications
that Iran has now begun to appreciate that Indo-Pakistan differences
including the question of Kashmir can best be resolved if the two
countries are left to themselves.
The invitation issued, much before the Indo-Pakistan hostilities,
to the Shah of Iran to visit India was accepted by him in November,
1965.
<pg38>
ARAB WORLD
In keeping with the traditional good relations between India
and the Arab world, the League of Arab States was permitted to
open an independent office in New Delhi in July 1965. However,
the completely partisan attitude taken by Jordan, the one member
of the Arab League which happened to be in the Security Council,
came as an unpleasant surprise to India. This was, however,
counterbalanced by the sympathy and understanding of other friendly
Arab countries. In this connection, particular mention must be
made of the United Arab Republic. The official Publication of the
UAR Embassy in New Delhi, The UAR News, commenting on the
meeting between President Radhakrishnan and President Nasser in
Cairo on 10 October 1965, referred to the reiteration by President
Nasser of "UAR's stand about Kashmir and other affairs and assured
the Indian President that the UAR holds fast to these views and
there is no change in them. President Nasser expressed full support for India's case and cause".
An Indian parliamentary goodwill delegation visited countries
in West Asia and North Africa including Morocco, Tunisia, Algeria,
Lebanon, Jordan, Kuwait, Iraq and Iran in December 1965. They
were well received in these countries and created a good impression
wherever they went.
The Amir of Kuwait, H. H. Shaikh Abdullah Al Salem Al-Sabah,
a great friend of India, died on 24 November, 1965 and was succeeded
by H. H. Shaikh Sabah Al Salem Al Sabah.
The countries of West Asia and North Africa received the news

of the passing away of the late Prime Minister Shri Lal Bahadur
Shastri with shock. A state of mourning was declared in the U.A.R.
for seven days, in Algeria for three days and in Tunisia for a day.
The Prime Minister of Afghanistan, Mr. Maiwandwal, the Foreign
Minister of Iran, Mr. Abbas Aram, the Vice-President of the U.A.R.
Mr. Shafi, Hajj Ahmed Balafrej, Personal Representative of His
Majesty King Hassan II of Morocco, Mr. Rabab Bitat, Minister in
the Algerian Government and the Tunisian Ambassador to Lebanon
came specially to New Delhi to attend the funeral of Shri Lal
Bahadur Shastri.
While the death of the late Prime Minister was mourned, the
countries of West Asia and North Africa welcomed the Tashkent
declaration and regarded it as a step towards normalisation of relations between India and Pakistan and for peace in Asia.
<pg39>
Due to his death on 11 January, at Tashkent the scheduled visit
of the late Prime Minister to Kabul on his way back from Tashkent,
at the invitation of the Afghan Government could not materialize.
INDIA
PAKISTAN USA ISRAEL CHINA AFGHANISTAN IRAN TURKEY JORDAN EGYPT ALGERIA
MOROCCO TUNISIA IRAQ KUWAIT LEBANON UZBEKISTAN MALI
Feb 18, 1965

Africa South of the Sahara
CHAPTER VI
AFRICA SOUTH OF THE SAHARA
India's close and friendly relations with the African countries
continued to grow during 1965. To strengthen these relations increasing cooperation was sought in the political, economic and cultural fields. Diplomatic relations were established with Mauritania
and the Gambia. The President of India paid a state visit to Ethiopia in October 1965-the first ever by an Indian Head of State to
Africa south of the Sahara. The Foreign Minister, the Minister of
State and the Deputy Minister of External Affairs paid goodwill
visits to a number of African countries during the year. At the nonofficial level two parliamentary goodwill delegations visited some
countries in West and East Africa with a view to creating better
understanding and cooperation with the African countries.

A number of distinguished visitors from Africa paid visits to
India during 1965, the most notable being Dr. Milton Obote, the
Prime Minister of Uganda and Dr. S. Ramgoolam, the Premier of
Mauritius. A goodwill delegation from Uganda and a parliamentary
delegation from Kenya also paid short visits.
The rapid unfolding of events in Rhodesia culminating in the
unilateral declaration of independence on Nov 11, 1965, by
the white minority government in that colony dominated the
African scene during the year under review. African thinking and
action were powerfully affected first by the threat of unilateral
declaration of independence posed by the Smith regime and subsequently by the consequences of the illegal act which sought to
perpetuate minority rule in defiance of world opinion and against all
accepted canons of international behaviour. The policies of the British Government on this serious issue came in for sharp criticism
from the Afro-Asian and other states.
The meeting of the African Heads of States and Governments
under the auspices of the Organisation of African Unity in Accra in
October, 1965, was another manifestation of the desire of the African
people to forge a common front in tackling the manifold problems
facing the continent. The liberation of African territories still
<pg40>
<pg41>
under colonial domination and the policies of racialism and apartheid in South and South West Africa received attention of the
Organisation of African Unity. However, Rhodesia was the most
immediate and serious problem confronting the Organisation. There
were differences of opinion and methods of approach manifested
among the member states in dealing with this problem. Following
unilateral declaration of independence the Organisation of African
Unity Council of Ministers meeting in Addis Ababa on 3 December,
1965, recommended to the member states of break off diplomatic relations with Britain if it failed to end the rebellion in Rhodesia by
15 December, 1965. Differences arose in the implementation of this
resolution and only 9 of the 36 African countries broke off diplomatic
relations with Britain of which Ghana and Tanzania are members of
the Commonwealth.
The rebellion in Rhodesia by the minority regime created a sharp
reaction in all the countries of the world and there was universal
condemnation of this illegal act. The British Government took
necessary legal and constitutional measures against the Smith regime
and imposed partial economic sanctions against that Government.
However, Britain continued to rule out the use of force to put an end
to this illegal seizure of power although the General Assembly of the
United Nations in its resolution of 5 November, 1965, called upon the
United Kingdom. Government to take all possible measures, in-

cluding the use of force, to prevent a unilateral declaration of independence. The Government of India felt that the measures taken
by Britain in Rhodesia were somewhat belated and inadequate. The
Government of India condemned in strong terms the illegal seizure
of power by the white minority government of Mr. Ian Smith and
offered full cooperation to the Security Council, the General Assembly and the Organisation of African Unity in whatever steps they
may propose to deal with the problems posed by unilateral declaration of independence. They also imposed a total embargo on all
trade and economic relations with Rhodesia as a manifestation of
India's adherence to basic principles and solidarity with the African
people, although this was at considerable sacrifice to her economy.
The Government of India have always considered the issue of the
future of Rhodesia as being of the greatest importance in the context of the process of decolonisation on the one hand and the forces
seeking to strengthen racism, reaction and fanaticism as manifested
in Angola, Mozambique, South West Africa and South Africa on
the other. The manner in which this explosive issue is handled will
<pg42>
have the most serious consequences for the peace, stability and progress of the world.
A Conference of Commonwealth Heads of States and Governments was convened in Lagos on 11 and 12 January, 1966, to considerthe serious situation in Rhodesia. India participated in this Conference where all Commonwealth Governments were represented except Ghana and Tanzania. India reiterated the view that the primary responsibility for ending the rebellion in Rhodesia rested with
Britain. However, partial economic sanctions against that country
had not had the desired result and there was the need for total embargo on trade, including an effective embargo on oil. It was alsostressed that if within a reasonable period the present sanctions
failed to have any decisive effect further measures must be undertaken, not excluding the use of force. The difficulties faced by
Zambia were the cause of concern to the Government of India and
they rendered necessary assistance for Zambia's contingency planning
with further offers of aid on request.
The Commonwealth Conference in Lagos agreed to hold another
conference in July, 1966, if the rebellion had not ended by then;
stressed the need for release of all political prisoners and abrogation
of repressive and discriminatory laws in the colony; accepted that
the use of military force could not be precluded if this proved necessary to restore law and order in Rhodesia; emphasised that planned
assistance to a lawfully constituted Government of Rhodesia should
begin forthwith including a special training programme for Rhodesian Africans; agreed on the appointment of two Special Committees composed of representatives of all Commonwealth Governments to review the effect of sanctions and to coordinate a specialprogramme of assistance to the people of Rhodesia.

The international situation in the Congo continued to attract
attention from African and other states. While internal causes of
dissension remained, the Central Government in Leopoldville was
able to extend its authority to a greater part of the country. General
elections were held and Mr. Tshombe ceased to be the Prime Minister
when the new Parliament was convoked. An interim Government.
was formed pending the holding of Presidential elections in 1966.
President Kasavubu attended the Organisation of African Unity
conference in Accra (October, 1965) and at his instance the Congo
problem was deleted from the summit agenda. The Congo (Leopoldville) however witnessed another coup d'etat in November, 1965 by
<pg43>
which General Mobutu, the Chief of the Congolese Army, was proclaimed President and a military Government installed.
In less than two months preceding mid-January, 1966, many West
African countries witnessed political upheavals in the form of military coups. Following the coup d'etat in Congo (Leopoldville),
Dahomey, Central African Republic, Upper Volta and finally Nigeria
witnessed the installation of military regimes. The setback suffered
by democratic forces in Nigeria received widespread attention in
Africa and abroad. The Government of India's relations with all
these countries continued to remain normal.
The process of decolonisation in the African continent made some
progress during 1965. The emergence of the Gambia as a fully independent country and an equal member of the Commonwealth was
welcomed by Government of India and diplomatic relations at High
Commission level were established with that country. Further steps
were taken towards the emergence of an independent Mauritius
during the Constitutional Conference in September, 1965. It was
decided that Mauritius would achieve independence before the end
of 1966. The Government of India also welcomed the announcement
regaring independence of Basutoland and Bechuanaland by April
and September, 1966 respectively.
Further progress was made in the implementation of the Government of India's programme of economic and technical collaboration with the African countries. The demand for Indian experts in
various fields increased considerably and services of Indian technicians, doctors, teachers etc. were made available to a number of
countries including Ethiopia, Uganda, Nigeria, Somalia etc. A large
number of African students and trainees were offered facilities for
advanced education and vocational and other training in Indian
establishments. Most of them came under scholarships awarded by
the Government of India.
INDIA
MAURITANIA THE GAMBIA UGANDA MAURITIUS USA KENYA GHANA ETHIOPIA TANZANIA

ANGOLA MOZAMBIQUE SOUTH AFRICA ZAMBIA CONGO CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC NIGER
NIGERIA MALI SOMALIA
Nov 11, 1965

Eastern and Western Europe
CHAPTER VII
EASTERN AND WESTERN EUROPE
Eastern Europe
U.S.S.R.
The year was noteworthy for the development of improved
political, cultural and economic relations between India and the Soviet
Union.
The Soviet stand on Kashmir remains unchanged. The Soviet
Union also offered her good offices to arrange an Indo-Pak summit.
meeting on Soviet soil. This offer was first accepted by India and
later by Pakistan, and a Shastri-Ayub meeting was held at Tashkent
in January, 1966.
There were several exchanges of visits by the leaders of the two
countries, during the year under review. Prime Minister Shri Lal
Bahadur Shastri accompanied by Sardar Swaran Singh, Foreign
Minister, paid an official visit to the Soviet Union from May 11, 1965 to 19 Ma
y,
1965 and had frank and friendly exchange of views with the then
President Mikoyan, Chairman Kosygin and Mr. L. I. Brezhnev, First
Secretary of the Central Committee of the C.P.S.U. During these
discussions both sides affirmed their adherence to the policy of peaceful co-existence and their belief in the imperative need for general
and complete disarmament, of liquidation of colonialism, imperialism
and recialism and expressed their eagerness to develop further
mutual cooperation in various fields.
Smt. Indira Gandhi, the then Minister of Information and Broadcasting visited Moscow during February, 1965 and again in July, 1965
on her return from Mongolia and had talks with the Soviet leaders
on mutual relations between the two countries.
A Supreme Court delegation led by Shri P. B. Gajendragadkar,
Chief Justice of India paid a goodwill visit to the Soviet Union from
26 June to 7 July, 1965.

An Indian parliamentary delegation, led by Shri Satya Narayan
Sinha, Minister of Communications and Parliamentary Affairs paid
a goodwill visit to the Asian Republics of the U.S.S.R. from 21 October
to 3 November, 1965.
<pg44>
<pg45>
From the Asian Republic of the U.S.S.R. India received a
11-member goodwill parliamentary delegation from 23 February to
10 March, 1965 under the leadership of Mme. Nasriddinova, Chairman
of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the Uzbek Republic.
Mr. N. P. Firyubin, Deputy Foreign Minister of the U.S.S.R., paid
a visit to India from 18 to 20 June, 1965, to exchange views on the
second Afro-Asian Conference.
Mr. K. T. Mazurov, First Deputy Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the U.S.S.R., accompanied by Mr. Y. A. Malik, Deputy
Foreign Minister and Mr V. A. Sargeev, Deputy Chairman of the
State Committee for Economic Relations with Foreign Countries, paid
a visit to India from 21 to 24 August, 1965. Mr. Mazurov, during his
stay in India, had talks with Prime Minister and the Foreign Minister
and exchanged views on important international issues and subjects
of mutual interest.
The Foreign Minister of India, Shri Swaran Singh paid a visit
to the Soviet Union from 23 to 26 December, 1965 on an invitation
from the Soviet Government and exchanged views on important
international matters and subjects of mutual interest.
The cultural relations between India and the Soviet Union continued to be close. The annual cultural plan between India and
the Soviet Union, signed in Moscow in March, 1965 included 80 items
for exchanges in fields of art, culture, education, science, sports, public health etc. The two sides also signed a protocol for recognition
of degrees awarded by the universities of the two countries. A Nehru,
memorial exhibition organised in Moscow and Tashkent attracted
large crowds. On 27 October, 1965 an agreement between India
and the Soviet Union was signed for the establishment of the Institute of Russian Studies in India which was inaugurated on 14 November, 1965 by Mr. V. P. Yelutin, Soviet Minister for Higher and'
Specialised Education.
The economic relations between the two countries were further
improved. W. A. V. Siderenko, Minister of Geology and Conservation of Natural Resources, paid a visit to India on the occasion of the
commissioning of Barauni Oil Refinery, which is being constructed
with Soviet collaboration. The Government of India and the Soviet
Union signed an agreement on 25 January, 1965 for erection of an
integrated iron and steel works at Bokaro. The Soviet Government

has extended a credit upto Rs. 100.5 crores for the purpose of meeting the foreign exchange cost of the plant. Mr. V. E. Dymshits,
<pg46>
Deputy Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the U.S.S.R. visited
India early in 1965 especially to take part in the tenth anniversary
celebrations of Indo-Soviet economic collaboration. In May, 1965,
the Deputy Chairman of the Planning Commission, Shri Ashok Mehta,
paid a visit to the Soviet Union to discuss Soviet assistance for
India's Fourth Five Year Plan. The Soviet Union showed willingness to provide help to India for her economic and industrial development. During November, 1965, the then Finance Minister,
Shri T. T. Krishnamachari paid a visit to the Soviet Union for further discussions on Indo-Soviet economic cooperation during India's
Fourth Five Year Plan. The Soviet side expressed its willingness
to develop further collaboration with India, in the economic field,
and for extending additional long-term credits for India's Fourth
Five Year Plan. The Soviet Prime Minister emphasised that the
U.S.S.R. would have continuing interest in India's economic development and that aid would be available for taking up projects even
beyond India's Fourth Five Year Plan. Earlier during May and
June, 1965 Shri N. Sanjiva Reddy, Minister of Steel and Mines and
Dr. K. L. Rao, Minister of Irrigation and Power paid visits to the
Soviet Union for discussions on technical matters. Mr. N. P.
Nepoobzhny, Soviet Minister for Power, Engineering and Electripaid a day's visit to India on 26 October, 1965.
During the Prime Minister's visit to the Soviet Union, it was
agreed in principle that efforts would be made to double the volume
of trade between the two countries by 1970 over the level of 1965.
During August, 1965, a trade delegation led by the Secretary, Ministry of Commerce, visited the Soviet Union to discuss the details for
expansion of trade between the two countries. A Soviet trade delegation visited India during December to finalise the details of the
plan and an agreement was signed between the two countries for
increase of trade. The significant feature of trade between India
and the U.S.S.R. will be increasing export of manufactured goods to
the Soviet Union.
Shri Nagendra. Singh, Secretary, Ministry of Transport visited the
Soviet Union during June, 1965 to hold discussions for further cooperation between India and the Soviet Union in the field of shipping.
An agreement for the supply and erection of two medium-wave
transmitters of 500 kw each was signed on 26 October, 1965 between
Governments of India and the U.S.S.R.
<pg47>
An agreement between India and the Soviet Union was entered
into to abolish consular fees between the two countries on reciprocal
basis from 1 July, 1965.

The Soviet Minister for Foreign Trade, Mr. Nikolai Patolichev
paid a visit to India from 4 to 8 January, 1966 to finalise a long-term
trade, agreement between India and the Soviet Union, which was
agreed upon during the late Prime Minister's visit to Moscow.
The trade agreement was signed on 7 January, 1966. The Agreement envisages a 100 per cent. increase by 1970 on the 1965 trade
between the two countries.
The Soviet Union and other East European countries received the
news of the tragic death of Prime Minister, Shri Lal Bahadur Shastri
with great sorrow. Prime Minister Kosygin accompanied by Mr. R.
Kurbanov, Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the Uzbek S.S.R.
and Mr. Nikolai Firyubin, Deputy Foreign Minister came to India to
attend the funeral of the late Prime Minister.
YUGOSLAVIA
Indo-Yugoslav relations remained friendly and cordial. The Prime
Minister paid a visit to Yugoslavia during July, 1965 and the President during September-October, 1965. An identity of views was
expressed during these visits, on the policy of peaceful co-existence,
non-alignment, disarmament, banning of nuclear tests and weapons,
end to colonialism, imperialism and racialism.
President Tito extended full support to India on Kashmir and
declared that Kashmir is an internal affair of India. He also condemned China and certain other, countries which tried to add fuel
to the fire by taking sides on the issue. The Yugoslav declaration on
Kashmir provoked strong protest from Pakistan but the Yugoslav
attitude remained clear and forthright on this question.
Indo-Yugoslav economic and cultural relations maintained their
steady pace of progress. The Education Minister Shri Chagla paid
a visit to Belgrade during June-July, 1965 to discuss scientific and
cultural exchanges between the two countries.
Shri Manubhai Shah, Commerce Minister visited Yugoslavia during October,: 1965 to discuss further economic cooperation between
India and Yugoslavia and signed a protocol for expansion of these
relations. India and- Yugoslavia. will cooperate in the establishment
of industrial enterprises in third countries.
111 E.A.-4.
<pg48>
A four-member parliamentary delegation from Yugoslavia, led by
Mr. Lazar Kolisevski, President of the Federal Committee of the
Socialist Alliance of the Working People of Yugoslavia paid a visit
to India from 19 to 26 February, 1965 on an invitation from the
Speaker of Lok Sabha and the Chairman of Rajya Sabha.
Shri B. R. Bhagat, Minister of Planning and Minister in the Minis-

try of Finance, paid a visit to Yugoslavia from 30 to 31 May, 1965.
A shipping delegation led by Shri Nagendra Singh, Secretary,
Ministry of Transport visited Yugoslavia during the month of
January, 1965 to discuss shipping matters between the two countries.
An agreement between India and Yugoslavia far cooperation in
the development of atomic energy for peaceful purposes was signed
on 8 September, 1965.
Mr. Avdo Humo, Member of the Yugoslav Government and
Chairman of the Federal Council for Coordination of Scientific Activities paid a visit to India from 30 October to 4 November, 1965 and
had discussions with the Minister of Education, Shri M. C. Chagla
and the C.S.I.R. to explore the possibilities of further cooperation
between India and Yugoslavia in the field of scientific research.
Mr. Misa Pavicevic, Deputy Secretary of State in the Yugoslav
Foreign Office paid a visit to India from 9 to 13 December, 1965 and
exchanged views with the officers of Ministry of External Affairs
on various international issues and subjects of mutual interests.
Mr. Jakov Blazevic, Vice-President of Federal Executive Council,
represented the Yugoslav Government at the funeral of the late
Prime Minister.
Other East European countries
India's relations with Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Poland
and Rumania remained cordial and friendly and were further
strengthened by various cultural, trade and economic exchanges.
In the cultural field there was the usual exchange of scholars,
scientists and artists with all these countries. A cultural delegation
led by Shri R. M. Hajarnavis, Minister for Cultural Affairs visited
Bulgaria, Hungary and Rumania in May-June, 1965 to discuss, finalise
and sign the annual cultural plan for the year 1965-66 with Bulgaria
and biennial cultural plans for the year 1965-66 and 1966-67 with
Hungary and Rumania. Shri M. C. Chagla, Minister of Education
visited Czechoslovakia from 21 to 27 June, 1965. After his talks with
<pg49>
Czechoslovak leaders. a cultural plan for 1965-66 was signed on 29
July, 1965.
At the invitation of the Government of India, Mr. Jozef Lenart, the
Prime Minister of Czechoslovakia accompanied by Mr. Vaclav David,
Foreign Minister, paid an official visit to India from 2 to 7 March,
1965. In response to an invitation from the Government of Czechoslovakia, Dr. S. Radhakrishnan, the President of India, paid a state
visit to Czechoslovakia from 4 to 7 October, 1965. At the invitation
of the Government of Rumania, Dr. S. Radhakrishnan, the President
of India, visited Rumania from 7 to 10 October, 1965 and had friendly

talks with the President of Rumania. Mr. Mihail Florescu, Minister
of Petroleum and Chemicals of Rumania paid a visit to India from 13
to 27 January, 1965 on the occasion of the opening ceremony of the
Barauni Refinery. Mr. Mihail Suder, Minister of Forest Economy
visited India from 30 January to 13 February, 1965. Mr. Rudolf Ronai,
Hungarian Deputy Minister of Communications visited India from
24 to 30 March, 1965 on the occasion of Air India's inaugural flight
between London and New Delhi via Moscow. Shri B. R. Bhagat
Minister of Planning and Minister in the Ministry of Finance, visited
Hungary and Czechoslovakia in May-June, 1965. Shrimati Lakshmi
N. Menon, the then Minister of State in the Ministry of External
Affairs paid a visit to Rumania to attend the funeral ceremony of
Mr. Gheorghi Gheorghiu Dej, the late President of Rumania, on 24
March, 1965. She again visited Rumania from 15 to 18 June, 1965.
Shrimati Lakshmi Menon also visited Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia and
'Hungary in June, 1965. Shri Nityanand Kanungo, Minister of Civil
Aviation paid a visit to Czechoslovakia from 11 to 14 June, 1965. Shri
S. K. Dey, the then Minister of Community Development and Cooperation visited Czechoslovakia in June, 1965 and had useful talks
with his counterparts. Dr. N. Sanjiva Reddy, Minister of Steel and
Mines paid a visit to Poland from 23 to 27 June, 1965. Shri K. Raghuramaiah, Minister of Supply visited Czechoslovakia in July, 1965.
1965 recorded a significant increase in collaboration with all these
countries. A Czechoslovakia delegation led by Mr. Pesl, the Minister
of Heavy Industry visited India from 30 January to 12 February,
1965 to study the possibilities of supply of machinery and equipment
on a long-term basis for the various projects already set up and to
be set up in India under the first and second Czechoslovak credits.
Shri T. T. Krishnamachari, the then Finance Minister paid a visit to
Czechoslovakia from 26 to 30 October, 1965 to discuss Czechoslovak
<pg50>
assistance for India's Fourth Five Year Plan. In order, to expand
economic collaboration between India and Czechoslovakia, there is a
proposal to set up. a Joint Indo-Czechoslovak Commission for economic, scientific and technical cooperation. Czechoslovakia has offered
a credit of Rs. 30 crores and an agreement to this effect was signed in
Prague on 5 November, 1965.
A goodwill parliamentary delegation led by Shri K. D. Malaviya,
M.P. visited Bulgaria, Rumania, Hungary and Poland during November, 1965 to explain India's viewpoint on the Indo-Pak conflict.
Western Europe
The relations between India and the West European countries
(except Portugal) continued to develop on friendly and cooperative
basis. In response to Government of India's request, certain West
European countries have offered to send relief supplies to ease the
food shortage in India.

His Holiness the Pope has been very kind to offer 100,000 dollars
as his personal contribution.
The Pakistani aggression on India and the ensuing conflict between
the two countries aroused considerable interest. Some of the newspapers and other organs of public opinion in Western Europe adopted
a critical attitude on- India's policies and actions. Others took a more
objective and reasonable view as evidence of Pakistani aggression on
Kashmir and Sino-Pakistan collusion became more conclusive. Officially, the Governments in Western Europe took a neutral stand on
the conflict, but compared to their earlier policies on Kashmir and
Indo-Pakistan relations in general, it may be said that there is now
much better understanding of India's policies.
AUSTRIA
Relations with Austria continued to be friendly and cordial.
Shrimati Lakshmi N. Menon, the then Minister of State in the Ministry of External Affairs paid a visit to Austria from 23 to 26 June, 1965
and held friendly discussions with Dr. Bruno Kreisky, the Foreign
Minister of Austria. Shri B. R. Bhagat, Minister of Planning, and
Finance visited Austria from 27 to 28 May, 1965.
The Austrian Government has given India a credit of about Rs. 2
crores as part of the Aid India Consortium's assistance for 1965-66.
This is to be used for the import of Austrian goods. The credit
<pg51>
carries an interest of 6 1/2 per cent and is payable in 20 equal and consecutive half yearly instalments on 1 January and 1 July. The first
instalment is payable on 1 January, 1970.
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY
A delegation consisting of six members of the Development Commitee of the Parliament of the Federal Republic of Germany and the
Secretary of the Development Committee visited India from 3 to 25
April, 1965.
At the invitation of the German Academic Exchange Service the
Director General, Scientific and Industrial Research, Directors/Scientists of various National Laboratories/Institutes and Secretary, Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, visited the Federal Republic
of Germany in four groups commencing from May 1965. They visited various scientific/research/industrial institutions in the Federal
Republic of Germany.
Shri N. Sanjiva Reddy, Minister for Steel and Mines, during the
course of his tour of selected industrial establishments in Europe
discussed with the Governments concerned matters relating to foreign
assistance for industrial projects in India and also visited the Federal
Republic of Germany in June, 1965.

His Excellency Mr. Kurt Georg Kiesinger, Chief Minister of
Baden Wuerttemberg (Federal Republic of Germany), accompanied
by Mr. Rudolf Kissel, Honorary Consul-General for India in Stuttgart,
visited India as the guests of the Government of India from 14 to
26 March, 1965.
The Federal Chancellor Prof. Ludwig Erhard was invited to pay
a visit to India.
An exhibition of sculptures of Shri Amar Nath Sehgal was held
in Berlin in August 1965 at the invitation of the West Berlin Senate.
As a member of the Aid-India Consortium, the Federal Republic
of Germany pledged 85.9 million dollars for aid to India during
1965-66. Out of this, government capital aid will be 37.5 million
dollars, suppliers credit 25 million dollars, and Rourkela refinancing
23.4 million dollars.
Twenty-eight German Development Service (Peace Corps)
volunteers have been assigned to work in India. There is a proposal
to assign some more volunteers.
<pg52>
The Government of Baden Wuerttemberg State in the Federal
Republic of Germany has offered to contribute DM 5 million in
equipment and teachers for setting up a technical school in India
to be located at Bangalore for the training of highly skilled (master)
craftsman required for meeting the requirements of the expanding
industry in India.
The Federal Republic of Germany was represented by Mr. Walter
Scheel, the Minister for Economic Co-operation, at the funeral of the
late Prime Minister, Shri Lal Bahadur Shastri.
THE NETHERLANDS
Mrs. Vijayalakshmi Pandit, M.P., visited the Netherlands in
November, 1965 a personal representative of the Prime Minister
of India to explain India's point of view on the recent Indo-Pakistan
conflict
A number of scholarships and fellowships have been offered to
Indians for higher studies in the Netherlands. Under the Reciprocal
Scholarship Scheme, the Government of India offered two scholarships to the nationals of the Netherlands for higher studies in India
during the years 1965-67.
As a member of the Aid-India Consortium, the Netherlands
extended to India credits amounting to 11.1 million dollars for
1965-66. Out of this, 2/3rd will be governmental and 1/3rd suppliers
credit. A notable feature of this credit is that the rate of interest

charged thereon i.e. 3 per cent would be less than that charged by
the World Bank.
Five Dutch volunteers arrived in India under the Youth Volunteer Programme to work in the field of nursing in schools.
In pursuance of an agreement signed in December, 1964, the
Government of the Netherlands will collaborate with the Govern-ment of India in the establishment and operation of an Aerial PhotoInterpretation Training Institute in India. The Government of the
Netherlands will supply equipment, etc., costing about Rs. 38 lakhs
for this project.
FRANCE
Early In 1965, the Prime Minister and the Foreign Minister of
France visited India. It was the first visit by a French Head of
Government to India. The joint communique by the Prime
Ministers of India and France stated about Kashmir and other
<pg53>
related matters that "a peaceful and equitable solution should be
found in a calm and friendly atmosphere through direct
negotiations".
A fifteen member delegation of the French National Assembly
paid a visit to India from 4 to 28 January, 1965.
The then Deputy Minister for External Affairs, Shri Dinesh
Singh, paid a brief visit to Paris on his way to the Gambia to attend
the Independence celebrations there on 6 February, 1965.
M. Andre Malraux, French Cabinet Minister in charge of
Cultural Affairs, visited India from 8 to 12 August, 1965. He had
talks with the President, the Vice-President, the Prime Minister,
the Foreign Minister and the Ministers for Education, Commerce
and the Minister of State for Cultural Affairs.
Shrimati Vijayalakshmi Pandit, Member of Parliament, visited
France as a personal representative of the Prime Minister of India to
explain India's point of view on the conflict with Pakistan.
An exhibition of sculptures by Shri Amar Nath Sehgal was held
at Musee D'Moderne, Paris. The exhibition was well received and
commented on by art critics and in the French Press.
As a member of the Aid-India Consortium, France pledged 20
million dollars for aid to India during 1965-66. The aid is composed
of "French credits" which are in the nature of export credits and
the "Washington Club Credits" which are allocated to various
projects.

During the year 1964-65, the value of Indian imports from France
was Rs. 16.70 crores as against exports from India valued at
Rs. 12.12 crores.
The Government of France sent Mr. Louis Joxe, a high ranking
Minister, to Delhi on the occasion of the funeral of the late Prime
Minister, Shri Shastri.
SPAIN
A trade delegation consisting of the representatives of the M.M.
T.C., the S.T.C. and the engineering industry visited Spain for 12
days in June 1965 to explore the possibilities of expanding and
diversifying trade between India and Spain. A delegation of
Spanish businessmen had visited India last year.
<pg54>
His Highness the Maharaja of Jaipur was appointed as the first
resident Ambassador of India in Spain. He took over in November,
1965.
BELGIUM
The then Union Minister for Communications and Parliamentary
Affairs, Shri Satya Narayan Sinha, visited Belgium on the invitation
of the Government of Belgium in June, 1965.
Shri R. M. Hajarnavis, the then Minister of State for Cultural
Affairs, also visited Belgium in June 1965. He called on Belgium's
Minister of National Education on 11 June, 1965, and discussed
matters relating to cultural cooperation between the two countries.
An agreement on cooperation for the peaceful uses of atomic
energy was signed by India and Belgium on 30 January, 1965. In
pursuance of this agreement, the Government of India agreed in
June 1965 to lease to Belgium thirteen tonnes of heavy water
produced at the Nangal Heavy Water Plant in India. This is the
first time that such a sophisticated product was being supplied to
Western Europe from a country other than the United States.
The Government of Belgium offered a number of scholarships to.
Indians for higher studies in that country. The Government of
India, under its Reciprocal Scholarships Schemes, offered one scholarships to a Belgian national for studies in India during 1965-67.
Belgium is a member of the Aid-India Consortium. Till 1964,
the Belgian Government had extended assistance to India amounting
to 1000 million Belgian Francs (Rs. 95-2 million) for the second,
third and fourth years of India's Third Five Year Plan in the form
of medium term suppliers credits for the purchase of Belgian capital
goods. It pledged a further four million dollars for 1965-66, out of
which 1/3rd will be for small projects.

SWEDEN
The Swedish Government has maintained a friendly attitude
towards India; the most tangible and concrete expression of this
interest in our country was the Indo-Swedish Financial Development Cooperation Agreement, signed on 29 September, 1964, through
which Sweden agreed, for the first time, on a Government-toGovernment basis, to extend credits and an outright grant to India
for the execution of some of the schemes in the Third Five Year
Plan.
<pg55>
Indian classical dancing troupes visited Sweden and their per-formances were greatly appreciated by the Swedish audience.
Sweden has abolished customs duty on the import of tea from
India. Sweden and India have entered into an agreement for
collaboration in the peaceful uses of atomic energy.
NORWAY
Norway is rendering economic assistance to India through various
collaboration schemes. The most outstanding of these is the
Norwegian Fisheries Projects in Kerala, Mysore and Madras. It is
helping the fishing industry in mechanising fishing boats and pro-viding fishing-gear and also in the construction and maintenance of
cold storage and freezing plants.
This year a Triveni Kala Sangam. troupe visited Norway. The,
troupe consisted of 12 persons and gave exposition of Manipuri
dances.
FINLAND
Following the visit of President Kekkonen to India in February
1965, the relations between India and Finland have been further
strengthened. In the Indo-Pak conflict, Finland because of her
policy of neutrality, was keen to follow the United Nations. However, India's policy of peace and non-alignment as well as her
problems with Pakistan and China are well understood and appreciated in Finland. At the request of the Secretary-General of the
United Nations, U. Thant, Finland has sent military observers to
join the U.N. Military Observers Mission for India and Pakistan.
Finland has already 3 officers in Kashmir as, members of the U.N.
Military Observer Group.
Triveni Kala Sangam dance troupe visited Helsinki also and
gave two performances on 16 and 17 November, 1965.
DENMARK
India has entered into an agreement with Denmark for collaboration in the field of atomic energy for peaceful purposes.

The Triveni Kala Sangam troupe gave performances in Denmark
in November this year.
India enjoys a modest favourable balance of trade with Denmark.
<pg56>
TURKEY
Indo-Turkish relations remained friendly despite some misunderstandings over India's attitude on Cyprus question and Turkey's
attitude on the Indo-Pak conflict. The visit of the Vice-President of
India to Turkey during last June removed this misunderstanding to
a large extent. Indian Minister for Community Development also
visited Turkey and collaborations between the two countries in
community development further developed. A 3-member delegation from Turkey visited India to attend the Dairy Seminar held in
Bombay. An Indian expert on community development went to
Turkey to help Turkish authorities in the setting up of Blocks for
community development.
Indo-Turkish cultural and commercial contacts continued to
develop normally. India participated in the annual lzmer Industrial Fair.
A Turkish parliamentary delegation visited India and called on
the President, the Speaker and the Foreign Minister.
Some of the official statements of the Turkish Government at the
time of Pakistani aggression in Kutch and during the recent aggression in Kashmir created some resentment in India. The Turkish
Government supplied 5 million worth of domestically manufactured
arms within the framework of her trade agreement with Pakistan.
Press reports regarding Turkey having diverted NATO arms to
Pakistan were, however, officially denied by the Turkish Government.
GREECE
India's relations with Greece remained cordial and friendly.
They were further strengthened by the visit of the Indian VicePresident to Greece from 6 to 11 June, 1965. India has a bilateral
trade agreement with Greece but commercial transactions are not
large.
The Greek Government is pleased with India's recent co-sponsorship of the Afro-Asian Resolution on Cyprus in U.N. which was
endorsed by the General Assembly by 47 votes in favour and only
5 against; 54 countries abstained. The countries which opposed the
resolution were Turkey, United States, Albania. Iran and Pakistan.
ITALY

India's commercial, cultural and political relations with Italy
continued to be close. Italy is a valued member of the Aid India
Consortium and her assistance to India has been welcome.
<pg57>
The Pope's visit to India last year has greatly increased the
interest of the Italian public in India. Trade and commerce between
the two countries has also been on the increase. Since independence, a number of industrial schemes have been initiated in which
the two countries are collaborating.
The acceptance by Shrimati Indira Gandhi of the award of the
Isabella D'Este award which was organised by the Italian Committee
to encourage popular exhibitions, and presented on 23 November,
1965, was a significant gesture of Indo-Italian goodwill. Shrimati
Gandhi, the then Minister of Information and Broadcasting was
cited for her eminence in the field of diplomacy.
SWITZERLAND
There has been further collaboration between India and Switzerland in industrial and commercial fields.
CYPRUS
The relations between India and Cyprus continue to be cordial
and friendly. An Indian parliamentary delegation which visited
the country soon after Pakistan's aggression against India to explain
India's position to the Cypriot Government was given a hearty
welcome in Nicosia. The untimely demise of General Thimayya
was deeply mourned by the Cypriot authorities who decided to
rename one of the main streets in Larnaca "General Thimayya
Avenue".
UNITED KINGDOM
While Britain did not condemn the massive infiltration into
Kashmir or the Pakistani attack on India across the cease fire line
and the international boundary with Patton tanks supported by
aircraft, Prime Minister Wilson thought it fit to act when Indian
forces in defensive action crossed into West Pakistan. He issued a
statement on 6 September describing Indian action as a very "distressing response" to the Security Council resolutions and expressed
concern" at India having crossed the international frontier.
The British Government went further and placed an embargo
on arms and equipment to India and adopted measures which in
effect stopped not only the supplies of arms and equipment to India
under aid but even purchases from Government stocks. Commercial
purchases, although not embargoed, were in effect suspended. The
exports of so-called strategic materials e.g., raw

<pg58>
materials, spares and components for aircraft and other Military
equipment etc. were made subject to a licensing-system which, in
fact, meant delay and often stoppage of deliveries of much needed
material to, India.
This created a strong reaction in India reflected by all shades of
opinion, and caused considerable strain on Indo-British relations.
MALTA
Malta became independent in September 1964 and was welcomed
as a member of the Commonwealth. Shri L.R.S. Singh, India's
Ambassador to Rome has been concurrently appointed as High
Commissioner in Malta with residence at Rome, with effect from 17
May, 1965.
USA
INDIA UZBEKISTAN PAKISTAN RUSSIA MONGOLIA MALI LATVIA YUGOSLAVIA CHINA
BULGARIA HUNGARY NORWAY POLAND SLOVAKIA UNITED KINGDOM CZECH REPUBLIC
PORTUGAL AUSTRIA CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC GERMANY THE NETHERLANDS FRANCE
THE GAMBIA SPAIN BELGIUM SWEDEN FINLAND DENMARK TURKEY CYPRUS GREECE
ALBANIA IRAN ITALY SWITZERLAND MALTA
May 11, 1965

The Americas
CHAPTER VIII
THE AMERICAS
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
As the year drew to a close, prospects of better understanding
and more cordial relations with the United States appeared bright.
The late Prime Minister's long-awaited visit to the United House was
announced for the Feb 01, 1966, and the White House also
announced that President Johnson had ordered immediate shipments
of 1.5 million tons of wheat and of fertilizers worth $ 50,000,000.
This announcement indicated United State's desire to help India
tide over the difficult food situation.
Yet during the year under review certain stresses and strains

developed in the relations between India and the U.S.A. The
cancellation of the late Prime Minister's visit to the United States,
particularly the manner in which it came about aroused criticism in
Parliament and in the press. President Johnson, however, wrote
to the late Prime Minister on 25 June expressing his regret for the
inconvenience caused to the Prime Minister and repeated his invitation for a visit to the United States on any future date convenient
to the Prime Minister. The late Prime Minister in his reply on 9
July, stated that he may not be able to pay a visit to the United
States during the current year owing to his preoccupations with the
Parliament and other matters of the state.
Another major factor affecting Indo-U.S.A. relations was the use
of American military equipment by Pakistan in her aggression, first
in the Rann of Kutch during March-April of 1965 and subsequently
Pakistan's massive invasion across the international frontier on
1 September in the Chhamb area in the course of which Pakistan
used two full Regiments of American tanks with support of U.S.
supplied aircraft. In the subsequent fighting, Pakistan extensively
used U.S. aid weapons and aircraft. The use of U.S. aid weapons by
Pakistan in her aggression against India was contrarv to the
assurances given by the United States to India.
After India's defensive action on the Western front on 6
September, the United States stopped all arms aid to both India and
Pakistan. The U.S. also assured the Government of India that no
spares or fresh supplies of U.S. pact arms from any third country
<pg59>
<pg60>
would be allowed to be transferred to Pakistan. Economic aid to
both countries pledged by the U.S. for the fiscal year 1965-66 was,
also stopped, though the aid already committed for the previous years
continued to flow. It was estimated that India was scheduled to,
receive up to Rs. 256.2 crores ($528 million) under previous agreements. PL 480 food shipments were allocated on a month-to-month
basis.
In the beginning of December, two important Congressional"
delegations came to India. The Senate delegation was led by,
Senator Wayne Morse and the House of Representative delegation
was led by Representative Clement J. Zablocki. They held meaningful discussions with the late Prime Minister, the Ministers ofExternal Affairs, Defence, Food and Finance. RepresentativeZablocki, in a press conference, stated clearly that Pakistan had'
misused United States aid arms in its attack on India.
The Food Minister, Shri C. Subramaniam visited Washington
from 17 to 26 December, 1965 in connection with the stepping up of
imports under the P.L. 480 Agreement. His mission was fully'
successful since as a result of his efforts, and in view of the scarcity

conditions prevailing in India, President Johnson announced his
agreement to make available "massive supplies" of foodgrains during
the current fiscal year.
Governor Averell Harriman, a Personal Representative of the
United States President, visited India in the first week of January,
1966, and during discussions with the President, Prime Minister and
Foreign Minister explained United States efforts to bring about a,,,,
cessation of hostilities in Vietnam.
United States Vice President, Mr. Hubert H. Humphrey, accompanied by the Secretary of State, Mr. Dean Rusk, and two former,
Ambassadors to India, Mr. John Sherman Cooper and Prof. John,
Kennath Galbraith came to India to attend the funeral of late Prime
Minister Shri Lal Bahadur Shastri. They took the opportunity to
meet the President, Foreign Minister and Food Minister and
discussed with them matters of mutual concern.
Vice-President Hubert H. Humphrey arrived in New Delhi on a
two day visit on 16 February. His visit was part of his tour undertaken at the specific request of President Johnson to some countries:
of South Asia. The Vice-President was accompained by GovernorAverell Harriman and a number of aides. The object of this visit
was to inform Government leaders of the purpose of the Honolulu
<pg61>
Conference, which was attended by the President of the United
States. At Honolulu the President discussed:
(a) the military situation in Vietnam, and
(b) economic and social development plans with South
Vietnam leaders.
The Vice-President called on the President and Vice-President
and had discussions with Ministers of Finance, Food and Agriculture,
Planning, Minister of External Affairs and Minister of Defence.
He rounded up his discussions with a two hour talk with the Prime
Minister. The Prime Minister made a statement in both Houses of
Parliament on 22 February, 1966 giving an account of the VicePresident's discussions. Before he left New Delhi, the VicePresident gave a press conference in which he announced that he,
had informed the Prime Minister that the United States Government
would extend a loan of $ 100 million available for the import or
essential commodities which are in short supply.
CANADA
The visit of late Prime Minister Shri Lal Bahadur Shastri, to
Canada during the month of June was a land-mark in IndoCanadian relations. This visit was particularly significant for two
reasons; firstly, it took place even though the visit to the United
States had been cancelled; and secondly, it was the first visit abroad

of the late Prime Minister after Pakistan's aggression on the SindKutch border in March/April, 1965.
During this visit, the late Prime Minister had discussions with.
Canadian leaders in Ottawa where he addressed the Canadian House
of Commons and inaugurated the Commonwealth Room in the
Parliament building. Another highlight of this visit was an address,
by the late Shri Shastri to a Special Convocation held at the McGill
University which conferred an Honorary degree on him.
The joint communique issued on the conclusion of this visit
expressed Canada's "deep and continued interest in the economic
development of India and in the success of India's Five Year Plans",
and also repeated her "sympathy and support" for India in herborder conflict with China. The Prime Ministers expressed their
"deep regret and concern over the series of nuclear tests to which
the People's Republic of China had devoted itself in defiance of
<pg62>
world. opinion". Shri. Shastri extended, an invitation to Canadian
Prime Minister to pay a visit to India, which the latter accepted.
Canada has also made available to India economic aid approximating half the Pledged amount for 1965-66 of which the bulk consists
of grants. The slowing down of the conclusion of loan agreements
is as much a feature of Indo-Canadian as of Indo-U.S. economic
relations.
India participated in the 54th Inter-parliamentary conference
which was held in Ottawa during September 1965.
LATIN AMERICA AND THE CARIBBEAN
India continued her efforts to strengthen her relations with the.
Latin American countries, and to develop close cultural contacts
with them. Possibilities of extending trade were explored though,
at present, the total volume of trade due to the distance involved
and the cost of freight between these countries and India, has not
increased.
During the Indo-Pakistan conflict the Latin American countries
displayed understanding and sympathy of the Indian position.
The Chilean Government to, whom Pakistan had approached
for arms, publicly announced that they could not supply any arms
to Pakistan in view of the very friendly and cordial relations of
Chile with India.
The Union Cabinet Ministers Shri S. K. Patil and Shri A. K. Sen
sited Latin America in the second half of October on good-will
sits as personal representatives of the Prime Minister of India.
They utilised this opportunity to explain to the Government and

press in these countries the stand taken by India on Kashmir and
the Indo-Pakistan armed conflict.
It was also apparent. that Latin American countries were deeply
concerned over the Chinese threat to India.
USA
INDIA PAKISTAN CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC VIETNAM CANADA CHINA CHILE
Feb 01, 1966

United Nations and International Conferences
CHAPTER IX
UNITED NATIONS AND INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCES
I. THE XIX SESSION
The XIX Session of the United Nations General Assembly, which
had commenced on Dec 01, 1964, adjourned on 18 February, 1965,
And concluded with its resumed session held on 1 September, 1965.
II. THE XX SESSION
The XX Session of the United Nations General Assembly commenced on 21 September, 1965 and concluded on 22 December, 1965.
Mr. Amintore Fanfani, Foreign Minister of Italy was unanimously
elected as President. The Gambia, the Maldive Islands and
Singapore were admitted to the United Nations raising the total
membership to 117.
(a) General Debate
The Indian delegation, to the XX , Session of the U.N.
General Assembly was led by Sardar Swaran Singh, Minister
for External Affairs. In his statement in the general debate
of the General Assembly on 12 October, 1965, he described the
United Nations as a symbol of the "principles of co-operation, collaboration and consolidation" and reaffirmed India's adherence to the
policy of non-alignment and peaceful co-existence. He condemned
the continued interference and threats of use of force by certain
states against the territorial integrity or political independence of
other states like Malaysia and Cyprus. He also reviewed the international situation and expressed India's concern for urgent settlement
of the problems of peace and security, decolonisation, apartheid,
conventional and nuclear disarmament and the economic development

of the less developed world.
(b) The Security Council and Economic and Social Council
The Charter amendments recommended. in General Assembly
Resolution 1991 (XVIII) which provided for an increase in the membership of the Security Council from 11 to 15 and of the Economic
and Social Council from 18, to 27, came into force on 31 August,
1965, after having been ratified by more than 2/3rds of the members
of the United, Nations. India had, ratified the amendments on
10 September, 1964.
<pg63>
111 E.A.-5
<pg64>
(c) Elections
(i) Security Council.-The General Assembly elected seven new
non-permanent members to the Security Council-three to the regular
vacancies and four to the newly created seats for terms commencing
on 1 January, 1966. They are Japan, Mali, Nigeria, Uganda,
Bulgaria, Argentina and New Zealand. While Japan, Mali, Nigeria,
Bulgaria and Argentina were elected for the usual two-year term,
Uganda and New Zealand were elected for a one-year term. India
has decided to stand for election to the Security Council at the next
Session of the General Assembly.
(ii) Ecosoc.-The General Assembly also elected fifteen new
members to the Economic and Social Council to fill six normal vacancies and nine newly created seats. They are: Czechoslovakia, Iran,
Morocco, Panama, Philippines, Sweden, U.K., U.S.S.R., Venezuela,
Cameroon, Dahomey, India, Greece, Sierra Leone and Tanzania. The
first nine were elected for the usual three-year term, while Cameroon,
Dahomey and India were elected for a two-year term and the rest
for only one year. The term of all the new members will commence
on 1 January, 1966.
(iii) International Court of Justice.-Mr. Fouad Ammoun of
Lebanon was elected a member of the International Court of Justice
in a vacancy caused by the death on 4 August, 1965 of Judge Abdel
Hamid Badawi of the U.A.R.
(iv) ACABQ.-Shri S. K. Singh, First Secretary in the Permanent
Mission of India to the United Nations, New York, was re-elected as
a member of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions, for a term of three years commencing on.
1 January, 1966.
(v) Ad Hoc Committee of Experts on U.N. Finances.-The General
Assembly established an ad hoc Committee of Experts to examine the

finances of the United Nations and its Specialised Agencies. India,
was appointed a member of the Committee and is represented on it
by Shri K. C. Ghei, Special Secretary in the Cabinet Secretariat.
(vi) Committee of contributions.-Following the resignation of
Shri B. N. Chakravarty from the United Nations Committee of contributions (of which he was chairman), Shri G. Parthasarathi, who
succeeded him as India's permanent Representative to, the United
Nations, was elected unanimously to the Committee.
<pg65>
(d) China
The XX Session considered the question of the representation of
China in the United Nations and voted on two draft resolutions.
The first resolution sought to reaffirm the earlier decision of the
General Assembly, vide its Resolution 1668 (XVI), declaring the
representation of China to be an "important" question for purposes
of Article 18 of the United Nations Charter, requiring a two-thirds
rather than a simple majority for a decision. This resolution was
adopted by 56 votes to 49 with 11 abstention (India voted against
the Resolution). The second draft resolution called on the General
Assembly to "restore all its rights to the People's Republic of China
and to recognise the representatives of its Government as the only
lawful representatives of China to the United Nations", and to "expel
forthwith the representatives of Chiang Kai Shek from the place
which they unlawfully occupy at the United Nations". India voted
in favour of the resolution. In view of the adoption of the earlier
resolution, the People's Republic of China failed to secure membership of the United Nations.
(e) Tibet
Speaking on the question of Tibet, India's delegate Shri Rafiq
Zakaria, strongly condemned the oppressive policies pursued by the
Chinese Government in Tibet and called upon the international community to assist in the restoration of human rights to the Tibetan
people. He said that India has already extended assistance to Tibetan
refugees and would continue to offer all possible assistance to them.
On 18 December the Assembly adopted a resolution by 43 votes
to 26 with 22 abstentions, which reaffirmed the General Assembly's
previous resolutions on Tibet, and solemnly renewed its call for the
cessation of all practices which deprive the Tibetan people of human
rights and fundamental freedoms which they have always enjoyed,
It also appealed to all states to use their best endeavours to achieve
the purposes of this resolution.
(f) Declaration on non-intervention
On 21 December, the General Assembly adopted by an overwhelming majority a Declaration on the Inadmissibility of Intervention in the Domestic Affairs of States and the Protection of their
Independence and Sovereignty. It declared that no state had the

right to intervene, directly or indirectly in the internal and external
affairs of any other state. Consequently, armed intervention and
all other forms of interference or threats against the personality of
<pg66>
the state, or against its political, economic and cultural elements,
were condemned. No state should use or encourage the use of
economic, political or other measures to coerce another state. No
state shall organise, assist, foment, finance, incite Or tolerate subversive terrorist or armed activities directed to the violent overthrow
of the regime of another state or interfere in civil strife in another
state.
(g) Friendly relations and co-operation among states
The 27-member Special Committee (including India) established
by the General Assembly at its XVIII Session to study and report.
on the "Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations
and Cooperation. among States" submitted its report to the General
Assembly, which considered the subject at its XX Session and decided
to set up a Special Committee with wider representation to continue
the preparatory work concerning a declaration containing an enunciation of seven principles of international law viz:
(a) Non-aggression,
(b) Non-intervention,
(c) Cooperation,
(d) Peaceful settlement of disputes,
(e) Equal rights and self-determination of peoples,
(f) Sovereign equality of states, and
(g) Fulfilment of Charter obligations.
III. NON-SELF GOVERNING TERRITORIES
India continued to take an active part in the deliberations of the
Special Committee of Twenty-Four and co-sponsored most of its
resolutions. India also provided facilities for the special education
and training programmes for South West Africa, and other non-selfgoverning territories. During 1965-66, India awarded 31 scholarships
to students of these territories.
The Special Committee of Twenty-Four held its meetings for the
first time in Africa at Lusaka (Zambia), Dar-es-Salaam (Tanzania)
and Addis Ababa (Ethiopia) in May and June 1965. It adopted an
important resolution containing an overall appraisal of its deliberations in Africa relating to the territories under Portuguese Adminis-

tration, Southern Rhodesia, South West Africa and Basutoland,
Bechuanaland and Swaziland.
<pg67>
The General Assembly adopted for the first time by a simple
majority a general resolution on the colonial question, which had
earlier been treated is an "important" question requiring a twothirds majority. The resolution expressed awareness that the continuation of colonial rule and the practice of apartheid and racial
discrimination threatened international peace and security, recognised the legitimacy of the struggle by the peoples under colonial
rule to exercise their right to self-determination and independence
and requested the colonial powers to dismantle their military bases,
and to refrain from establishing new ones in colonial territories.
It also requested the Special Committee, whenever it considered
appropriate, to recommend a deadline for the accession to independence of each territory, in accordance with the Wishes of the people.
Southern Rhodesia
The Special Committee adopted various resolutions drawing the
attention of the Security Council to the grave situation prevailing
in Southern Rhodesia.
India's Minister of External Affairs, while speaking in the Fourth
Committee on 8 October, stressed the urgency of the situation and
pointed, out Britain's primary responsibility for finding a solution
after consultations with the true representatives of all the people
of Southern Rhodesia. On 12 October, the General Assembly adopted
a resolution noting the urgent situation in Southern Rhodesia and
condemning the threat of unilateral declaration of independence and
minority rule by the Southern Rhodesian authorities, and on 5 November, it adopted another resolution which among other things called
on the U.K. immediately to release all political prisoners, repeal
discriminatory legislation, remove all restrictions on African political
activity and the establishment of full democratic freedom. On both
occasions the Indian representative urged the U.K. Government to
fulfil their solemn obligation under the Charter towards a democratic
solution of the problem.
The Smith Government unilaterally declared independence of,
11 November, 1965, despite warnings by the British Government of
economic sanctions against this act of rebellion. Britain suspended
the Smith cabinet and brought the matter before the security
council. India reacted to this unilateral declaration of independence by breaking all economic relations with Southern Rhodesia
(diplomatic relations were terminated earlier) and refused to recognise the white minority Government.
<pg68>
Resolutions were passed by the security council and by the

General Assembly condemning the unilateral declaration of independence by the white minority and asking Britain to implement the
relevant U.N. resolutions to put an end to the rebellion by the unlawful authorities in Southern Rhodesia. The Indian representative
urged the security council to apply political, economic and military
measures, including those under Chapter VII of the U.N. Charter.
He also asked the security council to warn the Governments of
Portugal and South Africa of grave consequences, if they continued
to assist the usurpers in perpetuating white supremacy and exploitation in Africa.
Portuguese territories
The Special Committee also considered the situation in the territories under Portuguese administration.
The Permanent Representative of India said in the General
Assembly that the declared policies of Portugal in these territories
run counter to the spirit of the Charter, the Declaration of Human
Rights, the, Declaration on Decolonisation and other resolutions of the
General Assembly. He said that India had not only co-sponsored
the relevant resolutions of the U.N. on the subject but had also taken
action against Portuguese colonialism.
South Africa and apartheid
The General Assembly adopted two resolutions on apartheid on
15 December. The first resolution condemned South Africa for its
continuance of apartheid in defiance of U.N. resolutions and urgently
appealed to the major trading partners of South Africa to cease their
Increasing economic collaboration with it. It declared that the
situation in South Africa constituted a threat to international peace,
and security and called for action under Chapter VII of the Charter.
Apart from other measures, it also called for the widest possible
dissemination of information on apartheid and the enlargement of the
Special Committee by 6 members chosen on certain essential criteria.
The other resolution called for the establishment of U.N. Trust Fund
made up of voluntary contributions for the relief and assistance of
the victims of the policies of apartheid of the South African Government.
<pg69>
The Indian representative emphasised in the Special Political
Committee that the situation constituted a serious threat to peaceand that a total embargo on trade with South Africa would vield
results.
The Government of India have been in the vanguard of the struggle
against apartheid. In response to an appeal to give financial: assistance
to the families of the victims among the valiant fighters against the.
racial policies of the Government of South Africa, the Government
of India was the first country to contribute a sum of Rs. 25,000 to this

fund. The Government of India also announced in February, 1966
the award of eight scholarships for students from South Africa of a
total value of Rs. 36,000 p.a.
The XX Session of the General Assembly decided on the final
day to take no action on the credentials presented by South Africa
for the XIX and XX sessions.
South West Africa
The International Court of Justice resumed public hearings at
the Hague on the South West Africa." case brought before it by
Ethiopia and Liberia, accusing the Government of South Africa of
violating. its duties as a mandatory power practising apartheid, suppressing rights and liberties, and failing to transmit petitions and
annual reports to the united nations.
India co-sponsored a resolution in the General Assembly which
condemned South Africa's policies of apartheid and racial discrimination and the large-scale settlement of foreign immigrants in the
territory and its exploitation by the financial interests operating there.
The resolution considered that any attempt to. annex a part or the
whole of South West Africa constitutes an act of aggression; called
upon the Government of South Africa to remove immediately all
bases and other military installations located in the territory, requested all states to implement immediately the provisions of the 1963
resolution urging them- to stop providing South Africa with any arms,
military equipment or petroleum products and appealed to all states
to give to the indigenous people of the territory all necessary moral
and material support in their struggle for freedom.
British Guiana
The General Assembly also adopted a resolution on 16 December
1965, which took note of the date of independence envisaged for
British Guiana, requested the United Kingdom to end the state of
<pg70>
emergency and. to release political prisoners, and appealed to all
political parties to resolve, their differences.
Mauritius
The. General Assembly adopted a resolution on 16 December, 1965
Inviting the U.K., Government. to implement Resolution, 1514 (XV)
and not to take any action which would dismember the territory of
Mauritius and violate its territorial integrity. The Indian representative mentioned in the Committee that the. idea, of a colonial power
detaching a part of territory. for the Purpose of establishing a military,
base was repugnant to the above resolution.
Fiji

India co-sponsored a resolution in the General Assembly which
said that the constitutional changes contemplated would foment
separatist tendencies and requested the Administering power to take
urgent measures to repeal all discriminatory laws and establish an
unqualified system of democratic representation, based on the principle of "one man, one vote".
The Permanent Representative of India had earlier appealed to
the Government of the U.K. In the General Assembly to Ox an immiediate date-for Independence, on the basis of representative institutions and democratic elections conducted on an unqualified "one
man one vote" principle.
IV, PEACE-KEEPING OPERATIONS
(a) Article 19 controversy and Special Committee of 33
The XIX Session of the U.N. General Assembly recessed without
conducting its normal business in view of the controversy over the
financing of peace-keeping operations in the Congo and Gaza.
Countries like the Soviet Union and, France considered these operations as illegal and unauthorised while the U.S.A. and its supporters
Insisted on the automatic application of Article 19 of the U.N. Charter
which would deprive defaulters, who were in, arrears exceeding the
a mount of their assessed contributions for the preceding two years,
of their vote in the General Assembly. Eventually, a 33-member
Special Committee including India was established on 26 February,
1965 to go into the matter. Despite strenuous efforts to find at least
an interim solution in subsequent months, differences of interpretation
and opinion continued to prevail among member states. However, by
15 June a consensus had been achieved, viz., that the united
<pg71>
nations should be strengthened through a co-operative effort, and-that
the General Assembly, When reconvened, should conduct Its work
normally according to its; rules of procedure. Earlier, the SecretaryGeneral and the President of the General Assembly had issued a
detailed report on 31 May on the Views and suggestions made during
the informal consultations and. the, formal meetings of the Special
Committee on various aspects of peace-keeping operations. Certain
broad guidelines suggested therein were circulated in June 1965 to
all member states for their comments at the request of the Special
Committee by the Secretary-General.
The Special Committee met again in August, and on 31 August
reached the following consensus, which was endorsed by the XIX
Session of the General Assembly when it reconvened on 1 September,
1965:
(a) that the General Assembly will carry on its work normally
in, accordance with its rules of procedure;

(b) that the question of applicability of Article 19 will not be
raised with regard to UNEF and ONUC operations; and
(c) that the financial difficulties of the organisation should be
solved through voluntary contributions by members, with
highly developed: member states making substantial
contributions.
The Indian representative said in the Special Political Committee
in November 1965 that it might be practicable to teach an agreement
that the dispatch of armed personnel for reasons other than mere
observation or investigation should be; within the exclusive power
of the Security Council and that the financing of the future peacekeeping operations should be either by voluntary Contributions or by
compulsory assessments but not by a combination of both methods
giving a. few permanent. members the option of not making any
payment.
(b) UNEF
The United Nations Emergency Force (UNEF) continued to
serve effectively as a stabilising influence in maintaining peace in the
Gaza/Sinai area of operations. However, its numerical strength has
been gradually reduced. In view of the acute and uncertain financial situation affecting UNEF, the Secretary-General appointed a
survey team in November 1965 to undertake an examination of
UNEF operations with particular reference to its functioning and
<pg72>
cost. The Secretary-General has since proposed economies by stream
lining the force and reducing it by 620 men. The Indian contingent
has been reduced by 110 men in February 1966.
Major General Inderjit Rikhye of India, has been appointed as
Commander of UNEF to succeed Major General Syseno Sarmento
of Brazil. He took charge of his post in February 1966.
(c) Cyprus
U.N. forces continued to operate in Cyprus for the maintenance
of peace and were commanded by General K. S. Thimmayya until his
death. in December 1965.
V. INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION YEAR
In response to a proposal made by the late Prime Minister
Shri Jawaharlal. Nehru in 1961, the General Assembly designated
1965 as the International Cooperation Year. India was a member
of the U.N. Committee for the International Co-operation Year and
one of our officers in New York was appointed its Rapporteur. The
Indian National Committee for the I.C.Y. of which the Minister for

External Affairs was the President undertook overall planning and
coordination of activities in India during 1965 to observe the year.
Various all India nongovernmental organisations were also represented on this National Committee. State I.C.Y. Committees were
formed to implement the I.C.Y. programmes within all the states
and territories of India.
India's plans and projects for the observance of the I.C.Y. included
widespread publicity of the activities of the U.N. and the I.C.Y.
through all the media of information and publicity, a documentary
film on "Twenty Years of International Cooperation", a pamphlet on
"India and International Cooperation". an all-India I.C.Y. poster
competition, issue of an I.C.Y. commemorative stamp, commissioning
of a book entitled "India and the United Nations" exhibitions,
meetings, seminars, lectures, special All India Radio features and
programmes and the issue of I.C.Y. feature articles to the press and
voluntary organisations.
It is proposed to erect two boulders in the Budha Jayanti Park
In New Delhi on which will be inscribed suitable quotations from
the speech of. Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru on the I.C.Y. This
will serve as a permanent memorial to the I.C.Y.
<pg73>
Economic and social council
India was elected to the Sessional Committees of the ECOSOC for
1965 and continued its close association with the work of the Council.
India was later elected as a full member of the Economic and Social
Council during the XX Session of the General Assembly.
Commission on human rights
The Commission on Human Rights held its 21st session at Geneva
during March-April 1965. India is a member of the Commission and
its delegation was led by Shri K. C. Pant, M.P.
Sub-commission on prevention of discrimination and protection of
Minorities
The Sub-Commission is a body of experts, elected by the Commission on Human Rights, in their individual capacity. Shri A.
Krishnaswami of India was a member for many years and as now
been succeeded by Shri Nath Pat, M.P. who will serve on this body
for a term, of three years from 1 January 1966.
During its 17th Session, the Sub-Commission prepared a draft
International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Religious Intolerance and submitted it to the Commission on Human
Mights for consideration.
Governing body of the U.N. special fund

At the 38th Session of the Economic and Social Council held in
March 1965, India was elected to the Governing Council of the
United Nations Special Fund for the period ending 31 December 1967.
At its XX Session, the United Nations General Assembly decided
to combine the Expanded Programme of Technical Assistance and
the Special Fund to form the United Nations Development Programme, A Governing. Council of 37 Members has been formed to
discharge the functions previously exercised by the Governing
Council of the Special Fund and the Technical Assistance Committee. India, proposes to stand for election to the Governing Council for the period 1967-1969 at the 40th Session of the Economic and
Social Council.
United nations organisation for industrial development
The United Nations General Assembly, at its XX Session, decided
to establish within the United Nations an autonomous organisation
<pg74>
for the promotion of industrial development to be known as the
"United Nations Organisation for Industrial Development". A
special ad-hoc committee composed of 36 member-states of the
United nations and members of the Specialised Agencies has been
set up to prepare the operating procedures and administrative
arrangements of the organisation. India was elected to this ad-hoc
Committee.
Committee on housing, building and planning
India was also elected to the Committee on housing; building and
planning for a period of three years effective from 1 January 1966.
Shri C.B. Patel, Director, National Buildings Organisation, has been
nominated as India's representative on this Committee.
United nations conference on trade and development
As an outcome of the deliberations of the Conference on Trade
and Development held in Geneva in March-June 1964, a new United
Nations organ (UNCTAD) was set up to promote international trade
and help accelerate economic growth in the developing countries.
The members of this organ ate the member-states of the United Nations, its specialised Agencies and the International Atomic Energy
Agency. The Trade and Development Board is the permanent organ
of the United Nations conference on Trade and Development and
consists of 55 members. India is a member of the Board.
United nations training and research institute
A United Nations Training and Research Institute has been established at New York with a Board of Trustees to which Shri C.D.

Deshmukh, vice-Chancellor of Delhi University, has been appointed.
Specialised agencies of the united nations
At the 18th Session of the World Health Assembly in Geneva in
May 1965, India was re-elected as a member of the Executive Board
for a term of three years.
At the 15th Session of the Assembly of the International Civil
Aviation Organisation held in Montreal in June 1965, India was elected as a Category II member of its Council for a period of three years.
At the Plenipotentiary conference of the International Telecommunication Union held at Montreaux in the autumn of 1965,
India was re-elected to the Administrative Council of the Union and
Dr. M.B. Sarwate of India, Deputy Secretary-General of the Organisation, was elected as Secretary-General.
<pg75>
United nations seminars
The United Nations Human Rights Seminar on "Participation of
Women in Public Life" was held in Ulan Bator, Mongolia, in August
1965. It was attended by Smt. Lakshmi N. Menon, Minister of State.
Another United Nations Human Rights Seminar on "MultiNational Society" was held in Belgrade in June 1965 at which India
was represented by Shri Purshottam Trikamdas.
International conferences
During the year 1965, India participated in various international
conferences, congresses and symposia, a list of which is given in
Appendix II.
A list of International Organisations of which India is a member
is given, at Appendix III.
Commonwealth Prime Ministers' Conference, June, 1965
The Commonwealth Prime Ministers' Conference took place in
London between 17 and 25 June, 1965. India: was represented, at the
Conference by the late Prime Minister, Shri Lal Bahadur Shastri
At the meeting in 1964 the Prime Ministers had considered that
it might be desirable to establish a Commonwealth Foundation for
increasing interchanges between Commonwealth organisations in
professional fields and also to establish a Commonwealth Secretariat
as a visible symbol of the spirit of cooperation which animates the
Commonwealth.
At their present meeting the Prime Ministers approved the reports and an agreed memoranda was prepared by officials (i) on the

establishment and functions of the foundation; and (ii) on the
establishment and functions of the Secretariat. They also unanimously approved the appointment of Mr. Arnold Smith as the first
Secretary-General.
The result of the discussions are reflected in the Communique
which is at Appendix IV.
Commonwealth Medical Conference
The first Commonwealth Medical Conference was held in Edin.
burgh from 3 to 13 October, 1965 and was designed to spread and
strengthen Commonwealth teamwork in the war on disease. India
<pg76>
was represented by Its High Commissioner and offered to spare somemedical teachers and provide extra places for undergraduate and,
postgraduate courses and for training of nurses.
At the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association meeting held
in Wellington, New Zealand in November, 1965, India's delegation
was led by Shri Morarji Desai.
Second Afro-Asian Conference
The Second Afro-Asian Conference was scheduled to be held in
Algiers on 10 March originally but this date was postponed to.
29 June, 1965. Just before the first batch of the Indian delegation
left Delhi, news came through that President Ben Bella had been
deposed in a bloodless coup. The position became uncertain, but
after the Standing Committee of 15 nations in an extraordinary
meeting on 20 June confirmed that the Conference would take placeas scheduled, the Indian delegation proceeded to Algiers. The situation in Algiers, however, was far from normal. This coupled with
inadequate administrative arrangements for the holding of the Conference, made the commencement of the Conference a doubtful proposition. 13 Afro-Asian Head of States who were at that time
participating in the Commonwealth Conference at London, issued an
appeal on 21 June to the Algerian Government to postpone the Conference. In pursuance of this appeal, India favoured the postpone-ment of the Conference. In spite of obstinate opposition to the idea
of postponement by China, the Conference was finally postponed
to 5 November, 1965.
Developments between June and November, 1965, were not to theadvantage of China. Besides the loss of prestige as a result of China's
insistence upon holding the Algiers meeting in June despite the fact
that most of the countries south of Sahara were absent, her relations.
with Indonesia had deteriorated; she had created an adverse impression by her abrupt ultimatum to India at the height of the IndoPakistani conflict; and above all, it became increasingly clear that
opinion in favour of participation of the U.S.S.R. in the Algiers Con-ference had grown significantly, to the detriment of China's hopes of

dominating the Afro-Asian nations. It was not surprising, therefore, that China set her heart upon wrecking the Conference. Marshal Chen Yi, China's Foreign Minister, at a press conference of
29 September, 1965, laid down impossible pre-conditions for China's
participation, e.g. guarantee of condemnation of the U.S. aggression
<pg77>
in Vietnam, non-participation of U.S.S.R. in the Afro-Asian Conference, and non-invitation to the U.N. Secretary General to attend the
Conference as observer. Subsequently reference was made to
so-called "India's aggression on Pakistan" and other conflicts in the
Afro-Asian region as unfavourable factors for the success of the
Conference, but these were all devices to sabotage a Conference
which did not hold any prospect of serving China's ends.
China formally proposed the postponement of the Conference at
a meeting of the Standing Committee in October, but this was rejected. Subsequently, the Standing Committee requested the Government of Algeria to consult all the African and Asian countries
regarding the convening of the Conference on 5 November as scheduled. The poll showed that an overwhelming majority of countries
was in favour of participation. The Indian delegation arrived in
Algiers in time for the Foreign Ministers meeting which was scheduled for 28 October. As India's Foreign Minister had to be present
in New York for the Security Council debate on the Indo-Pakistan
conflict, the delegation was led by the Foreign Secretary, Shri C. S.
Jha. The Foreign Ministers' meeting was postponed from 28 to 30
October to enable more delegations, which had expressed their
willingness to participate, to arrive. In all, delegations from 45
countries came to Algiers. China and Pakistan were among the
absentees.
From the outset the Indian delegation argued that before any
other business could be taken up, the question of the composition of
the Conference should be settled. The formulation of the rules of
procedure and other matters constituted important business from
which members of the Afro-Asian world who were still to be invited
should not be excluded. India then Proposed the participation of the
USSR, Malaysia and Singapore in the Conference. 20 delegations
spoke on the proposal. The Rapporteur, Ambassador Lopez of the.
Philippines, mentioned at the conclusion of the Conference that.
"all delegations who spoke on the proposal expressed support thereof
and none of them opposed it". The Chairman of the Conference.
Foreign Minister Bouteflika of Algeria, summing up the Conference
proceedings in a public session on 2 November said: "I am sure that
I voice the feelings of us all when I say that a general consensus of
opinion has clearly been revealed in favour of inviting the U.S.S.R.
to take part."
<pg78>
The Conference thus accepted the U.S.S.R. in the Afro-Asian

family and recognised the right of Malaysia and Singapore to participate in the Conference, even though the adjournment did not permit these countries to be invited formally to the Conference.
On the night of 31 October/1 November at a closed session of
only Heads of delegations, a decision was taken to postpone the
Conference indefinitely. The main reason was that a large number
of Heads of States of Afro-Asian countries would not be able to attend
the summit scheduled for 5 November.
On balance, India came out well from the Conference. Her chief
proposal regarding the participation of the Soviet Union, Malaysia
and Singapore, had received a clear endorsement in the Conference
and it was abundantly clear that the next Afro-Asian Conference will
have to take into account the existence of a consensus on this issue.
This was, indeed, a signal defeat for China because China's move for
postponement had sprung from her fear of the Afro-Asian countries
deciding to admit the Soviet Union.
The Afro-Asian Conference has suffered a set-back because of repeated postponements. It seems unlikely that the conference will be
held in the near future. Indeed, so long as interested countries look
upon this conference merely as an instrument for furthering their
national policies, it may be difficult to hold it. India, for its part.
will continue to work for Afro-Asian solidarity.
ITALY
USA THE GAMBIA REPUBLIC OF SINGAPORE INDIA CYPRUS MALAYSIA JAPAN MALI NIGER
NIGERIA UGANDA ARGENTINA BULGARIA NEW ZEALAND IRAN NORWAY SLOVAKIA
MOROCCO PANAMA PHILIPPINES SWEDEN UNITED KINGDOM VENEZUELA CAMEROON
GREECE SIERRA LEONE TANZANIA LEBANON CHINA ZAMBIA ETHIOPIA SWAZILAND
PORTUGAL SOUTH AFRICA LIBERIA MAURITIUS FIJI CONGO FRANCE CENTRAL AFRICAN
REPUBLIC BRAZIL SWITZERLAND MONGOLIA YUGOSLAVIA ALGERIA INDONESIA PAKISTAN
VIETNAM
Dec 01, 1964

Disarmament
CHAPTER X
DISARMAMENT
The U.N. Disarmament Commission composed of the entire
membership of the United Nations met for the first time since 1960
at the initiative of the Soviet Union from Apr 21, 1965 to 16 June, 1965.

It adopted two resolutions which were both cosponsored by India.
The first resolution affirmed the proposal of the second Non-aligned
nations conference to convene a world disarmament conference to
which all countries would be invited and recommended that the
United Nations General Assembly give urgent consideration to this
proposal at its XX session. The second resolution deplored, inter
alia, that, notwithstanding U.N. General Assembly resolutions on
the subject, nuclear weapons tests had taken place and reaffirmed
the call of the General Assembly to all states to subscribe to the
partial test ban treaty and recommended that the EighteenNation Disarmament Committee should reconvene to resume efforts
to develop a treaty on general and complete disarmament. It
recommended that the Eighteen-Nation Disarmament Committee
should accord priority to the question of extending the scope of the
partial test ban treaty to cover underground tests and to the
question of nonproliferation of nuclear weapons. It also asked the
Eighteen-Nation Disarmament Committee to keep in mind the
principle of converting to programmes of economic and social development of the developing countries a substantial part of resources
released by the reduction of military expenditure. Both resolutions
were co-sponsored by a representative group of non-aligned countries and were adopted by an overwhelming majority.
In the general debate India laid particular emphasis on the
urgency of a comprehensive test ban and an agreement on nonproliferation. The Indian representative made a five-point proposal
the elements of which were:
(1) An undertaking by the nuclear powers not to transfer
nuclear weapons or nuclear weapons technology to others;
(2) An undertaking not to use nuclear weapons against countries who do not possess them;
(3) An undertaking through the United Nations to safeguard
the security of countries who may be threatened by powers
<pg79>
111 E.A.-6.
<pg80>
having a nuclear weapons capability or embarking on a
nuclear weapons capability;
(4) Tangible progress towards disarmament, including a
comprehensive test ban treaty, a complete freeze on
production of nuclear weapons and means of delivery as
well as a substantial reduction in the existing stocks; and
(5) An undertaking by non-nuclear powers not to acquire or
manufacture nuclear weapons.

India supported the proposal for the convening of a world disarmament conference and said that the Disarmament Committee was
the appropriate forum for detailed negotiations on disarmament
problems and that it should, therefore, convene as early as possible.
In pursuance of the recommendation of the Disarmament Commission, the Eighteen-Nation Disarmament Committee convened
in Geneva on 27 July, 1965, and adjourned on 16 September, 1965.
Its deliberations were confined mainly to consideration of the questions of a comprehensive test ban and non-proliferation.
The United States introduced a draft treaty on the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. It aimed principally at preventing the
emergence of a larger number of nuclear powers. The draft was
not acceptable to the Soviet Union as it did not preclude the establishment of the proposed Multilateral Nuclear Force under NATO.
Italy proposed that, as an interim measure, the non-nuclear
countries should make a unilateral declaration undertaking not to
acquire nuclear weapons for a fixed period during which an acceptable draft comprising obligations both for the nuclear and nonnuclear countries would be prepared. The non-nuclear powers
would resume their freedom of action if, during that period, their
demands were not met.
India reiterated the view that any treaty on nonproliferation
must be balanced and non-discriminatory and must impose equal
obligations on both the nuclear and non-nuclear powers. It was
pointed out that, since nuclear disarmament was the object of a
non-proliferation agreement, the agreement must contain definite
provisions which would enable the attainment of this objective and
the nuclear powers must assume definite obligations in that direction. India also stated that provisions for safeguarding the security
of non-nuclear powers was not a cardinal aspect of the problem of
non-proliferation and could not be treated as an alternative to a
non-proliferation arrangement.
<pg81>
As no agreement could be reached on the questions of comprehensive test ban and non-proliferation, India and the other nonaligned members of the Committee presented two joint memoranda
containing their views and recommendations on the above subjects.
The memorandum on a comprehensive test ban expressed the hope
that the conclusion of a comprehensive treaty could be facilitated
by an exchange of scientific and other information or by the improvement of detection and identification techniques. It contained
an appeal to the powers concerned immediately to suspend nuclear
weapons tests in all environments. The memorandum on nonproliferation, while regretting that it had not been possible to
reconcile the various approaches for an appropriate or adequate
treaty on non-proliferation, emphasised the fact that, since the aim

of a treaty on non-proliferation is the achievement of general and
complete disarmament and more particularly nuclear disarmament,
measures to prohibit the spread of nuclear weapons should be
coupled with, or followed by tangible steps to halt the nuclear arms
race and to limit, reduce and eventually eliminate stocks of nuclear
weapons and the means of their delivery.
The Soviet Union presented a draft treaty on non-proliferation
of nuclear weapons to the XX session of the U.N. General Assembly.
It seeks to prevent non-nuclear powers from any form of access to
nuclear weapons, confines itself to the question of further proliferation
but contains no provisions for checking existing proliferation by the
established nuclear powers.
The XX session of the General Assembly adopted by an overwhelming majority a resolution on nonproliferation which was cosponsored by India. The resolution called upon the EighteenNation Disarmament Committee to work out a non-proliferation
treaty on the basis of certain principles listed in the resolution.
These principles outline a positive approach to the question of
non-proliferation in that they seek to impose mutual obligations
and responsibilities on both the nuclear and non-nuclear powers.
The General Assembly adopted by an overwhelming majority a
resolution relating to the convening of a world disarmament conference. India was one of the co-sponsors of the resolution. It
calls for the establishment of a Preparatory Committee, after necessary consultations, for taking appropriate steps for convening such
a Conference not later than 1967.
On the question of general and complete disarmament, India
voted for a resolution which called for the early resumption of the
<pg82>
Eighteen-Nation Disarmament Committee and the continuation of
its efforts towards reaching agreement on the question of general
and complete disarmament under effective international control as
well as on other collateral measures. The Eighteen-Nation Disarmament Committee has since resumed its meetings in Geneva.
The General Assembly adopted a resolution co-sponsored by
35 countries on the question of the urgent need to suspend nuclear
and thermonuclear tests. The resolution which was co-sponsored
by India urged that all nuclear weapons tests be suspended and
that the spirit and provisions of the Moscow test ban treaty be
respected by all countries. India pressed for a complete ban on all
nuclear weapons tests and expressed its disapproval of nuclear
weapons tests which have taken place in spite of the partial test
ban treaty.
India continued to render active cooperation to the International
Atomic Energy Agency in its task of furthering the peaceful uses

of atomic energy. India has donated six radiation survey metres
and three contamination monitors fabricated in the AEET to the
Agency's Seibersdorf laboratory. India has also supplied on loan a
neutron crystal spectrometer with ancillary equipment for installation
at the Philippines Atomic Energy Research Centre. India is also
assisting and extending facilities either directly or through the
Agency to other developing countries in their programme of developing atomic energy for peaceful purposes.
INDIA
USA RUSSIA SWITZERLAND ITALY CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC PHILIPPINES
Apr 21, 1965

External Publicity
CHAPTER XI
EXTERNAL PUBLICITY
The main objectives of external publicity were the projection of
India's policy of non-alignment and peaceful co-existence and the
propagation of India's point of view on several important matters
like the India-China border question, the Kutch-Sind border
dispute, Kashmir and more recently, the infiltration of Pakistani
armed personnel into Kashmir followed by the Indo-Pak conflict.
It has also been India's endeavour to present through the media of
the press, the radio, television and films, India as a multi-religious,
secular democracy where all religious faiths are practised and
tolerated. There has been an increasing awareness abroad about
India and what it stands for. Matters relating to India have found
good coverage in the world press.
(i) Press and public relations
Close personal contacts with the foreign press were maintained
throughout. Accredited correspondents, both foreign and Indian,
were regularly briefed and supplied with background information
and publicity material on subjects of interest. India's points of view
were explained also informally to the foreign correspondents.
Nearly 972 press releases were issued on various topics, most of
which were carried by transmission for external publicity. Facilities were provided to 78 foreign journalists/T.V. teams to interview
important Indian leaders like the President, the Vice-President, the
Prime Minister and other Cabinet Ministers. 251 foreign journa-

lists, photographers, television and film teams were given logistic
facilities.
Press delegations from Brazil, Lebanon, Nepal, Kenya, Uganda,
Japan and from European countries like Holland and Norway were
invited. Opportunities were provided for them to meet with foreign
and local journalists in India. Foreign travel facilities were
provided to 23 Indian journalists.
(ii) Production
Written words have played an important part in India's publicity
efforts. 62 pamphlets on various subjects with particular reference
<pg83>
<pg84>
to India's relations with Pakistan and China were produced. 22 of
these were translated into French, 23 in Arabic and 9 in Spanish.
Besides these, a number of publications were translated into
Japanese, Swahili, German, Pushto and Persian for more effective
publicity. Special arrangements were made to supply publicity
material for distribution in Algiers during the Second Afro-Asian
Conference and a large number of special publications in three
languages English, French and Arabic were arranged to be sent.
145 selected P.I.B. releases, texts of important speeches by Indian
Ministers and sixteen special Republic Day features, were distributed to foreign Missions in Delhi and through Indian Missions abroad.
About 14,000 copies of a fortnightly magazine in English and
French versions were distributed abroad through the Indian
Missions. About 10,000 copies of the Tashkent Declaration as well
as some of the important speeches made by Shri Chagla in the
Security Council in 1964 and 1965, were put into circulation. In
addition to the daily, weekly and fortnightly bulletins brought out
by the Missions in English and in the local languages, an illustrated
quarterly on India produced in Russian by the Embassy of India in
Moscow was distributed not only in U.S.S.R. but also in some of the
East European countries.
6,000 copies of books, including books in Hindi, French, Arabic
and Spanish, were added to the libraries of Indian Missions abroad.
The subjects covered not only Indian history, art and culture but
also India's progress since independence in different spheres-social,
economic and political. In addition, a regular flow of newspapers,
periodicals and other journals, for the libraries as well as for free
distribution to various institutions was maintained.
About 1,000 copies of books on India were presented to leading
individuals, libraries and institutions.

During 1964-65 a total of about Rs. 27.5 lakhs were spent at
Headquarters and by Indian Missions abroad on the purchase and
production of books, periodicals and pamphlets.
About 17,500 clippings from the Indian newspapers were classified while about 10,700 clippings from foreign newspapers received
from our Missions were scrutinised for inclusion in the World Press
Review. Clippings were sent to different territorial Divisions and
to our Missions abroad.
<pg85>
(iii) Audio-visual publicity
The medium of films has been extensively used for the projection
of India's image and to counter anti-Indian propaganda. 1650 prints
of 118 documentary films suitable for external publicity were
supplied to Indian Missions abroad. In order to reach the masses
through this popular audio-visual medium, 14 documentary films
have been dubbed in Arabic, German, Persian and Bhasha Indonesia
for supply to the countries concerned. Arrangements have been
made to dub films in Swahili and to have seven films sub-titled in
Spanish. The film "Temples of Tomorrow" has been dubbed in
French. A documentary film, explaining Indian case on the IndiaChina border, which was produced under the title "The Great
Betrayal" has been sent to Missions abroad. Production of a fresh
documentary film on Kashmir has been taken up. No opportunity
has been lost to show Indian documentary films on foreign television.
Six feature films, showing India's culture, tradition and ancient
heritage and the character of its multi-religious society have also
been purchased and supplied to Missions abroad.
Films were also presented to schools and institutions abroad and
two films, "Call of the Khedda" and "The Living Forest" were
presented to Mr. Brezhnev, the First Secretary of the Soviet Communist Party, as he showed keen interest in Indian wild life.
Indian News Reviews on topical subjects, particularly on IndoPakistan relations have been regularly supplied to eighty Missions/
Posts abroad.
Compilation films and Indian News Reviews were produced on
the visits of foreign dignitaries and other V.I.P.s to India during the
year and prints thereof were presented to the personages concerned.
Work is in progress on a film based on the late Shri Lal Bahadur
Shastri's visit to Tashkent including the funeral procession and
condolence meeting.
Prints of some old films have been replaced in Missions where
they had become worn out.
India participated in 67 film festivals and received awards in 18
events. The outstanding award was, "The Silver Bear" awarded to
Satyajit Ray's film "Charulata" at the Berlin Film Festival. As in
previous years, India participated in the Jashan celebrations in

Afghanistan and sent a feature film "Sangam" sub-titled in Persian.
<pg86>
The film was shown free of charge and subsequently in the commercial circuit and proved popular. India will be participating in the
Cannes film festival scheduled for May, 1966.
Film projectors and accessories were supplied to newly set-up
Missions and those of five Missions were replaced. A number of
other proposals have been deferred owing to acute shortage of
foreign exchange. Photographs of national leaders and those
depicting developments in agriculture and industry totalling about
64,000 were sent to Indian Missions abroad.
Gramophone records of the Indian National Anthem were supplied
to several Missions and musical scores of the National Anthem distributed to foreign Missions in Delhi. Sets of 13 records each
representing a cross-section of Indian music were sent to Indian
Missions at Lusaka, Havana, Port of Spain, New York, Dar-es-Salaam
and Tunisia. Over 100 records of popular music were supplied to
Missions in Karachi, Stockholm, Tunis and Blantyre. One hundred
L.P. Gramophone records containing extracts from the speeches of
the President, the late Prime Minister and the Vice-President have
been supplied to the Missions abroad.
390 tapes including musical items, radio features, talks and
speeches of the President and the Prime Minister were sent to
various Missions abroad for publicity purposes.
(iv) Cultural work
India participated in as many as 33 exhibitions abroad. Exhibition material such as photographs, books, pamphlets, posters and
children's paintings were collected and sent to the various centres.
Nehru memorial exhibitions were held in New York, Washington,
Los Angeles, Chicago, London, Moscow and Nairobi. In New York,
it was opened by the United States Vice-President, in London, by the
Prime Minister of the United Kingdom and in Moscow, by the
Soviet Prime Minister. Two exhibitions were held in Nairobi which
were opened by the Vice-President and the Foreign Minister of
Kenya respectively. All the exhibitions were visited by large
number of people.
A speech contest in memory of the late Jawaharlal Nehru was
organised in Tokyo on 13 November, by the Indian Students' Association. An Inter-University contest on Nehru and his ideals was
also organised by the Indian High Commission in Colombo on the
<pg87>
occasion of his 76th birth anniversary. The Prime Minister of
Ceylon, Mr. Senanayake distributed the prizes.

India had an Information Centre in the Fourth International
Pacific Fair, Lima (Peru) from Oct 30, 1965 to 14 November, 1965. A
large amount of material including a model of the TAJ from India
and other material from the neighbouring Embassies of Buenos
Aires and Santiago were flown to Peru. Books have been sent for
participation in the exhibition of books for children and youth to be
held in Bonn. Paintings from school children in New Delhi were
sent to the Embassy of India, Tokyo for exchange of paintings by
children of Kasaoka city of Japan.
Shri Bismillah Khan and party and Shri Ravi Shankar and party
visited a number of places in Europe and gave performances. Performances of Manipuri dances were organised by the Triveni Kala
Sangham dance troupe in Oslo and Helsinki.
During the month of November 1965, Information Service of
India at Dar-es-Salaam organised a raffle in aid of the Tanganyika
Red Cross Society. The draw was made by Mrs. Saphia Kawawa,
wife of the second Vice-President. In Uganda, the Information
Service of India held an exhibition of contemporary Indian art. The
exhibition was opened by Uganda's Education Minister. The local
press, radio and television covered the inauguration extensively.
(v) Teleprinter arrangements
The Teleprinter system has been introduced in 38 Indian
Missions.
(vi) Changes in the cadre
Consequent on the re-organization of the Information Service of
India and its gradual integration into the Indian Foreign Service,
two posts of Assistant Information Officer in the External Publicity
Division were converted into Junior scale of IFS(A) with the provision that in the event of the non-availability of an IFS(A) officer
they can be manned by an officer of the integrated grade II and III
of the IFS (B).
The ISI Unit in Salisbury has been closed down and a new
publicity unit set up at Lusaka (Zambia). Information units were
also established at Oslo and Bucharest. A Press Attache's post has
been provided at Singapore.
<pg88>
(vii) Organization and staff
The External Publicity Division at headquarters and the Information Service of India units abroad, employ a total staff of 577, which
consists of 11 Public Relations Officers, 1 Deputy Director ISI, 38
Information Officers/Press Attaches, 37 Assistant Information
Officers/Assistant Press Attaches/Attaches (Inf.)/Registrars/Research Officers, 145 India-based ministerial staff, and 345 locally

recruited staff.
The ISI Officers who were employed on contract were brought
on the regular cadre either as permanent or quasi-permanent
officers and were entitled to the benefits of pension, gratuity etc.
(viii) Budget
The total budget of the External Publicity Division (including
the ISI units abroad) amounts to Rs. 1,31,46,400 for 1965-66. This
does not include Information units which have no separate budget
grants.
INDIA
CHINA PAKISTAN USA CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC BRAZIL KENYA LEBANON NEPAL
UGANDA JAPAN NORWAY ALGERIA UZBEKISTAN RUSSIA INDONESIA GERMANY
AFGHANISTAN CUBA SPAIN ZAMBIA TUNISIA SWEDEN UNITED KINGDOM SRI LANKA PERU
CHILE FINLAND ROMANIA REPUBLIC OF SINGAPORE
Oct 30, 1965

Technical and Economic Cooperation
CHAPTER XII
TECHNICAL AND ECONOMIC COOPERATION
The main function of the Economic Division is to render advice
to the Minister and senior officers of the Ministry on matters of
politico-economic importance and to maintain a close and effective
liaison in this regard between the Economic Ministries of the Government and India's Missions abroad. The duties of the Division
are, therefore, both administrative and advisory in nature and the
functions can be divided into two broad categories:
(i) Technical and economic cooperation; and
(ii) Other economic matters.
The programme of technical assistance and economic cooperation with friendly developing countries which was approved by the
Cabinet on Sep 15, 1964 and to which a reference was
made in the report for the last year gained momentum with the
strengthening of the Economic Division. During the year under
review a full-fledged Technical and Economic Cooperation cell was
created consisting of a Director, two Under Secretaries and a Senior

Research Officer along with the ancillary staff.
The first task of the new cell was to remove causes of delay in
the execution of assistance programmes and to lay the foundations
of a planned and purposeful policy of rendering assistance to
friendly developing countries. A Secretaries Committee was, therefore, established for sanctioning expenditures involved on various
schemes and directing the execution of the ITEC programme.
Uniform terms and conditions for experts deputed abroad as also for
trainees coming to India have been drawn up. In consultation with
other Ministries concerned, which it may be recalled are administering multilateral programmes, joint industrial ventures abroad,
granting of scholarships to students etc. as also our Missions
abroad, long term programmes are under consideration taking into
account the local needs of the countries concerned and India's resources and capacity to assist.
A Selection Committee was set up in March 1965 with a view to
selecting suitable Indian experts in various fields who could be
<pg89>
<pg90>
considered for deputation abroad. This arrangement provides for a
continuing panel of experts who could be available at short notice.
The Committee consists of the Establishment Officer of the Government of India and a Joint Secretary each from the Ministry of
External Affairs, Ministry of Finance and the Ministry concerned
with the field of the deputationist's expertise.
An agreement on technical, scientific and economic cooperation
was signed with the Government of Tunisia in 1965 and ratified in
February 1966. This agreement provides for the exchange of personnel for training purposes, exchange of experts, technical documentation and equipment; cooperation in scientific research; setting
up of joint industrial ventures etc. A similar agreement was signed
with the Government of Uganda by the Union Minister of Commerce, Shri Manubhai Shah in Kampala in November, 1965 and
another with Tanzania was signed by the Minister of External
Affairs Sardar Swaran Singh in New Delhi in January 1966 during
the visit of the Tanzanian Minister for Commerce and Cooperatives
H.E. Mr. A. M. Babu.
For the purpose of increasing economic cooperation with developing countries, a high powered delegation was sent, during the year
under review, to Tanzania and Zambia to hold discussions with
those countries and to submit a report regarding the fields where
friendly cooperation in the form of exchange of experts and training programmes, industrial collaboration and joint ventures etc.,
could be attempted. An opportunity was taken during the visit to
East Africa of the Commerce Minister, Shri Manubhai Shah to offer
India's assistance to Uganda and Tanzania in the establishment of

an industrial estate each in the two countries. The Committee
Minister also announced a gift of Rs. 5 lakhs worth of machinery
and equipment each to the Governments of Uganda and Tanzania
for a training-cum-production centre in the proposed industrial
estates in the two countries.
Various schemes and proposals were taken up under the ITEC
programme during the year. Generally speaking the assistance
given by India to other countries continued to be in the following
forms:
(1) Deputation of Indian technical and professional experts
to other developing countries. 17 experts have already
proceeded abroad and several more are expected to take
<pg91>
up their assignments within the course of the current
financial year.
(2) Provision of training facilities in India for trainees coming
from other developing countries. 79 personnel from
developing countries arrived in India during the year
out of which 49 are still receiving training here.
(3) Provision of technical assistance in the form of donation
of instruments, equipment, technical literature, and
setting up of hospitals etc.
(4) Giving facilities to various governments to recruit Indian
professional and technical experts.
Technical assistance given by India under multilateral arrangements like the Colombo Plan and the Special Commonwealth African
Assistance Programme continued to be the administrative responsibility of the Ministry of Finance. The Technical, Economic and
Cooperation Cell of this Ministry continued to assist the Finance
Ministry in these programmes.
Considerable encouragement has been given by the Government of India in establishing joint industrial ventures abroad.
Whereas the Ministry of Commerce is administratively responsible
for the joint industrial ventures abroad, this Ministry continued to
advise and assist at various stages,
The Government of India offered a loan of Rs. 2.5 crores to Tanzania for the purchase of machinery and equipment from India for
the setting up of industrial ventures in Tanzania. The terms and
conditions of this credit are now to be finalised.
The Government of India offered a short term credit of Rs. 2
crores to the Government of Ceylon for the purchase of consumer
goods. An agreement in this respect was signed in New Delhi in
February 1966.

Other economic matters
As one of its important functions, the Economic Division continued to play an advisory role in matters relating to agreements,
whether these related to trade, credits and payment, technical assistance, and treaties on air and shipping, also participated in the
various discussions and negotiations held between the Government of India and visiting foreign delegations. The Division was
associated with matters relating to export promotion and foreign
<pg92>
trade policy of India, in the deliberations of the Board of Trade,
Import and Export Promotion Advisory Council, the Institute of
Foreign Trade, and the Exhibitions Advisory Committee.
The Economic Division was further closely connected during
1965 in the preparation of briefs for the U.N. Conference, on Trade,
and Development, the Second Afro-Asian Conference, the Commonwealth Prime Ministers' Conference, and the various conferences of the Economic Commission for-Asia and Far East, and Economic Commission for Africa, and, particularly, that connected
with the Asian Development Bank. Special mention may be made
of the contribution made by the Economic Division towards coordinating Government of India's policies on increased cooperation
among the less developed countries on the one hand and policies
that the less developed countries should adopt vis-a-vis the developed countries on the other.
The Joint Secretary-in-charge of the Division was a member of
the Indian delegation to the twenty-first session of the ECAFE
held in Wellington, New Zealand, during early 1965. The Division is currently associated with the forthcoming twenty-second
session of the ECAFE scheduled to be held in New Delhi in March.
1966.
The Division remained directly concerned with the negotiations
with the foreign Governments on agreements pertaining to the
duty free import of gift articles from abroad, and in the processing
of various matters connected with such agreements already in
force. The Division also continued to deal with the work relating to
foreign Foundations, such as the Rockfeller, Asia, etc., as well as
with individual cases of requests for financial assistance from
foreign organisations or individuals or organisations in India. The
Division was also consulted in matters concerning Foreign Voluntary Service schemes such as the Peace Programme.
INDIA
USA TUNISIA UGANDA TANZANIA ZAMBIA SRI LANKA NEW ZEALAND
Sep 15, 1964

Passport and Consular Services
CHAPTER XIII
PASSPORT AND CONSULAR SERVICES
Passport services
The Passport and Visa Division continued to be responsible for theimplementation of the passport and emigration policy of the Govern-ment of India, administration of the Emigration Act of 1922 and
control of the Central Passport and Emigration Organisation and the
Regional Passport and Emigration Offices in Bombay, Calcutta, Delhi,
Lucknow and Madras.
In the five Regional passport offices, 56,208 fresh passport applications were received during the year 1965. In addition there were
2,271 applications for passports pending decision with them on Jan 01, 1965.
As against this, 52,435 passports were issued by them
in 1965.
At the headquarters of the Ministry, 2,627 Official passports, 424
Diplomatic passports and 2,832 visas to foreigners, were issued. Slight
rise in the number of Diplomatic and Official passports is due to the
fact that in October and November eight parliamentary goodwill
delegations of 46 members of Parliament, who were going to various
countries for explaining India's case on Indo-Pakistan conflict, had to
be extended passport facilities.
The percentage of rejected applications was less than 3 per cent.
of the total number of applications received.
During the year 1965 the Regional Passport Offices contested in
Courts of Law 12 cases filed by various parties against refusal of passport facilities.
Passport for medical personnel
The Ministry of Health brought to the notice of this Ministry that
there was an exodus of medical personnel from India as a result of
offers of employment/training facilities in more developed countries
and requested that it may be checked in national interest. Accordingly, with effect from November 1964, certain restrictions had been
placed on the extension of passport facilities to medical doctors, dentists, surgeons and nurses.
<pg93>

<pg94>
In November 1965, the matter was discussed in the Cabinet and it
was decided that passport facilities to medical personnel be extended
in accordance with the rules approved by them which would be applicable as soon as they are framed and till then applications were to
be disposed of according to the rules laid down in the Passport
Manual.
Liberalization of passport rules
The Prime Minister and the Foreign Minister desired that the
existing procedure for the granting of passports should be made
simpler and the revised rules regulating their issue should be liberal
so that applicants may get passports quickly and without having to
undergo avoidable formalities. A draft revised passport rules was
accordingly prepared and reviewed in consultation with the Ministry
of Home Affairs and other Divisions of this Ministry. Another interMinisterial meeting is planned in the near future for further review
of the draft so that the new rules can be circulated as soon as
possible.
Emigration to Britain
A British mission led by Lord Louis Mountbatten and the Home
Secretary, Sir Charles Cunningham, visited India from 4 to 7 May,
1965 to discuss Britain's Commonwealth immigration problems. Discussions with the British mission were held in a cordial atmosphere.
Besides the Prime Minister and the Foreign Minister, Ministers of
Law and Labour and high officials of the concerned Ministries
participated.
On 2 August, 1965, the British Government introduced further restrictive measures on entry of Indian and other Commonwealth citizens
into Britain. The measures introduced now have:
(a) restricted the number of employment vouchers issued to all
Commonwealth citizens including Indian nationals to a
maximum of 7,500 per annum (excluding those from Malta,
who have a special quota of 1000).
(b) restricted issue of employment vouchers mostly to trained
personnel with special skills or qualifications-like doctors,
dentists, trained nurses, teachers, engineers, etc. (i.e., Category 'B' vouchers).
(c) stopped the issue of employment vouchers to unskilled
workers (i.e. Category 'C'). (Last year employment vouchers issued in this category were only 550).
<pg95>
(d) restricted the issue of vouchers to persons going for specific

jobs (i.e. Category 'A') to a national maximum quota of 15
per cent. of the total number of vouchers issued in this
category.
(e) restricted rights of admission of dependent children into
Britain. Minors below 16 years of age are no longer allowed admission into Britain when they seek to join their
brothers, uncles or other relatives.
Dependent children of immigrants above 16 no longer
enjoy unrestricted right of, entry into Britain even for
joining a parent.
(f) It is now necessary for wives and children to obtain Entry
Certificates from the British High Commission before their
departure for Britain.
(g) Commonwealth citizens, who enter Britain for short stay or
as students or as visitors, are not now allowed to stay on
and take up employment in that country.
The number of visitors to Britain increased during the year.
According to statistics published by the British Government, 44,468
Indian nationals visited that country in 1964, as against 42,109 in 1963.
However, due to the increasing restrictions, the number of Indian
immigrants into U.K. declined. The net inflow of Indian nationals
into Britain during 1964, according to British Immigration authorities
is 15,513 persons. The corresponding figures in earlier years were
17,498 in 1963, 22,101 in 1962 and 23,736 in 1961. During the year
1965, 5,899 employment vouchers were issued by the British Government to Indian nationals for employment in Britain as against
6,084 vouchers issued last year.
During the year 1964, 2,060 Indian nationals residing in Britain
(including married women and minor children) relinquished Indian
citizenship, surrendered their passports and acquired U.K. citizenship.
During the year 1965, 167 Indian nationals had to return after
reaching Britain, as they were refused admission into that country by
the British immigration authorities, mostly on the ground that they
were likely to seek employment in Britain and they did not hold any
employment voucher. Similarly 61 Indian nationals were refused
entry into Britain during 1964.
111 E.A.-7.
<pg96>
Emigration to countries other than Britain
Passport facilities were extended inter alia. to 106 Indian teachers
for employment in Ethiopia and 14 engineers for employment in
Ghana. Some nurses and medical doctors were extended passport

facilities for employment in the Persian Gulf countries. Some batches,
of nurses from Kerala left for training-cum-employment in West German hospitals. Some other Indian nationals were also able to procure "work permit" of the West German Government. Some teachers, agrarian scientists, accountants, etc. left for employment in
Nigeria. The Protectors of Emigrants at air and sea ports registered
the departure for employment abroad of 2,420 skilled workers under
the Emigration Act. Most of these workers went to Persian Gulf'
countries, South-East Asian countries, Arabia and East African
countries.
Repatriation
182 Repatriates arrived in India from Malaysia during the year1965 against 188 in 1964.
Deportation
702 Indian nationals were deported from Ceylon on charges of'
illicit emigration.
Revenue Receipts
The Regional Passport Offices earned a revenue of Rs. 10,55,342.11
during the year 1965.
Consular services
The Consular Division of the Ministry of External Affairs are responsible for guiding the Indian Missions/Posts abroad on consular
work. They also render assistance and tender advice to foreign Missions in India on consular matters. Broadly speaking, the Consular
Division deal with the following items of work :
(i) They advise the Missions/Posts abroad regarding the assistance and financial relief that should be given to Indian
nationals when they become destitutes abroad and also,
arrange for their repatriation to India. When Indian
nationals abroad are deported by the Foreign Governments,
for offences committed by them against those Governments,
Consular Division advise the Indian Missions/Posts abroad
the action to be taken by the latter regarding such deportation. They also render assistance to find out the whereabouts of Indian nationals abroad when requests to trace
the whereabouts of such Indian nationals are received by.
<pg97>
them from their relatives in India. They find out the
whereabouts of foreigners in India in consultation with the
state Governments concerned when requests to trace the
whereabouts of such foreigners are received by them.
(ii) They also render assistance for the proper maintenance and

disposal of the properties and estates of Indian nationals
abroad and also render necessary assistance to foreign
Missions in India for the disposal of the properties and
estates of foreigners in India.
(iii) The Consular Division also make reciprocal arrangements
with other countries for service of summonses in civil cases
under section 29(c) C.P.C., execution of decrees under section 44A. C.P.C., examination of witnesses in criminal cases,
under section 504(3) and 508A. Cr.P.C. enforcement of
Maintenance orders under section 3 of the Maintenance
Orders Enforcement Act, 1921 and administration of properties of deceased Indian citizens under section 57 of the
Administrators General's Act, 1963. They also make reciprocal arrangements with Foreign Governments for the
extradition of Indian citizens from foreign countries for
extradition offences committed by them in India. This
arrangement also provides for the extradition of foreigners
abroad for extradition offences committed by them in
India.
(iv) They also deal with complaints from abroad against individuals, firms, etc. in India and complaints from India against
individuals, firms abroad.
(v) The Consular Division is also responsible for determining
the jurisdiction of Indian Missions/Posts abroad.
(vi) Whenever foreign nationals desire to adopt Indian children
and take them to their countries after adoption, they make
requests to the Consular Division either through Indian
Missions/Posts abroad or through their Missions in India
for this purpose. Such requests are considered by them
and the legal implications for adopting children by foreigners are explained to the foreign Missions. Assistance is
rendered to the foreigners to take their adopted children
to their countries when they fulfil the various conditions
laid down by the Government of India for this purpose.
(vii) When foreign Governments request the Government of
India to do consular and quasi-consular functions on their
<pg98>
behalf, the Consular Division consider such requests and
take decision on such requests. They are also responsible
for legalisation of documents which are to be produced
abroad.
(viii) Besides the functions mentioned above the Consular Division also deal with citizenship cases, in consultation with
the Ministry of Home Affairs and advise the latter regarding conferment of Indian citizenship on persons of Indian

origin as well as foreigners.
The work relating to compilation of Consular Manual has been
completed so far as the Ministry of External Affairs is concerned.
Some of the chapters have been finally approved while the remaining
are under reference to various Ministries and Departments concerned for approval.
40. Letters of requests and commissions for examination of witnesses abroad and vice-versa were forwarded to the authorities concerned after due scrutiny. Similarly 40 summonses and 23
maintenance orders and other processes were sent for execution or
service abroad,
The proposal to make reciprocal arrangements under Section 29(c)
of the Civil Procedure Code, 1908 for service of summons and other
processes with Japan, West Germany, Belgium, Hong Kong, U.A.R.,
the U.S.S.R., and Switzerland could not be put through unless Order
5, Rule 26(b) is amended. The Ministry of Law have taken up the
matter with the Law Commission and the latter's report is still
awaited.
Cases relating to reciprocal arrangements for execution of decrees
under Section 44A ibid with Japan, Trinidad and Tobago are still
pending for want of final replies from the Governments concerned.
Negotiations for reciprocal arrangements under Section 504(3) of
the Code of Criminal Procedure were completed with the United Arab
Republic and a notification declaring that country as a reciprocating
territory has been issued by the Ministry of Home Affairs. Cases
relating to similar arrangements with Southern Rhodesia, Zambia and
Malawi, the three separate territories of the erstwhile Central African
Federation were taken up with the respective Government. Case
with Southern Rhodesia had to be dropped as our diplomatic relation
with that country has been severed. Also, similar proposal with
Malawi has been dropped as the law of that country does not provide
<pg99>
for reciprocity. Similarly, the cage relating to Aden has been deferred pending finalisation of appropriate legislation in that country.
Negotiations for making reciprocal arrangements with Nepal, Nigeria,
Libya, West Germany, Czechoslovakia, Sierra Leone, Liberia and
Malaysia are in progress.
1326 commercial and judicial documents including powers of attorney and births, deaths, marriages, and educational certificates etc.
were attested for use in foreign countries.
Proposal to make reciprocal arrangements under section 14 of the
Notaries Act. 1952, with Czechoslovakia and some other countries are
being pursued.

On a reference received from the Commission of India, Hong Kong
that the Certificates of Origin issued by the Indian Chamber of Commerce, Hong Kong were not being accepted by certain countries who
are signatories to the International Convention Relating to the Simplification of Customs Formalities, 1923, even though the Government
of Hong Kong had designated that Chamber as competent to issue
such Certificates of Origin in accordance with the provisions of that
Convention, the matter was taken up with the countries concerned
through our Missions. As a result of these efforts, the Governments
of Sweden, Denmark, West Germany and Philippines have agreed to
accept such Certificates issued by the above Chamber. The matter
is still under correspondence with the Governments of Nigeria, Sierra
Leone, and Ruanda Burundi.
48 cases of estates and properties of Indians abroad and 17 cases
relating to foreigners in respect of their properties in India were dealt
with during the period under review.
Revised notifications for making Reciprocal Arrangements under
section 57 of the Administrators General's Act, 1963 with
Czechoslovakia, Poland, Afghanistan, Iran, Denmark and the U.S.A.
could not be issued by the Ministry of Law for want of final replies
from some of these countries.
During the period under review 28 persons (25 adults and 3
minors) were repatriated from foreign countries by our various
Missions at public expense at a total expenditure of Rs. 26,317.28.
Out of this amount, a sum of Rs. 3,223.00 has been recovered and
efforts are being made to recover the balance through the state
Governments.
<pg100>
A total sum of Rs. 4,931.17 was advanced to 18 Indian citizens to
enable them to tide over temporary difficulties which arose due to
unforeseen circumstances such as theft, illness, delay in the departure
of ships or their traveller cheques not being endorsed for the country
where they were stranded. A sum of Rs. 1,601.85 has been recovered
from the amount so advanced.
During the period under review 33 cases relating to extradition
of offenders from or to India, trial of citizens of India for offence
committed abroad and trial of foreigners in the country of their
nationality for offences committed in India were dealt with in the
section. In addition, 69 cases of deportation of Indian citizens from
other countries and 20 cases of arrests of Indian nationals in foreign
countries were also dealt with.
A large number of cases for the grant of Indian citizenship
referred to by the Ministry of Home Affairs for our views was returned to them with our comments. Besides, 218 references on this
subject received from Indian Missions abroad, foreign Missions in
India, Goa Administration etc. were handled. This includes

requests received from persons of Goan origin who failed to surrender their foreign passports within the prescribed time limit for
being recognised as Indian citizens. In addition, a large number of
references received from the PV Division in respect of persons who
had applied for Indian passports were also examined and comments offered.
59 cases relating to marriage, desertion, bigamy etc. and 28 cases
of adoption of Indian children by foreigners were dealt with. 113
cases of whereabouts and welfare of Indian nationals abroad were
also dealt with.
107 cases of death of foreigners in India were reported to the
foreign Missions concerned. 43 cases of death of Indian nationals
abroad were also dealt with.
20 cases relating to remittance facilities from or to India were
dealt with. 176 cases relating to complaints against Indians abroad
and foreigners in India and against Indian. firms and vice-versa,
recovery of private outstanding dues from Indians abroad, were
handled during the period under review. Also 35 cases regarding
issue of birth, death and marriage certificates were dealt with. 85
cases relating to issue of 'No objection to return to India' certificates
to Indian students who wanted to settle down in Canada and the
U.S.A. were dealt with during this period. 54 cases relating to settlement of claims of Indian citizens for pay, pension, gratuity, etc.
<pg101>
against foreign Governments were received and pursued with the
Governments concerned.
During the period under review several officers and staff who
were either fresh appointees or who had not handled consular work
in Mission/Post abroad previously were imparted training in consular matters.
During the period 1942-47, a sum of Rs. 7,18,03,561.00 was advanced
to the evacuees from War Zones during World War II on repayable
basis. Out of this amount, a sum of Rs. 25,53,381.85 is debitable to
the Government of Burma. So far, a sum of Rs. 38,88,797-25 has been
recovered, a sum of Rs. 2,68,53,247.58 has been written off, and a
sum of Rs. 4,10,61,516.17 is still outstanding. This outstanding amount
will be further reduced by Rs. 25,53,381.85 when debits are accepted
by the Government of Burma. Efforts are also being made to recover
the outstanding balance from the evacuees through the state
Governments concerned and to write off the irrecoverable amount.
At the request of the Government of Malta, the Government of
India have agreed to perform consular functions including passport
and visa work on behalf of that Government in India, with effect
from 15 October, 1965. A notification to this effect has been issued
and this work is being handled in the Consular section.

Diplomatic Missions and Consular Posts in India
During the period under review, the Embassy of Algeria was
established in India raising the total number of diplomatic Missions
in India to 68. H.E. Mr. Ali Lakhdari was accredited to India as the
First Ambassador of the Democratic and Popular Republic of Algeria.
He presented his letter of credence on 20 January, 1965. The League
of Arab States was also given recognition and the name of its officers
were included in a separate appendix in the Diplomatic List.
A list of the diplomatic Missions in India and a list of the suboffices of the High Commissions of the Commonwealth Countries
are given at Appendix V.
Consular posts in India
The total number of foreign consular posts at the end of December, 1965, was 105. During the period under review, the status of
the Honorary Consulate of Ethiopia at Bombay was raised to that
of an Honorary Consulate-General.
A list of Consular posts in India is given at Appendix VI.
Distinguished visitors from abroad
A list of distinguished visitors to India from abroad during the
year is given at Appendix VII.
INDIA
USA PAKISTAN MALI MALTA UNITED KINGDOM ETHIOPIA GHANA NIGER NIGERIA
MALAYSIA BELGIUM GERMANY HONG KONG JAPAN SWITZERLAND TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
ZAMBIA MALAWI NEPAL LIBERIA LIBYA NORWAY SIERRA LEONE SLOVAKIA DENMARK
PHILIPPINES SWEDEN BURUNDI AFGHANISTAN IRAN POLAND CANADA BURMA ALGERIA
Jan 01, 1965

Organisation and Administration
CHAPTER XIV
ORGANISATION AND ADMINISTRATION
I. Headquarters
The Ministry of External Affairs is responsible for the conduct
of India's relations with foreign countries. The Ministry is also res-

ponsible for the country's representation in the United Nations and
advises other Ministries and state Governments when the
latter have dealings with foreign Governments or institutions. The
Administration of the Emigration Act of 1922, the Haj Committee
Act, 1959, the Haj Committee Rules, 1963, the Indian Merchant Shipping Act in so far as it relates to pilgrim ships, the Indian Pilgrim
Shipping Rules of 1933 is also the special responsibility of the Ministry of External Affairs.
The Minister for External Affairs was assisted by the Minister of
States, a Deputy Minister and two Parliamentary Secretaries. With
the change of Government in January 1966, no Deputy Minister has
been appointed.
The decision to constitute the IFS Review Committee was an
important development for this Ministry during the year. It had
been felt that the time had come for a close examination and reappraisal of the structure and working of the Ministry of External
Affairs and the Indian Foreign Service. The object of the review is
to improve the efficiency of the Foreign Service and the working of
Indian Missions/Posts abroad, so as to make the Foreign Service
better able to meet the present and future needs of India's foreign
policy and diplomatic representation abroad.
Shri N. R. Pillai, formerly Secretary General of the Ministry of
External Affairs, was appointed Chairman of this Committee. Its
members are Shri C. S. Jha, Foreign Secretary, Shri L. P. Singh,
Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs, Shri D. S. Joshi, Secretary,
Ministry of Commerce and Shri Azim Husain, Secretary 11, Ministry
of External Affairs. The terms of reference of the Committee are :
"To review the structure and Organisation of the Indian Foreign
Service, with particular reference to recruitment, training and
service conditions, and to consider any other matters
<pg102>
<pg103>
conducive to the strengthening and efficient functioning of'
the Service at Headquarters and abroad, and make recommendations to Government."
The Committee has held several meetings and interviewed many
important people in all walks of life including business, press, government, politics, and others with varied experience. The Committee
is expected to submit its report by July 1966.
During 1965, efforts were made to modify the organisation at headquarters in order to suit the functional requirements of the Foreign
Office. The designations of Commonwealth Secretary and Special
Secretary have been abolished. The Ministry is now headed by the
Foreign Secretary and two other Secretaries with well defined res-

ponsibilities, designated as Secretary EA-I and Secretary EA-II.
Co-ordination between the Secretaries is provided by daily conferences which assist collective thinking in the formulation of policy.
The three Secretaries and the Secretary, Ministry of Commerce
and the Joint Secretary (Admn.) with Foreign Secretary as Chairman, constitute the Foreign Service Board which is responsible for
all diplomatic, commercial and consular postings and transfers,
promotions and confirmations of Foreign Service Officers of Branch
'A' of the Indian Foreign Service and Grade I of the Indian Foreign
Service (B).
There are 18 Divisions in the Ministry. Eight of these are territoral divisions, dealing with India's relations with foreign countries.
In the territorial divisions, an attempt has been made to provide
more concentrated attention on India's neighbours, South-East Asia,
West Asia and Africa. Separate Joint Secretaries/Directors deal
with these territorial divisions and co-ordination is also ensured at
their level. In view of the complexity of India's relations with Pakistan, the Pakistan Division has been placed under a Joint Secretary.
The Economic Division co-ordinates all matters pertaining to international economic cooperation and technical assistance. Since this
concerns several Ministries of the Government, there is a Committee
of Secretaries representing the External Affairs Ministry, the Department of Economic Affairs, Ministry of Finance and the Planning
Commission, to expedite decisions on the implementation of aid
programmes. These changes are expected to assist in the purposeful
pursuit of India's economic aid policy in Afro-Asian countries.
A new Division was created (Current Research Division) independent of territorial Divisions. Its functions are to concentrate research
<pg104>
for formulation of policy and to prepare background papers on important subjects. This is the nucleus round which a Policy planning
cell could be built for Indian Foreign Office.
The Specialised Divisions are in charge of the following:
Protocol and consular matter, passport and visas, external
publicity, historical and research matters and legal questions.
The work relating to the NEFA Administration which was hitherto done by this Ministry has been transferred to the Ministry of
Home Affairs with effect from Aug 01, 1965.
During the year 1965 a number of deputations/delegations were
sponsored by the Ministry of External Affairs. A statement indicating the names of persons sent abroad, the countries visited by them
and the purpose for which they were sent, is at Appendix VIII.
II. Rationalisation of the methods of work

The Re-organisation unit of the Ministry conducted, during the
year under report, work studies of the Regional Passport Offices
at Bombay, Madras, Calcutta and Lucknow. While in the Bombay
and Calcutta Offices some additional staff were recommended, in the
Madras office some staff was found to be surplus.
The Staff Inspection unit of the Ministry of Finance undertook
an on-the-spot work study of this Ministry to rationalise its staff
position.
The work relating to the weeding of records progressed satisfactorily and nearly 22,000 files were destroyed during the year.
III. Missions abroad
The need to extend India's diplomatic representation abroad continues, especially because of the importance of maintaining friendly
relations with newly independent countries which have representation in the United Nations. Proposals to open six new Missions
during this period had to be deferred because of financial stringency
and the difficult foreign exchange position.
India now maintains diplomatic and consular relations with 125
countries. It has 73 Embassies, 21 High Commissions, 14 Commissions, 4 Legations, 16 Consulates General, 17 Consulates, 3 Vice
Consulates, 1 Deputy High Commission, 1 Assistant High Commission, 4 Trade Commissions. A Est of Indian Missions and Posts
abroad may be seen at Appendix IX
<pg105>
IV. The Indian Foreign Service
The training of recruits to the Indian Foreign Service has recently been examined. While awaiting the recommendations of the Pillai
Committee, certain improvements have already been incorporated.
In order to provide for closer understanding of people in rural areas
and the problems of community development, the period of training
in the districts has been increased from three to six months. It is
expected that it will help IFS officers to gain a better appreciation
of India's requirements in economic development and social progress.
A short period of military orientation, similar to the training given
to IAS officers, has also been included in the programme. Finally,
in order to train the officers from the beginning in the working of
the Ministry of External Affairs, the period of headquarters training
has been increased from three to six months. Arrangements already
exist to instruct the recruits in the basic facts and trends of international affairs, under the auspices of the Indian School of International Studies.
The importance of refresher courses and mid-carder training to
enable officers to widen their horizons and think about policy problems in an atmosphere free from the pressure of day-to-day routine,

has been recognised. It is proposed to take advantage of useful
courses offered by institutions like! the Defence Services Staff College,
Wellington, the Administrative Staff College, Hyderabad, the National Defence College, New Delhi and other well-known foreign
institutions which offer scholarships. In this connection, the
Administration proposes to pay more attention to career planning,
so as to ensure that the best possible use is made of the talent and
aptitude of every officer. The Foreign Service should be able to
handle effectively the various kinds of specialist tasks requiring
expert knowledge. In the years since Independence, the Foreign
Service has acquired a great deal of experience in the execution of
foreign policy and in the conduct of diplomatic relations. With
better facilities for career planning, it should be able to fulfil the
expanding needs of India's foreign policy.
The total strength of the IFS cadre, both permanent and temporary is now 368. The number of officers recruited in 1965 was 21
(including 3 from Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes) as against
19 in 1964. The total strength of IFS(B) cadre, both permanent
and temporary is 2,457.
<pg106>
The cadre review of the senior posts in the IFS (Grades I to V)
has been completed. Grade III has been abolished.
The present arrangements for translation and interpretation in
this Ministry and Indian Missions/Posts abroad have been reviewed.
There is a scheme for replacing interpreters and translators locally
recruited in Indian Missions in West Asia by Indian personnel.
It has been decided to grant terminal benefits to local staff in
Indian Missions abroad. Local employees will be entitled to gratuity
at the rate of 1/3rd of a month's pay for every completed year of
service provided they have put in 10 years of continuous and satisfactory service.
The local staff in the High Commission of India, London is,
gradually being Indianised. 30 candidates have been selected for
the posts of Junior Assistants in the High Commission in London on
the results of the Assistants Grade Examination held by the U.P.S.C.
in December, 1964.
V. Welfare
The Foreign Office Club which has been in existence from 1947
continues to provide recreation facilities and periodical programmes
of entertainment to its members.
VI. Foreign Service Inspectorate
During 1965 there were two rounds of inspection of Indian Missions
by the Foreign Service Inspectors. The first was during the early

part of the year, with visits to London, Rio-de-Janeiro, Buenos Aires,
Santiago, New York and Oslo. The Inspectors made a series of
recommendations on various administrative matters, including allowances and staff position, and these have been or are being implemented
by Government. In the second round, the Inspectors visited the,
Missions at Damascus, Baghdad, Basrah and Kuwait. Their recommendations are under consideration of the Government.
VII. The External Affairs Hostel
The construction of the External Affairs Hostel has been completed. The Hostel, consisting in all of a hundred residential units
(suites, single rooms with and without kitchenettes), has been designed to provide transit accommodation for officers and staff under
the control of this Ministry.
<pg107>
VIII. Property abroad
Of the various proposals to purchase property abroad which were
initiated during 1964-65, only a few materialised because of limited
funds and foreign exchange difficulties.
In London, a new building consisting of 24 flats was purchased out
of a loan raised by the Mission. The building named Jawahar Bagh'
was occupied by Indian officers on 15 August, 1965. Suitable residences have been purchased for the High Commissioner in Wellington
and also for the Commissioners in Aden and in Fiji. In Dar-esSalaam and in Leopoldville buildings have been purchased for the
Embassy residence and the Chancery respectively. Some land adjoining the Indian Embassy in Washington was also acquired during
the year.
Proposals and plans for construction of the Chancery in Lagos and
the High Commissioner's residence in Trinidad, and building on
land that was acquired in Kabul and in Islamabad (Pakistan) are
being processed. Proposals for acquiring property in Lusaka,
Colombo, Rangoon, Bangkok and Rio are also being considered.
It is realised that purchase or construction of our own building
would definitely be more economical in the long run as compared to
renting accommodation. But progress in this direction has been
slow. However, proposals which can be financed by suitable loans
raised locally, and such cases are not many, are being considered
favourably by the Government.
IX Office accommodation at Headquarters
A great drawback in the day-to-day functioning of this Ministry
has been the lack of office accommodation. At present, the various
sections of the Ministry are housed in four different buildings. This
entails considerable delay in communicating papers and inconvenience

to officers and staff in maintaining inter-departmental contact. It
was expected that adequate accommodation would be provided for
this Ministry in the South Block by the end of this year, but unfortunately there has been some delay in carrying out the scheme.
X. Emergency
During the emergency, this Ministry as well as Missions abroad
had to cope with tremendous pressure of work. The Cipher Staff,
both at Headquarters and in Missions abroad, handled with devotion
the massive increase in the number of telegrams.
<pg108>
EXPENDITURE
(i) Revised Estimates
Under the Revised Estimates, the expenditure of this Ministry
in 1965-66 is expected to be Rs. 26.98 crores and falls under the two
main heads as shown below:
(In crores of rupees)
(1) External Affairs

12.10

(2) Other Revenue Expenditure of the
Ministry of External Affairs
14.88
-------------TOTAL
26.98
-------------The annual expenditure on 96 resident Missions and Posts abroad
amounts to Rs. 5.20 crores. This works out to an average of
Rs. 5.41 lakhs per Mission/Post per annum. Of this, an average of
Rs. 1.65 lakhs per Mission/Post is spent on the pay and allowances
of Officers, Rs. 1.77 lakhs on the pay and allowances of the staff,
about Rs. 1 lakh on office and residential accommodation and the
balance on contingent and other expenditure.
(ii) Review of Standing Charges
The sanctioned grant under 'Standing Charges' and the anticipated
requirements for the year 1965-66 are indicated below, along with
the corresponding figures of the Revised Estimates for 1964-65:
(Figures in lakhs of rupees)
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------Revised

Original

Revised

Estimates

Grant for

require

ments
for 1964-65

1965-66

for 196

5-66
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------External Affair
6

467 2

475.86

Other Revenue Expenditure of the Min of
External Affairs
3.02
2

3.02

495.8

3.5

-------------------------------------------TOTAL

470.54

478.88

499.3

8
-------------------------------------------A broad break-down of the figures is as
follows:
(i) Ministry of External Affairs
79.56

144.65

150.38

1

(ii) Missions and Posts abroad
94.63

300.82

303.13

2

(iii) Emigration and Passport Establishment 10.71
10.58
(iv) Special Diplomatic Expenditure
10.00
(v) Other Miscellaneous Expenditure
1.09

10.59

10.00

10.00

1.34

1.76

(vi) Other Revenue Expenditure-Loss by Exchange and Expenditure on Pilgrimage
beyond India
3.02
3.02
3.52
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg109>
The anticipated net excess of Rs. 20.50 lakhs in the Revised
Estimates for 1965-66 (as compared with the sanctioned grant) is

due to conversion of temporary posts into permanent ones and increased expenditure on air freight on diplomatic bags, telegrams and
publicity abroad.
The comparative figures of the Revised Estimates for 1964-65
and 1965-66 show that the current year's figures have exceeded last
year's by about Rs.28.84 lakhs. The excess is mainly due to increased
expenditure on external publicity.
NAGALAND
1965 was a year of peace in Nagaland. The Agreement on suspension of operations was already effective for nearly three months
on 1 January, 1965. The Peace Mission's proposals of 20 December,
1964 that "the Underground Nagas should, on their own volition,
decide to participate in the Indian Union and mutually settle the
terms and conditions for that purpose" was the subject of discussion
in the early part of this year. The Government of India accepted
this proposal and was willing to carry on further discussions with
it as the basis for negotiation.
In February a parliamentary delegation consisting of 14 members
of Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha visited Nagaland for an on the spot
study of the situation there.
The Government of India's delegation led by Shri Y. D. Gundevia,
and the representatives of the dissident Nagas met in Nagaland at
Chedema on 21 January and at Khensa on 24 February, 6 April and
again on 4 and 5 May in order to find out a solution on the basis of
the Peace Mission's proposal. But no acceptable solution could be,
reached in these talks.
The agreement on suspension of operations was extended from
time to time and the present extension is upto 15 April, 1966.
During this period the Government of India have observed the
terms of suspension of operations both in letter and in spirit.
Violations by the dissident Nagas of the terms of the agreement, such
as collection of money from villagers, kidnapping, movement of
groups of armed hostiles in uniforms in the villages as well as attacks
on the railway line and border villages and movement of parties to
East Pakistan have occurred. These violations have been brought to
the notice of the Peace Mission who have been requested to have
such violations stopped. The Civil Administration have also taken
<pg110>
necessary steps in accordance with law for protecting lives and
property and taking necessary steps whenever complaints of extortion
or forcible collection are received. Police action has been intensified
in order to maintain law and order and to deal with the delinquents.
The Nagaland Government has also pursued all round develop-

ment activities. An outlay of Rs. 531.43 lakhs has been approved for
expenditure on plan schemes during this year. During 1964-65
Rs. 267.46 lakhs was spent against the allocation of Rs. 404.32 lakhs;
during the current year anticipated expenditure will be about
Rs. 502.08 lakhs.
While planned schemes cover all aspects of development, special
stress is given on increased food production, extension of education,
development of power and road communication and expansion of
medical facilities. Anticipated expenditure on agricultural development will be Rs. 133.93 lakhs against the allocated sum of Rs. 142.16
lakhs. As against only one town, at the beginning of the Third Plan
having electric power with an installed capacity of 150 Kws, at present seven towns have been electrified and the installed capacity is
725 Kws. The Nagaland State Transport started operations from 26
January, 1965 and the State now has 1415 miles of motorable road.
At the end of 1965 there were 800 Lower Primary Schools, 126 Middle
English and 30 High English Schools. The number of hospitals at
the end of 1965 was 30 with 712 beds and number of dispensaries was
31. Remarkable progress was made for eradication of diseases and
the incidence of malaria has gone down from 30 per cent to 3 per cent.
INDIA
USA PAKISTAN CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC NEW ZEALAND UNITED KINGDOM ARGENTINA
CHILE NORWAY IRAQ KUWAIT SYRIA FIJI AFGHANISTAN ZAMBIA SRI LANKA
Aug 01, 1965

Appendix I TASHKENT DECLARATION
APPENDIX I
TASHKENT DECLARATION
The Prime Minister of India and the President of Pakistan, having met at
Tashkent and having discussed the existing relations between India and
Pakistan, hereby declare their firm resolve to restore normal and peaceful
relations between their countries and to promote understanding and friendly
relations between their peoples. They consider the attainment of there
objectives of vital importance for the welfare of the 600 million people of
India and Pakistan.
I
The Prime Minister of India and the President of Pakistan agree that both
sides will exert all efforts to create good neighbourly relations between
India

and Pakistan in accordance with the United Nations Charter. They reaffirm
their obligation under the Charter not to have recourse to force and to
settle their disputes through peaceful means. They considered that the interests of peace in their region and particularly in the Indo-Pakistan SubContinent and, indeed, the interests of the peoples of India and Pakistan
were not served by the continuance of tension between the two countries. It
was against this background that Jammu and Kashmir was discussed, and
each of the sides set forth its respective position.
II
The Prime Minister of India and the President of Pakistan have agreed
that all armed personnel of the two countries shall be withdrawn not later
than Feb 25, 1966 to the positions they held prior to 5 August, 1965,
and both sides shall observe the cease-fire terms on the cease-fire line.
III
The Prime Minister of India and the President of Pakistan have agreed
that relations between India and Pakistan shall be based on the principle of
non-interference in the internal affairs of each other.
IV
The Prime Minister of India and the President of Pakistan have agreed
that both sides will discourage any propaganda directed against the other
country, and will encourage propaganda which promotes the development
of friendly relations between the two countries.
V
The Prime Minister of India and the President of Pakistan have agreed
that the High Commissioner of India to Pakistan and the High Commissioner
of Pakistan to India will return to their posts and that the normal
functioning
of diplomatic missions of both countries will be restored. Both Governments
shall observe the Vienna Convention of 1961 on Diplomatic Intercourse.
<pg111>
Ill E.A.-8.
<pg112>
VI
The Prime Minister of India and the President of Pakistan have agreed to
consider measures towards the restoration of economic and trade relations,
communications, as well as cultural exchanges between India and Pakistan,
and to take measures to implement the existing agreements between India
and Pakistan.
VII
The Prime Minister of India and the President of Pakistan have agreed
that they will give instructions to their respective authorities to carry
the
repatriation of the prisoners of war.

out

VIII
The Prime Minister of India and the President of Pakistan have agreed
that the two sides will continue the discussion of questions relating to the
problems of refugees and evictions/illegal immigrations. They also agreed
that both sides will create conditions which will prevent the exodus of
people.
They further agreed to discuss the return of the property and assets taken
over by either side in connection with the conflict.
IX
The Prime Minister of India and the President of Pakistan have agreed
that the sides will continue meetings both at the highest and at other levels
on matters of direct concern to both countries. Both sides have recognized
the need to set up joint Indian-Pakistani bodies which will report to their
Governments in order to decide what further steps should be taken.
*

*

*

*

*

The Prime Minister of India and the President of Pakistan record their
feelings of deep appreciation and gratitude to the leaders of the Soviet
Union,
the Soviet Government and personally to the Chairman of the Council of
Ministers of the U.S.S.R. for their constructive, friendly and noble part in
bringing about the present meeting which has resulted in mutually satisfactory results. They also express to the Government and friendly people of
Uzbekistan their sincere thankfulness for their overwhelming reception and
generous hospitality.
They invite the Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the U.S.S.R. to
witness this Declaration.
Prime Minister of India
Pakista
n
Lal Bahadur Shastri

President of
Mohammed Ayub Khan

Tashkent, 10 January 1966.
UZBEKISTAN
INDIA PAKISTAN

USA

AUSTRIA

CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC

Feb 25, 1966

Appendix II INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCES, CONGRESSES AND SYMPOSIA

APPENDIX II

INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCES, CONGRESSES AND SYMPOSIA ETC.
INDIA PARTICIPATED
Sl. No.
in

1.

IN WHICH

Name of the Conference

International Seminar on the Promotion of Rural Co-operatives held
Berlin, February-March, 1965.

2.

Permanent International Commission of Road Congress held in Paris in
February, 1965.

3.

Meetings of the Inter-Union Co-ordination Committee in Geneva September-October, 1965.

4.

International Conference on Family Planning hold in Geneva in August,
1965.

5.

Third World Congress of Agricultural Librarians and Documentalists
held in Washington in October, 1965.

6.

First Course of Civil Defence Centre organised by the International
Civil Defence Organisation held in Geneva in October, 1965.

7.

International Red Cross Meeting held in Vienna in October, 1965.

8.

International Standard Organisation Meeting on Milk and
ducts held in Budapest in April, 1965.

9.

The Third General Assembly of International Quiet Sun Year held in
Madrid in March, 1965.

Milk Pro-

10.

The Thirty-fourth General Assembly of the Interpol held in Rio-deJaneiro in June, 1965.

11.

U.N. Advisory Committee on Application of Science and Technology
in London in July, 1965.

12.

The Thirty-third General

Conference of the International Office of

the Epizootics held in Paris in May, 1965.
13.

Meetings of the Executive and National Committee of International
Association of Plastic Art held in Paris in June, 1965.

14.

Meeting of the International Council of Monuments and Sites held in
Warsaw in June, 1965.

15. International Conference for the Eighth Revision of the
International
Classification of Diseases held in Geneva in August, 1965.
16.

Meeting of the International Council on Archives at Lahn (Germany)
in April, 1965.

17.

The fifth International Congress of Traffic Police held in Paris in
May-June, 1965.

18.

International Congress of Historians held in Vienna in August, 1995.
<pg113>
<pg114>

19.

Triennial Conference of the Associated Country Women held in,
Dublin in September, 1965.

20.

Meeting of the International Council of Nurses in Frankfurt in July,
1965.

21.

Meeting of the International Lead and Zinc Study Group held at,
Oslo, Norway in May, 1965.

22.

First Session of the Co-ordinating Council of the International
Hydrological Decade held in Paris in May-June, 1965.

23.

International Homoeopathic Congress held in London in July, 1965.

24.
Orga-

Executive Meeting of the International Union of Official Travel
nisation (IUOTO) in June, 1965 at Varna (Bulgaria).

25.

International Seminar on Planning in the field of Forestry held in
Berlin in October, 1965.

26.

VIIth Triennial General Conference of the International Council of'
Museums and Associated Meetings in the U.S.A. in September and:
October, 1965.

27.

Commonwealth Agricultural Bureau Review Conference held in.
London in July, 1965.

28.

The Twenty-third Conference of the International Union of Applied
Chemistry held in Paris in July, 1965.

29.

International Symposium on Design of Hydrometeorological Networks,
in Quebec City, Canada in June, 1965.

30.

International Conference on High Pressures held at Creusot (France)
in August, 1965.

31.
32.
33.

Eighth World Congress of the International Confederation of Free
Trade Unions held in Amsterdam in July, 1965.
Lead and Zinc Study Group Meeting held in Geneva in June, 1965.
Ninth Conference of the International Association for Research in
Income and Wealth held in Norway in September, 1965.

h
eld

34.

International Tuberculosis Conference held in Germany in October,
1965.

35.

Second International Conference on Protozoology held in London in,
August, 1965.

36.

The Thirty-fifth Session of the International Statistical Institute
in Belgrade in September, 1965.

37.

The Fifth Meeting of the International Gravity Commission held in
Paris in September, 1965.

38.

The Fifty-fourth Inter-Parliamentary Conference held in Ottawa in
September, 1965.

39.

The Sixth International Conference on Soil Mechanics and Foundation Engineering held in Montreal in September, 1965.

40.
Researc
h

XIth Congress of the International Associations for Hydraulic
held in Leningrad in September, 1965.
<pg115>

41.

The Nineteenth General Assembly of the World Medical Association
held in London in September, 1965.

42.

The Nineteenth Session of the International Tin Conference held in
Vienna in September, 1965.

43.

The Nineteenth General Assembly of the International Union of Official Travel Organisation held in Mexico City in October, 1965.

44.
August
,

International Meeting of Directors and Senior Staff of the Selected
Institute of Criminology organised by U.N. held in Denmark in
1965.

45.

Meeting of the U.N. Advisory Committee on Application of Science
and Technology held in Geneva in November, 1965.

46.

The Fourteenth Annual Conference of the Pacific Area Travel Association (PATA) held in Seoul in April, 1965.

47.

The fourth Session of the Executive Committee of the Afro-Asian
Rural Reconstruction Organization held in Cairo in April, 1965.

48.
1965.
49.

U.N. Tin Conference in New York from Mar 22, 1965 to 14 April,

U.N. Sugar Conference in Geneva from 20 September to 15 October.
1965.

50.

The Seventeenth Session of the Executive Committee of the W.M.O.
in Geneva from 27 May, 1965.

51.

The Fourth Session of the Commission of Aerology in Brussels from
6 to 20 July, 1965.

52.

International Symposium on Design of Hydrometeorological Networks
in Quebec City (Canada) from 15-22 June, 1965.

53.

The Fourth Session of the Commission of Climatology in Stockholm
from 12-26 August, 1965.
The Twentieth Session of the Administrative Council of the Interna-

54.

tional Tele-communication Union in Geneva/Paris from 12 April to
18 May, 1965.
55.

Meeting of the Executive Council and Education Committee of the
Universal Postal Union in Berne from 28 April, to 22 May, 1965.

56.

Plenipotentiary Conference of the International Tele-communication
Union in Montreux (Switzerland) from 14 September, 1965.

in

57.

Meeting of the International Union of Official Travel Organisations
Paris on 8 and 9 September, 1965.

58.

The Second Session of the FAO Statistics Advisory Committee in
Rome from 1 to 12 March, 1965.

59.

Meeting of the FAO Working Party on the Agricultural Census Fund
In Rome from 22 February, 1965.

60.

The Sixty-Seventh International Fair of Agriculture and Technique
and 18th Show of Agricultural Machinery in Verona (Italy) from
14 to 22 March, 1965.

161.

The Second FAO/WHO International Conference on Veterinary Education in Copenhagen from 12 to 21 August, 1965.
<pg116>

62.

FAO Regional Conference on Organisation and Administration for
Agricultural Development for Asia and the Far East in Bangkok from
May to June, 1965.

63.

The Forty-fourth Session of the FAO Council in Rome from 21 June
to 2 July, 1965.

64

FAO Seminar on Meteorology and the Desert Locust, in Asmara
(Ethiopia) from 31 August to 13 September, 1965.

65.

The Sixth Session of FAO Group on Coconut and Coconut Products in.
Rome from 28 May to 5 June, 1965.

66.

The Thirty-eighth Session of FAO Committee on Commodity Problems in Rome from 7 to 18 June, 1965.

67.

The third Session of the FAO/WHO Codex Alimentaries Commission

in Rome from 19 to 29 October, 1965.
68.

Meeting of the FAO Advisory Panel on World Indicative Plan in
Rome from 11 to 18 October, 1965.

69

ECAFE Seminar on Sampling Methods in Tokyo from 30 August, to 11
September, 1965.

70.

The Eighth Session of the ECAFE Committee on Trade in Bangkok
from 25 January to 2 February, 1965.

71.

The Seventeenth Session of the ECAFE Committee on Industry and
Natural Resources in Bangkok from 4 to 15 February, 1965.

72.

Intra-Regional Trade Promotion Talks under the auspices of ECAFE
in Bangkok from 14 to 22 January, 1965.

73.

The Twentieth Annual Meeting of the Boards of Governors of IMF,
IBRD, IFC and IDA in Washington from 27 September to 1 October,
1965.

74.

The Twenty-first Session of the Human Rights Commission at Geneva
from 22 March to 15 April, 1965.

75.

U.N. Seminar on Multi-national Society, held in Belgrade from 8-22
June, 1965.

76.

Seminar on Human Rights-Participation of Women in Public life
held at Ulan Bator (Mongolia) from 3-17 August, 1965.

77.

Symposium on the Granites of West Africa, sponsored by UNESCO
and the Association of African Geological Survey, from 9-30 March,
1965 held in (i) Ivory Coast, (ii) Nigeria, (iii) Cameroons.

78.

Meeting of Experts on the Promotion of International Understanding
through Adult Education at Saint-Cere (Lot) France from 17-21 May,
1965.

79.

The meeting of the Seventieth Session of Executive Board of UNESCO,
Paris from 26 March to 14 May, 1965.

80.

World Conference of Universities and continuing Education held at,
Humleback, Copenhagen, Denmark from 20 to 27 June, 1965.

81.

Meeting of the Working Group in Engineering Seismology held at
Georgia, (U.S.S.R.) from 8 to 12 June, 1965.
<pg117>

82.

Symposium of NICD Research Project in Communication and Rural
Development in India held in Geneva, from 5 to 9 June, 1965.

83.

The Twenty-first Session of the ECAFE in Wellington from 16 to 29
March, 1965.

84.

Governing Body of the I.L.O. One Hundred Sixty-first Session in
Geneva February-March, 1965.

85.
86.
Estab
87.

Governing Body of the I.L.O. One Hundred Sixty-second Session in
Geneva May-June, 1965.
Tripartite Technical Meeting on Hotels, Restaurants and Similar
lishments in Geneva in October, 1965.
The Forty-ninth Session of the International Labour Conference held
in Geneva in June, 1965.

88.

The Second Asian Maritime Conference of the I.L.O. held in Tokyo in
April, 1965.

89.

The Thirty-eighth Session of the ECOSOC in New York in March,
1965.

90.

The Thirty-ninth Session of the ECOSOC in Geneva in July, 1965.

91.

The Fifth Asian Malaria Conference in Colombo in May, 1965.

92.

The Eighteenth Session of the World Health Assembly in Geneva in
May, 1965.

93. International Conference for the Eighth Revision of the
Internation
al
Classification of Diseases in Geneva in July, 1965.
94.

The Fifteenth Session of the Assembly of the
June-July, 1965.

ICAO at Montreal,

95.

The Twentieth Session of the United Nations

General Assembly held

96.

in New York.
The Seventh Session of the Asian African Legal Consultative Committee held at Baghdad from 22 March to 3 April, 1965.

97.

Colloquium of Legal experts to consider the possibility of developing international law relating to refugees at Rome from 21 April to
6 May, 1965.

98.

Meeting of the International Law Association-Committee on State
Succession held in London from 2 to 9 July, 1965.

99.

Meeting of the Committee of International Law Association on the
uses of waters of International Rivers' held in Cambridge, Massachusetts (U.S.A.), from 9 to 12 September, 1965.

INDIA
GERMANY FRANCE SWITZERLAND USA AUSTRIA HUNGARY SPAIN UNITED KINGDOM
POLAND IRELAND NORWAY BULGARIA ITALY CANADA THE NETHERLANDS YUGOSLAVIA
MEXICO DENMARK KOREA EGYPT BELGIUM PERU SWEDEN ERITREA ETHIOPIA JAPAN
MONGOLIA CAMEROON NIGER NIGERIA GEORGIA NEW ZEALAND SRI LANKA IRAQ

Mar 22, 1965

Appendix III INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATIONS OF WHICH INDIA IS A MEMBER

Jan 01, 1965
APPENDIX III
INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATIONS OF WHICH INDIA IS A MEMBER*
United Nations
1. General Assembly.
2. Committees and Commissions of the General Assembly.
(a)

Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space.

(b)

Committee on Agreements for a Conference for the purpose of
Reviewing the Charter.

(c)

Special Committee of 24 on the situation with regard to the implementation of the Declaration on the granting of independence to
Colonial Countries and peoples.

(d)

Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation.

(e)

Peace Observation Commission.

(f)

Disarmament Commission.

(g)

International Law Commission.

(h)

Committee on Contributions.

(i)

Administrative Tribunal.

(j)

18-Nation Disarmament Committee.

(k)
(l)

Investment Committee.
Working Group of 21 to examine Administrative and Budgetary
Procedures of the United Nations.

(m)

Staff Pension Committee.

(n)

U.N. Committee for International Cooperation Year.

(o)

U.N. Advisory Committee on Congo.

(p)

Scientific Advisory Committee.

(q)

Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budget Questions.

3.

Economic and Social Council.

4.

Functional Commissions and Committees of the ECOSOC.
(i) Human Rights Commission.
(ii) Narcotic Drugs Commission.
(iii) Statistical Commission.
(iv) Population Commission.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------*Membership of International Organisations through non-official organisations is excluded.
<pg118>
<pg119>
(v) Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection
of Minorities.
(vi) Regional Commission of the Economic and Social Council:
Economic Commission for Asia and the Far East (ECAFE).
5.

Other Subsidiary Bodies of the Economic and Social Council.
(i)

Executive Board of United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF).

(ii) UN/FAO Inter-Governmental Committee on the World Food
Programme.
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
(vi)
6.

Permanent Central Opium Board.
Advisory Committee on the Application of Science and Technology
and Developments.

Committee on the International Year for Human Rights.
Drug Supervisory Body.

U.N. Conference on Trade and Development.
The Trade and Development Board.

7.

Specialised Agencies.
(a)

Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO).

(b)

General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT).

(c)

International

(d)

International Monetary Fund (IMF).

(e)

International

Finance Corporation (IFC).

(f)

International

Development Association (IDA).

Bank of Re-construction and Development (IBRD).

(g)

International

Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO).

(h)

International Tele-communication Union (ITU).

(i)

World Meteorological Organisation (WMO).

(j)

Universal Postal Union (UPU).

(k)

International Labour Organisation (ILO).

(l)

United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation
(UNESCO).

(m) World Health Organisation (WHO).
(n) Inter-Governmental Maritime Consultative Organisation (IMCO).
8.

International Atomic Energy Agency.
Other International Organisations

9.

Afro-Asian Rural Reconstruction Organisation, New Delhi.

10.

Advisory Committee of Marine Resources Research.

11.

Asian African Legal Consultative Committee, New Delhi.

12.

Asian Broadcasting Conference, Tokyo.

13.

American Society of Travel Agents, New York.
<pg120>

14.

Asian Productivity Organisation, Tokyo.

15.

Asian Statisticians Conference.

16.

Commonwealth Advisory Aeronautical Research Council, London.

17.

Commonwealth

Agricultural Bureau, London.

18.

Commonwealth

Broadcasting Conference.

19.

Commonwealth

Statisticians Conference.

20.

Commonwealth

Telecommunication Board, London.

21.

Commonwealth

Parliamentary Association, London.

22.

Commonwealth

Defence Science Organisation.

23.

Commonwealth
Stores.

Joint Services Committee on Clothing and General

24.

Commonwealth War Graves Commission.

25.

Federation International des Agences de Voyage, Paris.

26.

Indo-Pacific Fisheries Council, Bangkok.

27.

International Air Transport Association, Montreal.

28.

International Association for Bridges & Structural Engineering, Zurich.

29.

International Association of Hydraulic Research, Delft.

30.

International Association for the Exchange of Students for Technical
Experience, Stockholm.

31.

International Association of Cereal Chemistry, Vienna.

32.

International Association of Light House Authorities, Paris.

33.

International Association of Shell Structures, Madrid.

34.

International Association of Ports & Harbours, Tokyo.

35.

International Bureau of Education, Geneva.

36.

International Centre for the Study of Preservation and Restoration of
Cultural Property, Rome.

37.

International Coffee Council.

38.

International Commission on Irrigation & Drainage, New Delhi.

39.

International Commission on Large Dams, Paris.

40.

International Committee of Military Medicine & Pharmacy, Liege
(Belgium).

41.

International

Council of Archives, Paris.

42.

International
Paris.

Council of Building Research Studies and Documentation,

43.

International

Council for Bird Preservation, London.

44.

International

Criminal Police Commission, Paris.

45.

International

Customs Tariff Bureau, Brussels.

46.

International

Dairy Federation, Brussels.

47.

International

Federation of Film Archives, Paris.

48.

International

Institute for Refrigeration, Paris.
<pg121>

49

International

Institute for the Unification of Private Law, Rome.

50.

International

Lead & Zinc Study Group, New York.

51.

International

Liaison Centre of Cinema & Television Schools, Paris.

52.

International

Mathematical Union, Zurich.

53.

International

Office of Epizootics, Paris.

54.

International

Organisation for Pure and Applied Biophysics.

55.

International

Railway Congress Association, Brussels.

56.

International

Seed Testing Association, Washington.

57.

International
London.

Society of Soil Mechanics & Foundation Engineering,

58.

International

Society for Horticultural Science, The Hague.

59.

International

Sugar Council, London.

60.

International

Secretariat for Voluntary Service, Washington.

61.

International

Statistical Institute, The Hague.

62.

International

Social Security Association, Geneva.

63.

International

Tin Council, London.

64.

International

Union of Geodesy & Geophysics, Paris.

65.

International

Union of Official Travel Organisations, Geneva.

66.

International

Union of Astronomy, Greenwich.

67.

Union Against Venereal Diseases and Treponematoses,

68.

International
Paris.
International

69.

International

Union of Geological Sciences, Copenhagen.

70.

Inter-Parliamentary Union, Geneva.

71.

Pacific Area Travel Association, San Francisco.

72.

Permanent International Association of Navigation Congress, Brussels.

73.

Permanent International Association of Road Congress, Paris.

74.

Permanent Council of World Petroleum Congress, London.

75.

World Power Conference, Paris.

76.

World's Poultry Science Association, London.

Union of Railways, Paris.

INDIA
USA CONGO JAPAN UNITED KINGDOM FRANCE
SPAIN ITALY LATVIA BELGIUM DENMARK
Jan 01, 1965

SWITZERLAND

SWEDEN

AUSTRIA

Appendix IV COMMONWEALTH PRIME MINISTERS' MEETING, JUNE 1965

APPENDIX IV
COMMONWEALTH PRIME MINISTERS' MEETING, JUNE 1965: FINAL COMMUNIQUE
The following is the text of the Final Communique issued in London on
Jun 25, 1965:
At the Meeting of Commonwealth Prime Ministers, which ended today,
Pakistan, Ghana, Tanzania and Zambia were represented by their Presidents.
Britain, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, India, Malaysia, Nigeria, Sierra
Leone, Trinidad and Tobago, Uganda, Malawi, Malta and The Gambia were
represented by their Prime Ministers. Jamaica was represented by the
Acting Prime Minister; Ceylon by the Minister of Justice; Cyprus and Kenya
by the Ministers of External Affairs.
This was the first Meeting at which Malta, Zambia and The Gambia
were represented as Members of the Commonwealth; and the other Commonwealth Heads of Government were pleased to welcome them. The
Prime Minister of The Gambia informed the Meeting that it was his country's desire to continue her membership of the Commonwealth after introducing a republican form of Constitution and to accept The Queen as the
symbol of the free association of the independent member nations and, as
such, the Head of the Commonwealth. The Heads of Delegations of the other
Member countries of the Commonwealth assured the Prime Minister of
The Gambia that they would be happy to recognise The Gambia's continued
membership of the Commonwealth.
The Prime Ministers took note that their Meeting was being held during
the International Co-operation Year which itself stemmed from a proposal
by the former Prime Minister of India, the late Mr. Nehru. They recorded
their sympathy with its objectives and their desire to assist in its success.
The twentieth anniversary of the foundation of the United Nations fell
on the last day of the Meeting. The Prime Ministers sent a message of
greetings and of good wishes to the Organisation to mark this occasion.
The Prime Ministers recognised that the Commonwealth, as a multiracial association, is opposed to discrimination on grounds of race or colour;
and they took the opportunity of their Meeting to reaffirm the declaration
in their Communique of 1964 that, "for all Commonwealth Governments,
it should be an objective of policy to build in each country a structure of
society which offers equal opportunity and non-discrimination for all its
people, irrespective of race, colour or creed. The Commonwealth should
be able to exercise constructive leadership in the application of democratic
<pg122>
<pg123>
principles in a manner which will enable the people of each country of
different racial and cultural groups to exist and develop as free and equal,
citizens".
In the course of a comprehensive review of the major current interna-

tional issues, the Prime Ministers noted with concern that, despite the
efforts
of many countries to promote peace and stability throughout the world, dangerous conflict, or the threat of conflict, persists in several areas. They
ex
pressed their conviction that in these circumstances all possible steps should
be taken to reinforce the authority of the United Nations Organisation; and
they discussed in this context the question of China's representation ill the
Organisation. They also reaffirmed their belief in the importance of the
peace-keeping operations of the United Nations; and they renewed their support for the efforts now being made by a Committee of the United Nationl
to establish just and equitable principles for authorising, organising and
financing peace-keeping operations. They considered it essential that the
General Assembly, when it reconvened, should be able to function normally.,
They welcomed the voluntary and unconditional contributions which had
been made to the United Nations in order to help towards relieving it of
its financial difficulties; and they expressed the hope that, as a result of
these and other actions, the United Nations would be able to discharge its
functions. The Prime Ministers pledged their loyalty to the United Nations, the success of which they considered to be essential to the
maintenance.
of world peace.
The Prime Ministers expressed serious concern over the grave situation,
in Vietnam and the danger of its developing into a major international'
conflict. They reviewed the various efforts which had been made to achieve
a peaceful solution to the problem; and, bearing in mind that the Commonwealth, by virtue of its wide membership, represented a very broad'
spectrum of opinion in the world and that their Meeting was taking place,
at a time when the peril to world peace was rapidly increasing, they considered, on the first day of the Meeting, a proposal for a new attempt to
move forward to a peaceful solution. To this end a Mission was established
to make contact with the parties principally concerned with the problem of'
Vietnam.
The Mission is composed of the Prime Minister of Britain, the President
of Ghana and the Prime Ministers of Nigeria and of Trinidad and Tobago.,
The Prime Minister of Britain, as Chairman of the Meeting, was appointed'
Chairman of the Mission. Its object is to explore with the parties principally concerned how far there may be common ground about the circumstances in which a conference might be held leading to a just and lasting
peace in Vietnam and, having ascertained such common ground, to seek
agreement on a time, place and composition of a conference. The Mission
will report progress from time to time to the Prime Ministers by whom
they were appointed. The Meeting approved a statement of guidance to.
the Mission, a copy of which is attached to this Communique, together with
copies of two statements issued by the Mission.
<pg124>
MALAYSIA
The Prime Ministers reviewed other developments in South-East Asia.

They noted, with concern, that tension still persisted between Malaysia and
Indonesia, thus disturbing the peace, and security of the area, despite the
interval since they had last collectively considered the matter and had
stated in the Communique issued at the end of their Meeting in 1964, that
"they assured the Prime Minister of Malaysia of their sympathy and support in his efforts to preserve the sovereign independence and integrity of
his country and to promote a peaceful and honourable settlement of current
differences between Malaysia and neighbouring countries". They recognised and supported the right of the Government and people of Malaysia to
defend their sovereign independence and territorial integrity, and expressed
their sympathy to the Prime Minister of Malaysia in his country's efforts
to this end. They looked forward to the establishment of peaceful, friendly
and mutually advantageous relations between Malaysia and Indonesia on
a just and honourable basis.
CYPRUS
The Prime Ministers expressed concern about the situation regarding
Cyprus. They reaffirmed their full support for the U.N. Security Council
resolutions on the subject. The Prime Ministers asserted that the Cyprus
problem should be solved within the framework of the U.N. and its Charter
and in accordance with the principles of democracy and justice and in conformity with the wishes of the people of Cyprus.
They appealed to all countries concerned to act in accordance with the
Security Council Resolution of the 4th March 1964, and to refrain from
any action which might undermine the task of the United Nations PeaceKeeping Force to which a number of Commonwealth countries are contributing. They also expressed their appreciation of the work and persistent efforts of the United Nations Mediator.
AFRICA
The Meeting took note of the widely expressed regret at the failure of
the Portuguese Government to give due recognition to the legitimate political aspirations of the peoples of the Portuguese territories in Africa.

The

Meeting expressed support for the application of the principle of self-determination to the inhabitants of Angola, Mozambique
The Prime Ministers reaffirmed their condemnation
theid practised by the Government of the Republic
unanimously called upon South Africa to bring the

and Portuguese Guinea.
of the policy of aparof South Africa and
practice to an end.

CARIBBEAN
In discussion of Caribbean problems the Prime Ministers took note of
the situation in the Dominican Republic. They expressed the hope that
peace would be restored there and a final settlement reached within the
framework of the Charter of the United Nations on the basis of self-determination and in accordance with the wishes of the people of the Republic.
<pg125>
DISARMAMENT
The Prime Ministers reaffirmed the aim which they had expressed in
their Statement on Disarmanent on 17th March 1961, namely to achieve
total and worldwide disarmament, subject to effective inspection and control. They commended the thorough and useful work which had been done

in furtherance of that aim by the 18-Nation Disarmament Conference since
it first met in March 1962, both on general and complete disarmament and
on preliminary measures to build international confidence. They recognised that the non-aligned members of the Conference, by playing a constructive and intermediary role, had contributed to the progress already achieved
and had increased world understanding of the importance of disarmament.
The Prime Ministers believed that there was an urgent need for further
progress in the disarmament field both in the interest of world peace and
in order to enable the nations of the world to devote their resources to
more fruitful purposes. They considered that the problems involved in
the elaboration of an agreement for general and complete disarmament
should be re-examined, in the light of their Statement on Disarmament
of March 1961, by the 18-Nation Disarmament Committee at Geneva. They
considered that, in order to create the optimum conditions for the success
of their efforts to achieve general and complete disarmament, the 18-Nation
Disarmament Committee should resume its detailed negotiations at Geneva
with a view to reaching agreement on the next steps to disarmament which
could be submitted to an eventual World Disarmament Conference which
should be open to participation by all States.
They welcomed the various proposals which had been put forward for
measures to reduce tension and build up international confidence. They
hoped that early progress would be made towards an acceptable agreement
on some of these measures, including the limitation and reduction of stocks
of nuclear weapons and delivery vehicles and a phased reduction in conventional armaments, as steps towards a world agreement for general and
complete disarmament. They emphasised the urgency of arms control and
recognised that in appropriate areas agreement on nuclear-free zones could
assist such control. In this connection the hope was expressed that in the
preparation. of the appropriate Treaties the declarations by the Organisation of African Unity and certain Latin American States regarding the
establishment of nuclear-free zones in their own geographical areas would
be respected.
The Prime Ministers emphasised that ways and means should be found
for associating the People's Republic of China with future discussions on
disarmament. Indeed they felt that the importance of a solution of the disarmament problem had been underlined by the fact that, since their last
Meeting, the Government of the People's Republic of China had exploded
two nuclear devices and had clearly demonstrated their intention to develop nuclear weapons.
The Prime Ministers wished to record their firm conviction that the continuing spread of nuclear weapons had created a serious danger to mankind. They believed that the development of new national nuclear weapons
<pg126>
capabilities might jeopardise further efforts to bring about general and
complete disarmament. Moreover, the prospects for achieving a fair settlement of disputes would suffer as international tension increased and there
would be a growing risk that nuclear proliferation might cause a local,
conflict to escalate to a nuclear exchange into which the major nuclear
powers might be drawn.
Accordingly, the Prime Ministers, fully aware of the gravity of the situation and of their responsibility to each other and to other members of the.
international community, expressed their determination to give urgent and

wholehearted support to measures to prevent the spread of nuclear weapons.
To this end they reaffirmed their willingness to join with other countriesin signing as soon as possible any appropriate international agreement which
would halt the proliferation of nuclear weapons.
They expressed the hope that efforts to extend the Treaty Banning.
Nuclear Weapons Tests in the Atmosphere, in outer space and under water
should be extended to cover underground tests as well. They called on
all nations to abstain from actions which might make agreement on general
and complete disarmament or preliminary measures more difficult.
DEPENDENT TERRITORIES
Britain made the following statement to the Meeting about the progressof British Colonial dependencies towards independence. The independent
Members of the Commonwealth now amounted to no less than 21, including,
a population of more than 750 million: Britain had 31 remaining dependencies
with only 10 million inhabitants, of whom ever half were in Hong Kong and
the South Arabian Federation. Nineteen of these dependencies contained less.
than 100,000 people and six less than 10,000.

It was hoped that many of these

remaining dependencies would reach independence in the next three years,
including Basutoland, Bechuanaland, British Guiana, Swaziland and the
South Arabian Federation; and also some or all of the territories in the
East Caribbean, whether in a federation or separately.
The Prime Ministers of the other commonwealth countries noted with
approval the further progress of British territories to independent membership of the Commonwealth since their last Meeting. They welcomed the
assurance of the Prime Minister of Britain that it remained the objective
of his Government to lead to independence, on the basis of democratic
government and the principle of universal adult suffrage, such of the
remaining territories as desired it and could sustain it; and that the British
Government would continue to seek to devise the most appropriate alternative arrangements for such smaller territories as were unable, or unwilling,
to proceed to full independence.
In relation to Basutoland, Bechuanaland and Swaziland the view was
expressed that such economic assistance and guarantees of territorial
integrity as were necessary to maintain the territories as independent states
should be given.
As regards British Guiana, while differing views are held on the constitutional arrangements best suited for the country, the Prime Ministers welcomed
the British Government's intention to hold a conference later this year, one
of the tasks of which would be to devise a constitution, and to fix a date,
for
<pg127>
independence. The Prime Ministers noted the British Government's recognition of the need for adequate machinery to ensure human rights and due
judicial processes.

As regards the countries of the Eastern Caribbean the Meeting expressed
the hope that the assistance urgently required to strengthen their economies
and ensure their viability so as to enable them to sustain the obligations
of independence would not be delayed by the discussions on political
arrangements.
RHODESIA
The Commonwealth Secretary informed the Meeting of the attempts
which the British Government had made in recent months to resolve the problem of the further constitutional development of Rhodesia. He explained the
considerations by which they were and would continue to be guided in their
approach to the question of Rhodesian independence and emphasised that central to these was the necessity to provide guarantees that future constitutional development should conform to the principle of unimpeded progress to
majority rule, together with an immediate improvement in the political status
of the African population and the progressive elimination of racial discrimination. As they had repeatedly made clear, the British Government would
not only recommend to Parliament the grant of independence to Rhodesia
if they were satisfied that this was on a basis acceptable to the people of
the
country taken as a whole. He emphasised the dangers of the use of force
or unconstitutional methods by any party; and the reaffirmed in this
connection the policies of the British Government as indicated in their
statements of 27th October 1964 and 29th April 1965.
The Heads of Government of the Commonwealth took note of the Commonwealth Secretary's statement. They reaffirmed their previous statement
that they were irrevocably opposed to any unilateral declaration of
independence by the Government of Rhodesia, and further reaffirmed their
insistence on the principle of majority rule.
While the Prime Ministers reaffirmed that the authority and responsibility
for leading her remaining Colonies, including Rhodesia, to independence must
continue to rest with Britain, they also reaffirmed that the question of membership of the Commonwealth by an independent Rhodesia, or by any other
newly independent territory, would be a matter for collective Commonwealth
decision.
The British Prime Minister was urged by other Prime Ministers to convene
a constitutional conference at an early date, say within three months, which
all the political leaders in Rhodesia should be free to attend. They
reaffirme
d
that the object of such a conference should be to seek agreement on the
steps by which Rhodesia might proceed to. independence within the
Commonwealth at the earliest practicable date on a basis of majority rule. In
this connection they welcomed the statement of the British Government that
the principle of "one man one vote" was regarded as the very basis of democracy and this should be applied to Rhodesia.
An appeal was made for the immediate release of all the detained or restricted African Leaders as a first step to diminishing tensions and preparing
the way for a constitutional conference.

A further appeal was made that

the death sentences passed on persons now awaiting execution for offences
under the Law and Order (Maintenance) Act should be respited.
111 EA-9
<pg128>
It was further urged that, should the Rhodesian Government refuse to
attend such a conference and to release the detainees, the British Government should introduce legislation to suspend the 1961 Constitution and
appoint an interim Government, which should repeal oppressive and
discriminatory laws and prepare the way for free elections.
The British Government said that they were actively engaged in discussions with the Government of Rhodesia; and they undertook to take full
account, in relation to these discussions, of all the views which had been
expressed during the Meeting. In this process of seeking to reach agreement
on Rhodesia's advance to independence a constitutional conference would,
at the appropriate time, be a natural step. If the discussions did not develop satisfactorily in this direction in a reasonably speedy time, the
British
Government having regard to the principle enunciated by the Commonwealth Secretary of unimpeded progress towards majority rule would be
ready to consider promoting such a conference in order to ensure Rhodesia's
progress to independence on a basis acceptable to the people of Rhodesia
as a whole.
The Prime Ministers renewed their call to all leaders and their supporters in Rhodesia to abstain from violence and to co-operate in the work
of fostering tolerance and justice, as the basis of a society in which all the
inhabitants would be assured that their Interests would be protected.
ECONOMIC AFFAIRS
The Prime Ministers then turned to consider problems of aid and
development. They recognised that economic and social development constitute a long-term co-operative enterprise in which all countries can work
together. The importance of economic planning in relation to development
would call for an increased supply of experts; and concerted measures
would therefore be required in order to enlarge and mobilise resources of
this kind by means of adequate facilities for education and training.
The Prime Ministers appreciated the importance of programmes of
economic aid to the developing Commonwealth countries. They took note
of the contributions made to such programmes by Commonwealth countries
both collectively and individually; and they agreed that these programmes
should be maintained and expanded as far as possible. They endorsed the
concept of co-operative forward planning of development aid which would
apply not only to matching the assistance provided by the developed countries with the needs of the developing countries but also to the supply of
personnel for schemes of technical assistance, to which they agreed that
high priority should be given. They welcomed the establishment of the
British Ministry of Overseas Development together with the decision of the
British Government to provide loans free of interest in appropriate cases;
they also expressed their appreciation of the similar loans already provided by the Government of Canada and of the fact that the Government of
Australia makes its aid available wholly on the basis of grants. It was
suggested that, in those cases where financial assistance would remain

unused, or give rise to serious internal problems, because of the inability of
<pg129>
some recipient countries to finance local costs, donor countries should consider making financial contributions to cover a proportion of such costs.
The Prime Ministers recognised the importance of the flow of direct investment to developing countries and expressed the hope that, insofar as
economic circumstances permit, the minimum restriction would be placed
in its way.
The Prime Ministers recorded their satisfaction at the constructive outcome of the Third Commonwealth Education Conference in Ottawa last
August; they looked forward to an equally successful result for the Cornmonwealth Medical Conference which is to be held in Edinburgh in
October, 1965.
The Prime Ministers agreed that effective development is promoted not
only by aid but even more by trade. Moreover, they were convinced that
an expanding exchange of goods and services, by emphasising the interdependence of the countries of the world, was one of the most effective ways
of promoting the growth of international understanding and the elimination
of the causes of friction.
In further discussion of economic development in the Commonwealth,
emphasis was laid on the importance to the economies both of Britain and
of certain other Commonwealth countries of emigration to Britain from
those countries. The Prime Ministers recognised that the extent of immigration into Britain was entirely a matter for the British Government
to determine. The hope was expressed that in operating such immigration
controls as they might think necessary, the British Government would
continue to give preferential treatment to Commonwealth citizens; and they
welcomed the assurance of the British Prime Minister that there would
be no differentiation in any restrictions on account of colour or creed.
The Prime Ministers welcomed the work which had been done since
their last Meeting in carrying forward the initial impetus to the expansion
of trade which was provided by the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development; and they pledged themselves afresh to press for more
outlets for the trade of developing countries.
They stressed the importance to the development of the economies of
member countries of the Commonwealth of the prices obtained for their
primary commodities, particularly where the prices of primary produce fell
in relation to prices of manufactured goods. The low levels to which the
prices of cocoa and some other commodities have fallen are a matter of
serious concern to producers. The problem of commodity prices extended
beyond the Commonwealth and the Prime Ministers endorsed the need for
consideration of the strengthening
of existing international
commodity
agreements, where appropriate, and stressed the urgent needs of negotiating further agreements of this kind.
The Prime Ministers agreed on the desirability of exploring means by
which Commonwealth trade might be encouraged and expanded. One
possibility would be to enable Commonwealth Governments, in planning
<pg130>

their economic development, to take into account each other's plans. An
exchange of information of this kind might enable production to be more
effectively matched to requirements in the Commonwealth and thus increase
trade between Commonwealth countries.
The Prime Ministers accordingly agreed on the following measures
designed to further these objectives, while at the same time re-affirming
their support for the Kennedy Round of tariff negotiations now proceeding
at Geneva, which these measures will not affect. They agreed to arrange
discussions between officials of Commonwealth Governments in the first
instance, with the help of the Commonwealth Secretariat, in order to examine these issues further and to prepare for an early meeting of Commonwealth Trade Ministers. These official discussions could also pay special
attention to problems of individual commodities of particular interest to
Commonwealth countries, in order to see how far policies could be coordinated within the Commonwealth with a view to appropriate further
action, whether on a Commonwealth or international scale.
They also agreed that subsequently the appropriate Ministers or officials
in Commonwealth countries should meet to consider the extent to which
each country's production and plans, as foreseen, could meet requirements
in other Member countries.
Ministers decided to consider through the medium of the Commonwealth Air Transport Council means of promoting a closer understanding
of the basic civil air transport requirement of Member countries.
In addition the Commonwealth Secretariat will examine the possibility
of arranging for the results of research to be shared more widely among
Commonwealth countries.
COMMONWEALTH FOUNDATION
At their previous Meeting in 1964 the Prime Ministers considered that
it might be desirable to establish a Commonwealth Foundation to administer a fund for increasing interchanges between Commonwealth organizations
in professional fields; officials were instructed to consider this proposal
in greater detail. At their present Meeting the Prime Ministers approved
a report by officials and an Agreed Memorandum on the establishment and
functions of the foundation ....
COMMONWEALTH SECRETARIAT
At their 1964 Meeting Prime Ministers saw a Commonwealth Secretariat
as being a visible symbol of the spirit of co-operation which animates the
Commonwealth and instructed officials to consider the best basis for establishing a Commonwealth Secretariat. At their present Meeting the Prime
Ministers had before them a report by officials which they approved ....
As already announced, they have unanimously approved the appointment
of Mr. Arnold Smith as the first Secretary-General.
UNITED KINGDOM
GHANA PAKISTAN TANZANIA ZAMBIA AUSTRALIA CANADA INDIA MALAYSIA NEW
ZEALAND NIGER NIGERIA USA THE GAMBIA MALAWI MALTA TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
UGANDA JAMAICA CYPRUS KENYA CHINA VIETNAM INDONESIA ANGOLA GUINEA
MOZAMBIQUE SOUTH AFRICA CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC DOMINICA SWITZERLAND
HONG KONG SWAZILAND RUSSIA

Jun 25, 1965

Appendix V COMMONWEALTH PRIME MINISTERS' MEETING, JUNE 1965

Jan 01, 1965
APPENDIX V
COMMONWEALTH PRIME MINISTERS' MEETING, JUNE 1965
(I) Embassies
1. Afghanistan

29. Jordan

2.

Algeria

3o.

Kuwait

3.

Argentina

31.

Laos

4.

Austria

32.

Lebanon

5.

Belgium

33.

Mexico

6.

Bolivia

34.

Mongolia

7.

Brazil

35.

Morocco

8.

Bulgaria

36.

Nepal

9.

Burma

37.

Netherlands

10.

Cambodia

38.

Norway

11.

Chile

39.

Peru

12.

China

40.

Philippines

13.

Colombia

41.

Poland

14.

Cuba

42.

Rumania

15.

Czechoslovakia

43.

Saudi Arabia

16.

Denmark

44.

Sudan

17.

Ethiopia

45.

Spain

18.

Finland

46.

Sweden

19.

France

47.

Switzerland

20.

Germany (Federal Republic)

48.

Syria

21.

Greece

49.

Thailand

22.

Hun

5o.

Turkey

23.

Indonesia

51.

U.S.S.R.

24.

Iran

52.

U. A. R.

25.

Iraq

53.

U.S.A.

26.

Ireland

54.

Venezuela

27.

Italy

55.

Yugoslavia

28.

Japan
<pg131>
<pg132>

(II) High Commissions
1.

Australia

2.

Britain

3.

Canada

4.

Ceylon

5.

Ghana

6.

Malaysia

7.

New Zealand

8.

Nigeria

9.

Pakistan

10.

Tanzania

11.

Uganda

(III) Legation
1. Albania (stationed at Baghdad)
2. Apostelic Internunciature (Holy Sea)
(IV)

Sub-offices of High Commission
1.

Office of the Assistant High Commission for Ceylon at Madras.

2.

Office

3.

Office of the Deputy High Commission for Pakistan at

Calcutta.

4.

Office of the

Deputy High Commission for Britain at

Bombay.

5.

Office of the

Deputy High Commission for Britain at

Calcutta.

of the

Assistant High Commission for Malaysia at Madras.

6.

Office of the

Deputy High Commission for Britain at Madras.

INDIA
AFGHANISTAN JORDAN ALGERIA KUWAIT ARGENTINA LAOS AUSTRIA LEBANON USA
BELGIUM MEXICO BOLIVIA MONGOLIA BRAZIL MOROCCO BULGARIA NEPAL BURMA
CAMBODIA NORWAY CHILE PERU CHINA PHILIPPINES COLOMBIA POLAND CUBA
SAUDI ARABIA SLOVAKIA DENMARK SUDAN ETHIOPIA SPAIN FINLAND SWEDEN
FRANCE SWITZERLAND GERMANY SYRIA GREECE THAILAND TURKEY INDONESIA IRAN
IRAQ IRELAND VENEZUELA ITALY YUGOSLAVIA JAPAN AUSTRALIA CANADA GHANA
MALAYSIA NEW ZEALAND NIGER NIGERIA PAKISTAN TANZANIA UGANDA ALBANIA
Jan 01, 1965

Appendix VI FOREIGN CONSULAR OFFICES IN INDIA

Jan 01, 1965
APPENDIX VI
FOREIGN CONSULAR OFFICES IN INDIA
--------------------------------------------------------------------------S. No.

Country

Location

Status

--------------------------------------------------------------------------1.

Afghanistan

Bombay

Consulate General

2. Austria
Genera
l

Bombay

Hon. Consulate

3.

Austria

Madras

Hon. Consulate

4.

Austria

Calcutta

Consulate

5.

Belgium

Bombay

Consulate General

6.

Belgium

Calcutta

Consulate General

7.

Belgium

Madras

Hon. Consulate

8.

Bolivia

Bombay

Hon. Consulate

9. Bolivia
Genera
l

Calcutta

Hon. Consulate

10.

Brazil

Calcutta

Hon. Consulate

11.

Burma

Calcutta

Consulate General

12.
Costa Rica
Genera
l

Bombay

Hon. Consulate

13.
Costa Rica
Genera
l.

Madras

Hon. Consulate

14.

Czechoslovakia

Bombay

Consulate General

15.

Czechoslovakia

Calcutta

Consulate General

16.
Gene
ral

Denmark

Bombay

Hon. Consulate

17.

Denmark

Calcutta

Hon. Consulate

18

Denmark

Cochin

Consulate

19.

Denmark

Madras

Hon. Consulate

Bombay

Hon. Consulate

20.
Dominican
Genera
l

Republic

21.

Dominican Republic

Calcutta

Hon. Consulate

22.

Equador

Calcutta

Hon. Consulate

23.

El Salvador

Calcutta

Hon. Consulate

24.
Ethiopia
Gener
al

Bombay

Hon.

25.
Ethiopia
Genera
l

Calcutta

Hon. Consulate

26.

Finland

Bombay

Hon.

27.

Finland

Calcutta

Hon.

28.

Finland

Madras

Hon.

Consulate

Consulate
Consulate
Consulate

---------------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg133>
<pg134>
------------------------------------------------------------------------------S. No.

Country

Location

Status

------------------------------------------------------------------------------29.
France
General

Bombay

Consulate

30.
France
General

Calcutta

Consulate

31.
Age
nt

France

Cochin

Hon. Consular

32.
France
General

Madras

Consulate

33.
France
General

Pondicherry

Consulate

34.
Germany
General

Bombay

Consulate

35.
Germany
General

Calcutta

Consulate

36
Germany
General

Madras

Consulate

37.
Greece
Ge
neral

Bombay

Hon. Consulate

38.
Greece
Ge
neral

Calcutta

Hon. Consulate

39.

Haiti

Bombay

Hon. Consulate

40.

Haiti

Calcutta

Hon. Consulate

41.

Indonesia

Bombay

Consulate

42.

Indonesia

Calcutta

Consulate

43.
Iran
Genera
l

Bombay

Consulate

44.
Iraq
Genera
l

Bombay

Consulate

45.

Israel

Bombay

Consulate

46.
Italy
Gener
al

Bombay

Consulate

47.
Age
nt

Cochin

Hon. Consular

48.
Japan
General

Calcutta

Consulate

49.
Japan
General

Bombay

Consulate

50.
Japan
Ge
neral

Madras

Hon. Consulate

51.

Jordan

Bombay

Hon. Consulate

52.
Kuwait
General

Bombay

Consulate

53.
Liberia
Ge
neral

Calcutta

Hon. Consulate

54.
Luxemburg
Consula
te

Bombay

Hon. Vice

55.
Nepal
General

Calcutta

Consulate

56.
Netherlands
General

Bombay

Consulate

57.
Netherlands
Ge
neral

Calcutta

Hon. Consulate

58.

Netherlands

Madras

Hon. Consulate

59.

Nicaragua

Bombay

Hon. Consulate

60.

Nicaragua

Calcutta

Hon. Consulate

61.

Norway

Bombay

Consulate

Italy

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

<pg135>
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------S.No.

Country

Location

Status

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------62.

Norway

Calcutta

Hon. Consulate General

63.

Norway

Cochin

Hon. Vice Consulate

64.

Norway

Madras

Hon. Consulate

65.

Panama

Bombay

Consulate General

66.

Panama

Calcutta

Consulate General

67.

Panama

Madras

Hon. Consulate

68.

Peru

Calcutta

Consulate General

69.

Philippines

Bombay

Hon. Consulate General

70.

Philippines

Calcutta

Hon. Consulate General

71.

Poland

Bombay

Consulate

72.

Poland

Calcutta

Consulate

73.

Spain

Bombay

Hon. Vice Consulate

74.

Spain

Calcutta

Hon. Vice Consulate

75.

Spain

Madras

Hon. Vice Consulate

76.

Sudan

Bombay

Consulate General

77

Sweden

Bombay

Hon. Consulate General

78.

Sweden

Calcutta

Hon. Consulate

79.

Sweden

Madras

Hon. Consulate

80.

Switzerland

Bombay

Consulate General

81.

Switzerland

Calcutta

Hon. Consulate

82.

Switzerland

Cochin

Hon. Consular Agent

83.

Syrian Arab

Bombay

Consulate General

Republic

84.

Thailand

Bombay

Hon. Consulate General

85.

Thailand

Calcutta

Consulate General

86.

Turkey

Bombay

Hon. Consulate General

87.

Turkey

Calcutta

Hon. Consulate General

88.

Turkey

Madras

Hon. Consulate General

89.

U.S.S.R.

Bombay

Consulate General

90.

U.S.S.R.

Calcutta

Consulate General

91.

U.S.S.R.

Madras

Consulate General

92.

United Arab Republic

Bombay

Consulate General

93.

U.A.R.

Calcutta

Consulate General

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg136>
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------S. No. Country

Location

Status

---------------------------------------------------------------------------------94.
U.S.A.
Bombay
Consulate
Genera
l
95.
U.S.A.
General

Calcutta

Consulate

96.
U.S.A.
General

Madras

Consulate

97.
Yugoslavia
General

Bombay

Consulate

98.
Yugoslavia
General

Calcutta

Consulate

99.

New Delhi

Consulate

Korea (D. P. R.)

General
100. Korea (Republic of)
General

New Delhi

Consulate

101. Monaco
General

New Delhi

Consulate

102. Viet Nam (D.P.R.)
General

New Delhi

Consulate

103. Viet Nam (Republic of)
General

New Delhi

Consulate

104.

Madras

Vice Consulate

Calcutta

Consulate

Burma

105. Italy
General

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------INDIA
USA AFGHANISTAN AUSTRIA BELGIUM BOLIVIA BRAZIL BURMA COSTA!!NORWAY
SLOVAKIA DENMARK DOMINICA EL SALVADOR ETHIOPIA FINLAND FRANCE GERMANY
GREECE HAITI INDONESIA IRAN IRAQ ISRAEL ITALY JAPAN JORDAN KUWAIT
LIBERIA NEPAL CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC NICARAGUA PANAMA PERU PHILIPPINES
POLAND SPAIN SUDAN SWEDEN SWITZERLAND SYRIA THAILAND TURKEY YUGOSLAVIA
KOREA MONACO
Jan 01, 1965

Appendix VII LIST OF

DISTINGUISHED VISITORS FROM ABROAD

APPENDIX VII
LIST OF

DISTINGUISHED VISITORS FROM ABROAD

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------S. No.

Full name and designation

Period of visit

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

---------------Heads of States
1.
H. E. General Ne Win, Chairman of the ReFebruary, 1965.
volutionary Council of the Union of Burma.
2.
H. E. Dr. Urho Kaleva Kekkonen, President
1
965.
of the Republic of Finland and Mrs. Urho
Kekkonen.
3.
Their Majesties
December,
Nepal.

the King and the Queen of

Feb 05, 1965 to 12

12 to 21 February,

25 November to
1965.

Heads of Governments
1.
H. E. Dr. S. Ramgoolam, Premier of MauriFe
bruary, 1965
tius and Mrs. Ramgoolam.

15 January to 2

2.
H. E. Mr. Georges Pompidou, Prime Minister
February,
1965.
of France and Mrs. Pompidou.

8 to 15

3.
H. E. Dr. Mohammad Yousuf, Prime Minister
February,
1965.
of Afghanistan.

18 to 28

4.
1965
.

2 to 7 March,

H. E. Mr. Jozef Lenart, Prime Minister of

Czechoslovakia.
5.
H. E. Mr. Lee Kuan Yew, Prime Minister of
1965.

9 to 11 May,

Singapore.
6.
1965
.

H. H. Prince Souvanna Phouma, Prime Minis-

26 to 28 July,

ter of Laos.

7.
H. E. Dr. A. Milton Obote, Prime Minister of
1965.

1 to 7 August,

Uganda.
Other Dignitaries
1.
Feb

Mr. John D.A.T. Tilney, M.P. of U.K.

8 January to 2

20

ruary,
1965.
2.
19
65.

Rt. Hon'ble Mrs. Barbara Castle, Minister of

11 to 19 January,

Overseas Development of U. K.

3.
H. E. Mr. Kirti Nidhi Bista, Foreign MinisFebr
uary, 1965
ter of Nepal.

25 January to 7

4.
H. E. Mr. Pheng Phongsavan, Foreign Minis1
965.
ter of Laos.

23 to 27 February,

5.
H. E. Dr. Abdel Khalek Hassouna, SecretaryMar
ch, 1965.
General of the Arab League.

23 February to 7

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg137>
<pg138>
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------vi
sit

S. No.

Full Name and Designation

Period of

---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------6.
Governor Averrell Harriman of U.S.A.
3 to 7
March,
1965.
7.
March
, 1965.

H. R. H. The Duke of Edinburgh

9 to 12

8.
Marc
h, 1965.

H. E. Dr. Kurt Georg Kiesinger, Chief

14 to 24

Minister of Baden, Wuerttemberg.

9.
Hon'ble Tun Abdul Razak, Deputy Prime
Mar
ch, 1965.
Minister of Malayasia.

18 to 20

10.
H. E. Mr. Tan Siew Sin, Finance Minister of
1 April, 1965.
the Federation of Malaysia.

30 March to

11.
Apri
l, 1965.

H. E. Dr. J. S. Luyimbazi Zake, Minister of

2 to 16

12.
Apri
l, 1965.

German Parliamentary Delegation

3 to 25

13.
April
, 1965.

Mrs. Trinidad, Former Philippines Ambassa-

4 to 8

14.
Apri
l, 1965.

Mr. Thomas Uren, M.P. Australian Federa-

15.
Apr
il, 1965.

H. E. Mr. Zakon Mohyiedin, Vice-President

16.
Apr
il, 1965

H. E. Abdelmagid Benegelloun, Director of

17.
Apr
il, 1965.

H. E. Bossier Palune, President, Economic

Education, Uganda.

dor.
8 to 10

tion of Parliament.
15 to 16

with Alen Shedi of the U.A.R.
22 to 24

Asia Division, Foreign Office, Morocco.
26 to 3o

and Social Council, Senegal.

18.
Uganda Goodwill Delegation
May, 1965.

28 April to

19.
Mr. Henry Cabot Lodge, Special Envoy of the]
1 May, 1965.
President of the U.S.A..

3o April to

20.
H. E. Mr. Mongi Slim, Minister without
1
May, 1965.
Portfolio of Tunisia.
1
965.

21.

22.
1965.

Admiral of the Fleet the Earl Mountbatten of

3o April to

3 to 7 May,

Burma from U. K.
H. E. Mr. Tran Van Do, Deputy Prime
Minister and Foreign Minister of Republic of
Vietnam.

6 to 10 May,

23.
1965.

Mr. Duncan Sandys, Former Secretary for

24.
June
, 1965.

H. E. Mr. Nicolai Firyubin, Deputy Foreign

25.
Augus
t, 1965.

H. E. Mr. Andre Malraux, Minister of State

26.
Augus
t, 1965.

H. E. Mr. K. T. Mazurov, First Deputy

5 to 8 June,

Commonwealth Relations, U. K.
18 to 20

Minister of U.S.S.R.
8 to 12

in charge of Cultural Affairs, Republic of
France.
21 to 24

Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the
U.S.S.R.
<pg139>

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------S.NO.
visit

Full name and Designation

Period of

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------1
965.

1
965.

27.

H. E. Mr. Allen Fairhall, Minister for Sup-

5 to 8 September,

ply, Government of Australia.
28.

Rt. Hon'ble Shojiro, Kawashima, Vice-Presi-

5 to 8 September,

dent of the Liberal Democratic Party and
Special Envoy of H. E. the Prime Minister
of Japan.

29.
H. E. Mr. U. Thant, Secretary-General of
September,
1965.
the U.N.O.

11 to 16

30.
1965.

H. E. Dr. Houchang Nahavandi Minister of

14 to 24 November,

31.
November,
1965.

H.E. Dr. Toh Chin Chye, Deputy Prime

Housing and Development of Iran.

Minister of Singapore.

9 to 13

1
965.

32.

H. E. Misa Pavicevic, Deputy Secretary Of

9 to 13 December,

State for Foreign Affairs of Yugoslavia.

33.
t
o 5 Janu-

Lord Fenner Brockway of U. K.

18 December, 1965

34.
1965.

H. E. Mr. Jeane Chauvel, Special Ambassa-

35.
t
o 4 Janu-

Rt. Hon'ble Edward Heath, Leader of the

ary, 1966.
19 to 23 December,

dor of France.
31 December, 1965

Opposition, U. K.

ary, 1966.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------BURMA
FINLAND NEPAL USA FRANCE AFGHANISTAN NORWAY SLOVAKIA REPUBLIC OF
SINGAPORE LAOS UGANDA UNITED KINGDOM MALAYSIA PHILIPPINES AUSTRALIA
MOROCCO SENEGAL TUNISIA VIETNAM JAPAN IRAN YUGOSLAVIA
Feb 05, 1965

Appendix VIII VISITS OF INDIAN DIGNITARIES TO FOREIGN COUNTRIES

Jan 01, 1965
APPENDIX VIII
VISITS OF INDIAN DIGNITARIES TO FOREIGN COUNTRIES AND OTHER DEPUTATIONS/
DELEGATIONS SPONSORED BY THE MINISTRY
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------S. No.
Purpose

Name

Places
visited

---------------------------------------------------------------------------------

(4)

(1)

(2)

(3)

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------1.
Shri Sharda Prasad,
Nehru
Memorial Exhibition,
Editor, Publications Division,
Ministry of Information and
Broadcasting
2.
"

"

"

3.

4.
the
third

Shrimati Indira Gandhi,

Chief New York

the

"

"

then Minister of Information
and Broadcasting.
Shri L. R. Nair, Principal In"
formation Officer,
Press
Information Bureau.
Shri K. T. Chandy,

Director,

National
Institute of Managemen

Co
nference of the
Calcutta.
Inst
itute of Manage-

Moscow

"

Lagos

To attend

(Nigeria)

Management
Nigerian
ment.

5.
Shri K. K. Puri, Assistant InMemorial
Exhibition.
formation Officer, Press Information Bureau.

Moscow

6.
Shri Dinesh Singh, the then
I
ndependence
Minister, Ministry of Ex-

Gambia

Nehru

To attend the
Celebrations.

ternal Affairs.
7.
visit
.

Shrimati Lakshmi N. Menon,

Nepal

Goodwill

the then Minister of State in
the Ministry of External
Affairs.

8.
Shri Swaran Singh, Foreign
f
uneral of Sir
Minister.
Churchi

London

To attend the
Winston

ll.
9.
Shri K. C. Pant, Member of
2
1st Session of
Parliament.
Commi
ssion on

Geneva

To attend the
the U. N.
Human Rights.

10. Shri C. K.
Daphtary, AttorSe
venth Session,
ney-General of India and
Afr
ican Legal
Shri B. N. Lokur, Secretary,
Com
mittee.
Ministry of Law and party.

Baghdad

11. Shri Dayanand, Industrial Adpap
er for the East
viser, Directorate of
Fruit
Industri
al CoordinaUtilisation, Government
of
Conference.

Addis Ababa

To attend the
of the Asian
Consultative

To prepare a
African
tion

U. P.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg140>
<pg141>
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------12. Shri C. S. Jha, Foreign SecreAlgiers
To
attend
the meeting of the
tary.
Standing
Committee for the
Afro-Asia
n Conference.

13. Shri Nur Uddin Ahmad,
attend
the Conference of the
Mayor of Delhi Corporation
Wo
rld League.
and party.

Mecca

14. Shri C. Subramaniam, Ministhe celebrations in
ter for Food and Agriculture.
connection
with the tenth

Djakarta

To
Muslim

To attend

anniversar
y of the Bandung
Conference
.
15. Dr. V. K. R. V. Rao, Member,
the conference on
Planning Commission
and
Management
in a Developing
party.

Tehran

16. Shri T. Swaminathan, Secreou
t economic survey.
tary, Department of Technical Development and party.

Tanzania and

17. Shri B. K. Kapur, Secretary,
the progress made
Ministry of External Affairs
allie
d aspects of Indianand Party.
Dev
elopment Projects, in

Nepal

18. Dr. Zakir Hussain, Vicev
isit.
President of India.

19. Shri Dinesh Singh, the then
Officia
l discussions.
Minister, Ministry of External Affairs.

disc

20. Shri C. S. Jha, Foreign Sec-

To attend

Economy'.
To carry

Zambia.
To review
and
aided
Nepal.
Kuwait, Saudi

Goodwill

Arabia, Jordan, Turkey
and Greece.
Tokyo, Manila,
Phnom Ponh,
Bangkok and
Vientiane.
Ceylon

Official

ussions.

visi
t.

visi
t.

retary.

21. Shri P. B. Gajendragadkar,

U.S.S.R.

Goodwill

Chief justice of India and
party.
22. Shrimati Lakshmi N. Menon,

Nigeria

the then Minister of State in
the Ministry of External
Affairs.

23. Shri Swaran Singh, Foreign
Minister.

24. Shrimati Indira Gandhi, the
the Nehru,
then Minister of Information
Exhibitio
n.
and Broadcasting.

Goodwill

Cameroon,
Ghana,
Czechoslovakia, Rumania,
Bulgaria,
Hungary and
Austria
Nairobi,
Entebbe,
Addis Ababa
and Dar-esSalaam.

Goodwill visit.

London

In connection with

25. Shri B. K. Kapur, Secretary,
"
Ministry of External Affairs.

Memorial

"

"

"

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg142>
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------26. Shri Sharda Prasad, Chief
wi
th the Nehru
Editor, Publications Division,
Exhibiti
on.
Ministry of Information and

London

In connection
Memorial

Broadcasting.
27. Shri J. Rameshwar Rao,
Se
cond AfroMember of Parliament and
Conference.

Algiers

To attend the
Asian

party.
28.
Shrimati Lakshmi N. Menon,
f
uneral of the
the then Minister of State in
o
f Rumania.
the Ministry of External
Affairs.

Rumania

29.
Shrimati Indira Gandhi, the
Na
tional Day
then Minister of Information
and Broadcasting.

Mongolia

30.

Dr. S. Radhakrishnan, President of India.

31.
Shri B. K. Kapur, Secretary
w
ith the BurMinistry of External Affairs
r
egarding
and party.
pe
rsons of

late President

To attend the
Celebrations.

Yugoslavia,
Czechoslovakia, Rumania
and Ethiopia.
Rangoon

State visit.

For discussions
mese Government
assets of the
Indian

an
d other

origin

questions.

32. Shri F. A. Ahmed, the then
Na
tional Mosque
Minster of Finance, GovernCelebrations.
ment of Assam and party.
33.
Shrimati Vijaya Lakshmi Panvisit.
dit, Member of Parliament.
34. Shri Dinesh Singh, the
visit.
Deputy Minister,

To attend the

then

Ministry

Kuala Lumpur

Opening of the
and Malaysia Day

Belgrade, The

Goodwill

Hague, Bonn,
and Paris.
Colombo,
Singapore &

Goodwill

of External Affairs.

Kuala Lumpur.

35. Shri J. Rameshwar Rao, Memo
f the Organisation
ber of Parliament and party.
a
nd Afro-

36.

Accra

and

Conference

Algiers.

of African Unity
Asian Conference.

Shri A. K. Sen, the then

Accra, Argen-

Law Minister.

tina, Chile,
Columbia,
Jamaica,
Mexico
City, Panama.,
Peru, Trinidad
and
Venezuela.

37.

Shri K. D. Malaviya, M.P.
and party.

Poland, Hungary, Rumania and
Bulgaria.

38.

Dewan Chaman Lal, M.P.

Kenya,

and party.

Uganda,
Tanzania,
Zambia and
Malavi.

Goodwill visit.

Goodwill visit.

Goodwill visit.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg143>
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

---------------------------------------------------------------------------------39. Dr. C. D. Pande, M.P.
visit
.
party.

and Algeria,
Tunisia,
Morocco
Senegal,
Mauritania
and Ivory
Coast.

Goodwill

40. Saeed Ali Zaheer and party.
visit
.

Kuwait,
Lebanon,
Cyprus, Jordan, Iraq,
Turkey and
Iran.

41. Shri H. C. Heda, M. P. and
visit
.
party.

Guinea, Mali,

42. Shri D. P. Karmarkar, M. P.
v
isit.
and party.

Thailand,

43. Sardar Surjit Singh Majithia,
visit
.
M.P. and party.
44. Dr. Harekrushna Mahtab, M.P.
visit
.
and party.

Goodwill

Laos, Cambodia, Malaysia, Singapore and
Ceylon.
Libya, Sudan,

Goodwill

Ethiopia, and
Somalia.
Ghana, Liberia,

Goodwill

Sierra Leone,
and Nigeria.
Australia and

46. Shrimati Vijaya Lakshmi Pantour
dit, M.P.
Universiti
es on

U.S.A.

tou

Goodwill

Cameroon,
Congo
(Brazeville)
and Congo
(Leopoldville).

45. Shri Morarji Desai, M.P.
visit
.

47. Shri B. K. Kapur, Secretary,
the
Prime
Ministry of External Affairs.
t
o Burma.

Goodwill

Goodwill

Japan.
Deputation-lecture
American
Indo-Pak conflict.
Burma and

(i) Accompanied

Malaysia.

Minister on visit
(ii).

Official

r to Malaysia.
48. Shri Humayun Kabir, the then
inau
guration
Minister of Petroleum and
n
ew PresiChemicals and party.
Vice-Presi
dent of
49. Shri Lal Bahadur Shastri,
Pre
sident of
Prime Minister and party.
Indo-Pa
k conflict.

Manila

ceremonies of the
dent and
Philippines.
Tashkent

Talks with the
Pakistan on

50. Shri A. K. Sen the then Law
Ministers
Minister and Shri A.
A.
Rhode
sia.
Husain, Secy E.A. (I)

Lagos

51.
c
ase.

Geneva.

Shri C. K. Daphtary, Attorney

To attend the

Commonwealth Prime
Conference on

Kutch Arbitration

General of India and party.

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------111 EA-10
INDIA
USA RUSSIA NIGER NIGERIA NEPAL UNITED KINGDOM SWITZERLAND IRAQ
ETHIOPIA ALGERIA INDONESIA IRAN CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC TANZANIA ZAMBIA
KUWAIT TURKEY GREECE JAPAN PHILIPPINES LAOS CAMEROON GHANA NORWAY
BULGARIA HUNGARY AUSTRIA KENYA MONGOLIA YUGOSLAVIA MALAYSIA GERMANY
FRANCE SRI LANKA REPUBLIC OF SINGAPORE CHILE JAMAICA MEXICO PANAMA PERU
VENEZUELA POLAND UGANDA TUNISIA MOROCCO SENEGAL MAURITANIA LEBANON
CYPRUS GUINEA MALI CONGO THAILAND LIBYA SUDAN SOMALIA LIBERIA SIERRA
LEONE AUSTRALIA BURMA UZBEKISTAN PAKISTAN
Jan 01, 1965

Appendix IX MISSIONS/POSTS ABROAD

Jan 01, 1965
APPENDIX IX
LIST OF INDIAN MISSIONS/POSTS ABROAD
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------Country

Location

Remarks

---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------EMBASSIES
1.

Afghanistan

Kabul

2.

Algeria

Algiers

3. Argentina
concurrentl
y ac-

Buenos Aires

credited to Paraguay

a
s Am-

bassador and Uruguay,

as

Minister.

4. Austria

Vienna

5. Belgium
concurrently
ac-

Brussels

as
Additionally
, the
Sp
ecial
econo
mic,
commercia
l
a
ccredited
Economic
Europe
an

Ambassador

Ambassador
credited to

Luxembourg

Ambassador.
Ambassador is India's
Representative for
financial and
affairs and he is also
to the European
Community and the

Coal and Steel

Community
.
6. Brazil

ac-

Rio-de-Janeiro

Ambassador concurrently
credited to Venezuela

an
d

Bolivia as Ambassador.

7.

Burma

Rangoon

8.

Cambodia

Phnom Penh

9. Chile
ac-

Santiago

Ambassador concurrently
credited

a
nd

to Colombia

Peru as Ambassador.

10.

China

Peking

11.

Congo

Leopoldville

12. Cuba
Secr
etary/

Havana

Incharge of a First
Charge d'Affaires.

Amba
ssador

resident in Mexico.

13.

Czechoslovakia

Prague

14.

Denmark

Copenhagen

15.

Ethiopia

Addis Ababa

16. Finland
Counsell
or/

Helsinki

In

Charge of a

Charge d'Affaires,

Ambas
sador

resident in Stockholm

(S
weden).

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg144>
<pg145>
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

-------------Country

Location

Remarks

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------17. France .
18.

Federal Republic of Germany

19. Hungary
20. Italy
concurr
ently ac-

Paris
Bonn
Budapest
Rome

credited to

Albania
as Minister

and as High

Commiss
ioner to

Malta and First

Se
cretary

concurrently

accr
edited to the

Republic of

M
arino as
Indonesia

Djakarta

22

Iran

Tehran

23.

Iraq

Baghdad

24.

Ireland

Dublin

25.

Japan

Tokyo
Amman

resident in

Beirut
.

d'Affaires.
Ambassador

Incharge of First
Charge

d'Affaires.
Ambassador

27.
Kuwait
Firs
t Secretary/

San

Consul General.

21.

26.
Jordan .
Secretary/

Ambassador

Kuwait

Incharge of a
Charge

Beirut
.
28.
Laos
29.
Lebanon
concurr
ently
ac-

resident in
Vientiane
Beirut

credited as

Ambass
ador to

Jordan and

and as

rus
Tananarive

Ambassador
credited as Consul

General

to

and

Reunion Island

Comores.

31. Mexico
concurr
ently ac-

Mexico City

32. Morocco
concurr
ently ac-

as Ambassador.
Rabat

Netherlands

bassador.
Kathmandu
The Hague

35. Norway

Oslo

36. Philippines

Manila

37. Poland .

Warsaw

38. Rumania
accred
ited to

Bucharest

Ambass
ador.

Ambassador
credited to

Tunisia
as Am33. Nepal

Ambassador
credited to Cuba

a
nd Panama

34.

Kuwait

High Commissioner

a
t Cyp30. Malagasy
concurr
ently ac-

Ambassador

Ambassador
Bulgaria as

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

------------<pg146>
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------Country

Location

Remarks

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------39. Saudi Arabia

Jedda

40. Senegal
co
ncurrently

Dakar
ac-

credited as

Ambassa
dor to

Ivory Coast and

Upp
er Volta.
41.

Somalia

Mogadiscio

42. Spain
Firs
t Secretary/

Madrid

43.

Khartoum

44. Sweden
concurre
ntly ac-

Stockholm

bassador.

45. Switzerland
concurre
ntly ac-

Berne

Thailand

48. Tunisia
First
Secretary/

Ambassador
credited to the

Vat
ican as

47.

Ambassador
credited to

Finland
as Am-

Syrian Arab

In charge of a
Charge d'Affaires.

Sudan

46.

Ambassdor

Ambassador.
Republic

Damascus
Bangkok
Tunis

Incharge of a

Charge d'Affaires.

Ambassador

49.

resident in Rabat.

Turkey

Ankara

50. United Arab Republic
concurr
ently ac-

Cairo

credited as

Ambass
ador to

Libya and Minister

to Yeman.
51. Union of Soviet Socialist
concurre
ntly acRepublics.
Mongol
ia
as

Moscow

52.

Washington

United States of America

53. Yugoslavia
concurren
tly ac-

Ambassador

Ambassador
credited to
Ambassador.

Belgrade

Ambassador
credited to Greece

as Ambassa-

dor.
EMBASSIES-(b) Non-resident

1.
Bolivia .
Rio-de-Janeir
o.

Ambassador resident in

2.

Bulgaria

Ambassador resident in

Bucharest.

3.

Cameroon

Ambassador

resident

in

4.
Columbia
(Chile).

Ambassador

resident

in Santiago

5.

Ambassador resident in Lagos.

Dahomey

resident

Lagos.

6.
Greece .
Belgrade.

Ambassador

7.

Guinea

Ambassador resident in Accra.

8.

Ivory Coast

Ambassador

9.

Liberia

Ambassador resident

resident

in

in Dakar.
in Accra.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg147>
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------Country

Location

Remarks

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------10.

Libya

Ambassador resident in Cairo.

11.

Luxembourg

Ambassador resident in Brussels.

12.

Mali

Ambassador

13.

Mauritania

Ambassador resident

14.

Mongolia

Ambassador resident in Moscow.

15.

Panama

Ambassador resident in Mexico City.

16.
Air
es.

Paraguay

Ambassador

17.

Togo

Ambassador resident in Lagos.

18.

Peru

Ambassador

19.

Upper Volta

Ambassador resident in Dakar.

20. Venezuela
Rio-de-Janeiro.

resident

in

Accra.

in Dakar.

resident

resident

in

in

Buenos

Santiago.

Ambassador resident in

HIGH COMMISSION-(a) Resident
1. Australia

Canberra.

2. Canada

Ottawa

3. Ceylon
accred
ited

Colombo

4. Ghana.
accred
ited

Accra

M
ali

High Commissioner
to Maldives.
High Commissioner
to Guinea, Liberia and

as Ambassador and as

Hig
h

Commissioner to Sierra

L
eone.
5. Kenya
accredi
ted

Nairobi

High Commissioner
to Ruanda and Burundi

as

Consul General.
6. Malawi
High

Blantyre

7. Malaysia

Kuala Lumpur

8. New Zealand

Wellington

9. Nigeria
concur
rent-

Lagos

Incharge of an Acting
Commissioner.

High Commissioner
ly accredited to Togo,

D
aho-

mey and Cameroon as Ambassador.

10. Pakistan

Karachi/
Islamabad

11. Singapore
H
igh Com-

Singapore

Incharge of an Acting
missioner.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg148>
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------Country

Location

Remarks

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------12. Trinidad and Tobago

Port of Spain

High Commissioner concurrently accredited as High
Commissioner to Jamaica

Commissioner to British
Guiana, Barbados, Antigua,
Grenada, Dominica, St.
Kitts, St. Lucia, St. Vincent
Montserrat and as Consul
General to Surinam.
13. Uganda

Kampala

14. United Kingdom

Incharge of an Acting High
Commissioner.
London

15.

United Republic of Tanzania . Dar-es-Salaam.

16.

Zambia

Lusaka
HIGH COMMISSIONS-(b) Non-resident

1.

Cyprus

High Commissioner resident at
Beirut.

2.

Sierra Leone

High Commissioner resident in
Accra.

3.

Jamaica

High Commissioner resident in
Port of Spain.

4.

Malta

5.

Gambia

High Commissioner resident in
Rome.
High Commissioner resident in
Dakar.
ASSISTANT HIGH COMMISSION

1. Ceylon

Kandy

Assistant High Commissioner.

COMMISSIONS-(a) Resident
1. Aden

Aden.

2. Fiji

Suva.

3. Hong Kong

Hong Kong.

4. Mauritius

Port Louis.

5. Kenya

Mombasa.

6. British Guiana

Georgetown

Incharge of Assistant Commissioner.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg149>
---------------------------------------------------------------------------Country

Location

Remark

---------------------------------------------------------------------------COMMISSIONS-(b) Non-resident
1.

Antigua

Commissioner resident in Port of Spain.

2.

Barbados

Do.

3.

Dominica

Do.

4.

Grenada

Do.

5.

Montserrat

Do.

6.

St. Kitts

Do.

7.

St. Lucia

Do.

8.

St. Vincent

Do.

LEGATIONS-Non-resident
*1. Albania
has
not

Minister resident in Rome (Italy)

pres
en-

*He

ted

his
Cred
ential
s.
2.

Uruguay

Minister resident in Buenos Aires.

3.

Vatican.

Minister resident in Berne.

4.

Yemen.

Minister resident in Cairo.
CONSULATE GENERAL-(a) Resident.

1.

Denmark

Copenhagen

Hon. Consul
General
(Functioning under the
Ambassador).

2. Germany (Federal Republic)
B
onn.

Berlin

3.

Frankfurt

Do.
Do.

Do.

4.

Do.

Hamburg

5.

Muscat

Muscat

Ambassador resident in

6. Switzerland
General
.

Geneva

Resident Consul

7. United States of America
i
n

New York

Ambassador

8. United States of America
Genera
l.

San Francisco

resident

Washington.
Resident

Consul

Ambassador resident in
Washington.

9.
10.

Vietnam (North)

Hanoi.

Vietnam (South)

Saigon.

11. Paraguay
General
.

Asuncion

Honorary Consul

---------------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg150>
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------Country

Location

Remarks

---------------------------------------------------------------------------------CONSULATE GENERAL-(b) Non-resident
1.

Burundi

Consul General resident

in Nairobi.

2. Comores
Tananarive
.

Consul General resident

in

3.

Consul General resident

in Rome.

Republic of San Marino

4. Re-Union Island
Tananarive.

Consul General resident in

5.

Consul General resident in Nairobi.

Ruanda.

6. Surinam
Spa

Consul General resident in Port of

in.
CONSULALTES-Resident
1. Belgium
resid
ent

Ghent

2. Burma
residen
t
in

Mandalay

3.

Canary Islands

Las Palm as

Hon. Consul.

4.

Freneh Somaliland

Djibouti

Hon. Cosul.

5. Germany (Federal
resi
dent in
Republic)

Munich

Hon. Consul. Ambassador

6.

Stuttgart

Germany

Hon. Consul. Ambassador
in Brussels.
Consul.

Ambassador

Rangoon.

(do.)

7. Greece
resid
ent in

Bonn.

Athens

Do.
Hon. Consul. Ambassador
Belgrade.

8. Iran
Tehra
n.

Khorramshahr

9. Italy
r
esident

Genoa,

Ambassador resident in

Hon. Consul. Ambassador
in Rome.

10.
Indonesia
D
jakarta.

Medan

Ambassador resident in

11.
Iraq
B
aghdad.

Basra

Ambassador resident in

12.
T
okyo.

Kobe

Ambassador resident in

Odessa

Ambassador resident in

Cleveland

Hon. Consul. Ambassador

Japan

13.
U.S.S.R.
M
oscow.
14.
U.S.A.
r
esident in

Washington.

15.

U.S.A.

Honolulu

16.
Panama
resident

Do.

Bandar Abbas

Hon. Consul. Ambassador
in Buenos Aires.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg151>
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------Country

Location

Remarks

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------VICE CONSULATES-Resident
1. Afghanistan

Jalalabad

2. Afghanistan

Kandahar

3. Iran
Tehran.

Zahidan

Ambassador resident in Kabul.
Do.
Ambassador resident in

DEPUTY HIGH COMMISSION-Resident
Pakistan

Dacca

High Commissioner resident in
Karachi.

TRADE COMMISSIONS AND OFFICES-Resident
1. Australia
Can-

Sydney

High Commissioner resident in
berra.

2. Canada
Ottawa.

Vancouver

High Commissioner resident in

3. Bahrein

Bahrein

In charge of a Trade Agent.

4.

Dubai

In charge of a Trade Agent.

Dubai

SPECIAL MISSIONS-(a) Resident
1. Political Office,
Sikkim.

Gangtok

Political Officer.

2. Permanent Mission of India
to the United

New York

Permanent Representative.

Nations.
SPECIAL MISSIONS-(b) Non-resident
Political Office,
Ga
ngtok.
Bhutan.

Political Officer resident in

NEW MISSIONS-Resident
1. Commission for
Commiss
ioner.
India.
2. Embassy of India
Secretary/C
d'A

George Town

In charge of Assistant

Amman (Jordan)

In charge of First
Beirut.

NEW MISSIONS-Non-resident
Mauritania

Ambassador resident at Dakar.
HONORARY CONSULATE

Panama
Bueono
s

Bandar Abbas

Hon. Consul. Ambassador at
Aires.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg152>
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------Station

From

To

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------UPGRADATION
(i)

Jalalabad

Vice-Consulate

(ii)

Kandahar

Do.

Consulate
Do.

RE-DESIGNATION
(i)

Mombasa

Vice-Consulate

(ii)

Singapore

Dy. High Commission

Commission for India.
High Commission of

India
.
CLOSURE
Commission for India, Salisbury was closed down.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------GMGIP Minto Road N.D.-111M of EA.-(6355)- 25-3-66-2,000

INDIA
AFGHANISTAN ALGERIA ARGENTINA PARAGUAY URUGUAY AUSTRIA USA BELGIUM
BRAZIL VENEZUELA BOLIVIA BURMA CAMBODIA CHILE COLOMBIA PERU CHINA
CONGO CUBA MEXICO CZECH REPUBLIC NORWAY SLOVAKIA DENMARK ETHIOPIA
FINLAND SWEDEN FRANCE GERMANY HUNGARY ITALY ALBANIA MALTA INDONESIA
IRAN IRAQ IRELAND JAPAN JORDAN LEBANON KUWAIT LAOS PANAMA MOROCCO
TUNISIA NEPAL PHILIPPINES POLAND ROMANIA BULGARIA SAUDI ARABIA SENEGAL
MALI SOMALIA SPAIN SUDAN SWITZERLAND SYRIA THAILAND TURKEY EGYPT
LIBYA RUSSIA YUGOSLAVIA GREECE CAMEROON GHANA GUINEA LIBERIA
MAURITANIA MONGOLIA AUSTRALIA CANADA SRI LANKA MALDIVES KENYA BURUNDI
MALAWI MALAYSIA NEW ZEALAND NIGER NIGERIA PAKISTAN REPUBLIC OF SINGAPORE
TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO JAMAICA DOMINICA GRENADA MONTSERRAT UGANDA UNITED
KINGDOM TANZANIA ZAMBIA CYPRUS SIERRA LEONE FIJI HONG KONG MAURITIUS
GUYANA YEMEN OMAN VIETNAM SAN MARINO DJIBOUTI BHUTAN CAYMAN ISLANDS
Jan 01, 1965


