   java script is required for this page java script is required for this
   page java script is required for this page java script is required for
   this page java script is required for this page java script is required
   for this page

   Sun, February 08, 2015 at 03:08:40 IST Indian Flag
   Ministry of                      Print Content Small Font Medium Font      
    External       MEA Library      Large Font                                
    Affairs,   Ministry of External   * Sitemap                               
   Government  Affairs, Government    * Contact Us                            
    of India         of India         * Feedback                              
                                      * _____________________           [  ]  

     * Home
     * Director's Office
          * Director Lib & Info
          * Library Officers & Staff
     * Journals
          * Current Journals
          * Online Journals
          * CD-ROMs Databases
     * Online Services
          * Business Monitor Online
          * EIU
          * JSTOR
          * Janes Online Services
          * Kessing World News Archive
          * Marketline MDIC
          * Online Service Links
     * Newspapers
          * E-Newspapers
          * Subscribed Print Newspapers
     * Library Bulletins
          * Foreign Affairs Documentation Bulletin
          * Recent Additions
          * Chronicle of Events
     * Alert
          * Book Alert
          * Article Alerts
     * Important Abbrevations

 Annual Reports Prior to 1999                                                               
   * Home >   Annual Reports Prior to 1999 >   Annual Report 1983-84        * Home          
 Annual Report 1983-84                                                      * Director's    
                                                                              Office        
 CONTENTS / Introduction                                                    * Journals      
 S.No. CHAPTERS                                         Page No.(iii-xii)   * Online        
 I. India's Neighbours                                  1-10                  Services      
 II. South-East Asia                                    11-14               * Newspapers    
 III. East Asia                                         15-17               * Alert         
 IV. West Asia and North Africa                         18-20               * Important     
 V. Africa (South of the Sahara)                        21-22                 Abbrevations  
 VI. Europe                                             23-29               * Back          
 VII The Americas                                       30-35                               
 VIII United Nations and International Conference       36-60                               
 IX Foreign Economic Relations                          61-65                               
 X. Policy Planning                                     66                                  
 XI. Extern Publicity                                   67-72                               
 XII. Cultural Relations                                73-74                               
 XIII. Protocol                                         75                                  
 XIV. Passport, Emigration and Consaular Services       76-78                               
 XV. Administration and Organistation                   79-81                               
 XVI. Use of Hindi in Official Work                     82-84                               
 APPENDICES                                             85-112                              
 -ii>                                                                                       
 INTRODUCTION                                                                               
                                                                                            
                                                                                            
 During a year of sustained and significant diplomatic activity, India                      
 enhanced its traditional status in the Movement of Non-Aligned countries                   
 and in the world community in general. Through a series of                                 
 well-conceived and well-timed initiatives flowing from her                                 
 responsibilities as the Chairperson of the Non- Aligned Movement. the                      
 Prime Minister of India carried forward the quest for peace and                            
 development. India also actively promoted international cooperation for                    
 peace and development through such gatherings as the Commonwealth Heads                    
 of Government Meeting and the South Asian Regional Cooperation Meeting                     
 at the Foreign Minister-level, both held in New Delhi during 1983. In a                    
 world filled with anxiety over deteriorating international relations,                      
 these initiatives earned all round appreciation. Nearer home, India made                   
 timely and unremitting efforts to help defuse the ethnic crisis in Sri                     
 Lanka and to smoothen the sometimes ruffled atmosphere in the                              
 sub-continent.                                                                             
                                                                                            
 The discussions and decisions of the 7th Non-Aligned Summit held in New                    
 Delhi in March 1983, have already been described in detail in the                          
 supplement to the Annual Report for 1982-83. Apart from calling for a                      
 halt to the drift towards nuclear conflict and emphasising the urgent                      
 necessity of a thorough-going restructuring of the international                           
 economic order, the Non- Aligned Summit generated important initiatives                    
 on both these fronts. The summit-level consultations brought together a                    
 representative cross- section of leaders of the developed and the                          
 developing countries in New York during the 38th UN General Assembly                       
 Session for an informal and friendly discussion of problems facing the                     
 world.                                                                                     
                                                                                            
 In her own address to the UN General Assembly in September 1983, the                       
 Prime Minister emphasised that the "safety of the weak" ought to be the                    
 "strength of the strong" and urged "that is why the weakest and the                        
 poorest among us, within each society and in the international                             
 community, must be shielded from the inclemencies of the international                     
 climate". She underlined the need for cooperative endeavour aimed at the                   
 re-organisation of political and economic systems at the global and                        
 state levels. She also emphasised the role of the United Nations                           
 Organisation and the need to make it more effective and more capable of                    
 facing difficulties which were not foreseen at its inception.                              
                                                                                            
 The Prime Minister followed up the momentum gained at the Summit-level                     
 consultations by addressing all member countries of the Non-Aligned                        
 Movement as well as other countries which participated at the New York                     
 meeting, apprising them of the                                                             
 -iii>                                                                                      
 discussions and also seeking suggestions from them, on the question of                     
 ways and means of pursuing this useful dialogue begun at the initiative                    
 of the Non-Aligned.                                                                        
                                                                                            
 The year also witnessed the largest-ever meeting of the Commonwealth                       
 Heads of Government held, for the first time, in New Delhi. The Summit                     
 brought together 42 countries from five continents representing a                          
 cross-section of humanity from the developed as well as the developing                     
 countries, and provided them an opportunity for taking stock of the                        
 world political and economic situation. It is a matter of satisfaction                     
 that despite the divergent views and perceptions inescapable in such a                     
 large and varied grouping as the Commonwealth, the final documents                         
 issued by the Summit brought out the essential unity of approach and                       
 purpose in matters connected with peace and development. The Goa                           
 declaration on international security specifically calls for the                           
 resumption of a genuine political dialogue between the United States and                   
 the USSR as well as increased East-West contacts at other levels. This                     
 was consistent with the call given by the Prime Minister that the                          
 Commonwealth leaders urge the two powers to exert themselves with                          
 greater determination to break the stalemate in disarmament                                
 negotiations.                                                                              
                                                                                            
 While India is naturally concerned over the global setback to detente                      
 and the reemergence of the cold war atmosphere, there is,                                  
 understandably, more immediate concern over the threat posed to India's                    
 security by the developments in India's neighbourhood. The increasing                      
 naval and military presence of the big powers in the Indian Ocean                          
 bristles with dangers of armed conflict and poses a grave threat to the                    
 sovereignty and independence of the Indian Ocean littoral states. The                      
 failure of the UN Ad Hoc Committee on the Indian Ocean to convene the                      
 long-delayed conference on the Indian Ocean is considered a seriouso                       
 setback. India and like-minded countries continue to work towards the                      
 goal of a zone of peace in the Indian Ocean. The NAM and CHOGM fully                       
 endorsed India's views and aspirations in this matter.                                     
                                                                                            
 The induction of weapons of a level of sophistication hitherto unknown                     
 in the Indian sub-continent also poses serious security problems for                       
 India. The type, scale and level of sophistication of the military                         
 equipment being acquired by Pakistan from the USA and other sources will                   
 upset the existing military balance in the South Asian region as a whole                   
 and between India and Pakistan in particular. Thist would also force                       
 India to go in for matching acquisitions, thereby compelling diversion                     
 of scarce resources. However, India is anxious that the process of                         
 normalisation with Pakistan, which India cherishes and for which it has,                   
 already taken several initiatives, should not be allowed to receive a                      
 setback. Accordingly, the thrust of India's policy of friendship and                       
 cooperation with Pakistan has been maintained. The meeting of the                          
 Indo-Pakistan Joint Commission in June 1983 and the subsequent meetings                    
 of the Sub-Commissions in January 1984 were concrete manifestations of                     
 these. efforts. India has also made several proposals for increasing                       
 friendly cooperation in various. fields like culture, tourism, travel,                     
 etc.                                                                                       
 -iv>                                                                                       
 India's overall good relations with Bangladesh in the political,                           
 economic and cultural spheres have continued over the last year. The                       
 Joint Economic Commission set up following Gen. Ershad's visit to India                    
 in October 1982 has already held two meetings, as a result of which                        
 economic and commercial ties between the two couniries are being                           
 steadily strengthened and improved. The extension of Government-to                         
 Government and commercial credits to Bangladesh is expected to lead to                     
 closer friendly involvement of India in the development programme of                       
 Bangladesh. An agreement on the sharing of the Teesta waters was signed                    
 during the year, and discussions are continuing on other outstanding                       
 issues such as the augmentation of the Ganga waters at Farakka, the                        
 vested properties in Bangladesh of Indian nationals, large-scale                           
 infiltration from Bangladesh into neigbbouring Indian states, etc.                         
                                                                                            
 There was deep concern in India over the ethnic violence in Sri Lanka in                   
 which Indian nationals. and Tamils of Indian origin suffereed heavy                        
 caualties and loss of property. India offered its good offices to                          
 President Jayewardene to facilitate a viable political settlement. The                     
 offer was accepted and discusgions have been held in Colombo and New                       
 Delhi with the Sri Lankan Government leaders and Tamil leaders, with a                     
 view to finding a satisfactory solution to the ethnic problem.                             
                                                                                            
 India has been seeking to enlarge areas of cooperation with its                            
 traditionally close and friendly neighbours Nepal and Bhutan. High-level                   
 exchanges of Visits have taken place between India and the two                             
 countries, indicative of the healthy relationship existing with these                      
 countries. India continues to contribute substantially to the                              
 development programmes of Nepal and Bhutan.                                                
                                                                                            
 Indian efforts to improve relations with China have continued. Bilateral                   
 exchanges in various fields took place throughout the year. The Fourth                     
 Round of India-China official-level talks was held in New Delhi from 24                    
 to 30 October, with the discussions broadly covering the boundary                          
 question, bilateral exchanges, and an exchange of views on the                             
 international situation. On the boundary question, an attempt was                          
 initiated by the two sides to evolve a mutually-agreed set of principles                   
 to serve as guidelines for future discussions.                                             
                                                                                            
 Relations with Burma and the Maldives proceeded along the traditional                      
 lines of friendship and cooperation. The President of the Maldives paid                    
 a State visit to India during the year. A Cultural Agreement was signed                    
 and civil aviation cooperation further expanded.                                           
                                                                                            
 India remains deeply concerned with the search for durable peace in West                   
 Asia. The continuing conflict and the presence of foreign forces in                        
 Lebanon and off its Shores have made this quest even more difficult. In                    
 November, following the tragic developments in northern Lebanon, the                       
 Prime Minister in her capacity as the Chairperson of the Non-Aligned                       
 Movement convened an urgent meeting at the Ministeriallevel of the                         
 Non-Aligned Committee on Palestine and, in pursuance of the Committee's.                   
 recommendations, despatched a Non-Aligned Ministerial Group to visit                       
 Kuwait and                                                                                 
 -v>                                                                                        
 Damascus. The visit contributed substantially to, the consolidation of                     
 the ceasefire between opposing groups of Palestinian freedom fighters                      
 and to their decision to solve their internal differences by peaceful                      
 means.                                                                                     
                                                                                            
 India's excellent relations with the Arab States of West Asia and North                    
 Africa were reflected in the State visit of President Giani Zail Singh                     
 to Bahrain and Qatar as well as the visit of the Minister of Stabe for                     
 External Affairs to Saudi Arabia, UAE, Kuwait, Bahrain, Oman and the                       
 Yemen Arab Republic. Joint Commissions between India and Iraq, Libya and                   
 Saudi Arabia held meetings during the year and an agreement was reached                    
 to establish a Joint Commission with Egypt.                                                
                                                                                            
 India regrets that, in spite of sustained efforts for peace, the war                       
 between Iran and Iraq continues. During the 7th Non- Aligned Summit, the                   
 Prime Minister had issued an appeal to both these countries to bring an                    
 end to the tragic conflict. India continues its endeavours to bring                        
 about peace in the Gulf.                                                                   
                                                                                            
 India's consistent policy of firm opposition to Apartheid, condemnation                    
 of the racist regime and its aggressive postures against the front-line                    
 States in Southern Africa, and support to the liberation movements found                   
 forceful reiteration on several occasions during the year at various                       
 international fora. India rejected in no uncertain terms the racist                        
 regime's vicious scheme of consolidating Apartheid by extending                            
 insignificant concessions to the Indian and Coloured communities while                     
 leaving the majority African community out of the picture.                                 
                                                                                            
 India continued to strengthen its relations with the countries of                          
 Sub-Saharan Africa through a series of personal meetings at                                
 international conferences as also formal exchanges of visits. The                          
 increasing treend in economic and technical cooperation with the                           
 countries of Africa was marked by exchange of visit by Ministers and                       
 delegations in various fields as well as the grant of a large number of                    
 scholarships and admissions to African students.                                           
                                                                                            
 The year witnesosed the further consolidation of political and economic                    
 relations between India and Western Europe. Relations with France were                     
 further strengthened particularly in the fields of energy, power, coal                     
 and electronics. Queen Elizabeth of Britain visited India at the time of                   
 the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting and the British Prime                         
 Minister availed of the opportunity provided by the Commonwealth                           
 Conferenc to discuss, with the Prime Minister of India bilateral and                       
 international issues. The West German Chancellor made a transit visit,                     
 preceded by visits by two of his Ministers. The Prime Minister of India                    
 paid official visits, to Austria, Norway, Finland, Denmark, Cyprus and                     
 Greece and made a stop-over visit to Paris.                                                
                                                                                            
 The visit of President Zail Singh to Czechoslovakia, of the Prime                          
 Minister to Yugoslavia, of the Minister of External Affairs to the                         
 Soviet Union, Romania and Hungary, of the Minister of Commerce to the                      
 USSR, and of the Speaker of the Lok Sabha to the German Democratic                         
 Republic and Czechoslovakia, and the visit to                                              
 -vi>                                                                                       
                                                                                            
 India of the Soviet First Deputy Premier, the State visit of the                           
 President of Bulgaria and the Deputy Chairman of the GDR Council of                        
 Ministers reflected the wide-ranging and abiding relations between India                   
 and the countries of Eastern Europe. Joint Commissions between India and                   
 several East European countries held meetings, and discussed ways and                      
 means of expanding and diversifying economic and trade relations.                          
                                                                                            
 There was sustained, improvement in relations between India and the USA                    
 notwithstanding the differences in perceptions on a number of regional                     
 and global questions. The meeting between the Prime Minister of India                      
 and the US President during the former's visit to the United Nations in                    
 September provided an opportunity for a personal exchange of views. The                    
 visit of the US Secretary of State to India in June 1983 also provided                     
 an opportunity for better mutual understanding. The IndoUS Joint                           
 Commission and its Sub-Commissions held several meetings during the                        
 year.                                                                                      
                                                                                            
 With Canada, the year witnessed a revival of links with the visit of the                   
 Canadian Prime Minister in November to attend the CHOGM and that of the                    
 Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign Minister earlier. There was also an                      
 increase in the tempo of India's relations with several Latin American                     
 countries, with visits being exchanged particularly with Cuba and                          
 Argentina and increased activity in the cultural and economic fields.                      
                                                                                            
 India took several major steps in 1983 on vital economic issues                            
 affecting all countries, rich and poor, developed and developing. The                      
 successive summit meetings of the Non-Aligned nations and of the                           
 Commonwealth countries devoted considerable attention to the economic                      
 crises faced especially by the developing countries, which have been                       
 made worse by continuing differences of approach between, the rich and                     
 the poor nations.                                                                          
                                                                                            
 India also played host to the first-ever meeting of Foreign Ministers of                   
 the seven countries of South Asia. The meeting took a historic step in                     
 adopting the Declaration on South Asian Regional Cooperation (SARC) and                    
 launching an Integrated Programme of Action covering diverse fields such                   
 as telecommunications, meteorology, agricultur health and population,                      
 etc.                                                                                       
                                                                                            
 Consistent with its current Chairmanship of the Non-Aligned Movement and                   
 in keeping with its traditionally active role in the United Nations,                       
 India tock several initiatives during the 38th Session of the UN General                   
 Assembly to highlight some of the crucial issues facing the world in                       
 relation to peace and development. The Prime Minister personally led the                   
 Indian delegation to the 38th Session of the General Assembly and                          
 addressed the Assembly on the urgency of finding a collective and speedy                   
 solution to the crises, in the international security environment as                       
 well as the international economic order. India played an active part in                   
 the UN bodies and in Group of 77 meetings dealing with such questions as                   
 Disarmament, Namibia, Apartheid, Palestine, Energy, New Information                        
 Order and Human Rights.                                                                    
 -vii>                                                                                      
 India took a consistent and principled stand on the critical situations                    
 in Cyprus, Grenada, Afghanistan, West Asia, Kampuchea and the Falkland                     
 Islands (Malvinas).                                                                        
 India acceded to the Antarctica Treaty and was accorded Consultative                       
 Status under the treaty.                                                                   
                                                                                            
 India was elected to various" UN Bodies and other international                            
 organisatioins" the most important being the election as, a member of                      
 the Security Council for the years 1984 and 1985. India retained its                       
 membership in the governing bodies of UNDP, ICAO, UNIDO and several                        
 other UN bodies, and distinguished Indians were elected to prominent                       
 international bodies, such as the Inter-Parliamentary Union, FAO Council                   
 and WMO.                                                                                   
                                                                                            
 The Committee appointed on the instructions of the Prime Minister to                       
 examine the working of Indian Missions abroad submitted its preliminary                    
 report in May and is expected to submit its final report shortly. The                      
 Ministry was able to shoulder the administrative requirements of the                       
 Non-Aligned Summit and the CHOGM, requiring only marginal assistance                       
 from other departments and agencies of the Government of India.                            
                                                                                            
 The year has thus witnessed a heightening of India's traditionally                         
 active interest and role in promoting peace and development, the two                       
 major issues of our time. It is heartening that the initiatives taken by                   
 India in this regard during the year, both in its neighbourhood and on                     
 the wider international scene, largely evoked positive responses India                     
 shall, in the coming years, continue its earnest endeavours to further                     
 improve the climate for peace and cooperation for mutual prosperity                        
 among the nations of the world.                                                            
 -1>                                                                                        
                                                                                            
 INDIA'S NEIGHBOURS                                                                         
                                                                      Top                   
 India's relations with Sri Lanka continued on an even keel in the first                    
 half of 1983. Foreign Minister Shri P. V. Narasimha Rao paid an official                   
 visit to Sri Lanka in April. The occasion was utilised to have                             
 wide-ranging discussions on all bilateral matters of interest including                    
 the residual problem of stateless persons of Indian origin. The Sri                        
 Lankan President indicated his willingness to solve this issue and the                     
 joint statement issued at the end of the visit noted that President                        
 Jayewardene had said that "he would be taking appropriate steps to                         
 resolve the outstanding matters" in this regard.                                           
                                                                                            
 Relations came under some strain however in the wake of the ethnic                         
 violence in Sri Lanka in July-August 1983. These developments caused                       
 widespread concern in India, not only because of the human suffering                       
 involved but also because a large number of Indian nationals and persons                   
 of Indian origin in Sri Lanka were severely affected. The Prime Minister                   
 offered India's good offices to Sri Lanka in order to facilitate a                         
 political settlement of the ethnic problem. This offer was accepted both                   
 by President Jayewardene and by Mr. Amirthalingam, leader of the major                     
 Tamil party, the Tamil United Liberation Front. In pursuance of this                       
 offer, the Prime Minister's Special Envoy, Shri G. Parthasarathi,                          
 visited Sri Lanka in August and October 1983 and in January 1984. During                   
 these visits Shri Parthasarathi had detailed discussions with President                    
 Jayewardene, Government leaders, leaders of opposition parties and                         
 social organisations.                                                                      
                                                                                            
 Some ideas emerged from these talks which could form the basis of a                        
 solution to the ethnic problem in Sri Lanka. President Jayewardene                         
 announced that he would place these ideas before an All Parties                            
 Conference. We were able to facilitate the Tamil United Liberation                         
 Front's participation in the Conference. The Conference was convened on                    
 10 January 1984, and sat for ten days. All political parties except the                    
 Janata Vimukthi Peramuna and Nava Sama Samaj Party, which are                              
 proscribed, attended the Conference, as did various social and religious                   
 organisations. The Conference decided to set up two committees which                       
 will examine the grievances of all communities and suggest solutions to                    
 these grievances, including appropriate systems of government for                          
 people's participation at all levels, and the causes of ethnic violence                    
 and terrorism and their eradication. These two committees will sit for                     
 two weeks from 6 February onwards and report back to the Conference. The                   
 fact that the Conference has been convened is of significance, given the                   
 estrangement between the Sinhala and Tamil communities in the wake of                      
 the July riots. We wish the Sri Lankan                                                     
 -2>                                                                                        
 Government and people success in their endeavour to find a lasting                         
 solution to the ethnic problem in their country.                                           
                                                                                            
 As a result of ethnic disturbances in Sri Lanka, India had to face the                     
 problem of the sudden influx of a large number of Sri Lankan Tamils.                       
 About 24,000 have come over to India since July 1983 and more are                          
 coming. It is not possible to assess with any degree of accuracy the                       
 number of those who might have crossed over to India from Sri Lanka                        
 clandestinely. All organisations representing Indian Tamil plantation                      
 labour in Sri Lanka expressed the view that all the Tamils of Indian                       
 origin, irrespective of their citizenship status, should be permitted to                   
 come to India since they feel increasingly insecure. This would involve                    
 upward of a million people and the Government of India made it clear                       
 that India was not in a position to accept such a large number of people                   
 The question of the remaining stateless persons of Indian origin in Sri                    
 Lanka was discussed with President Jayewardene, who assured us that he                     
 would take steps to grant Sri Lankan citizenship to such persons. In                       
 these discussions we also emphasised that a viable political settlement                    
 was essential for the restoration of a sense of security among the                         
 minorities in Sri Lanka so that they regained confidence in their future                   
 and did not come to India.                                                                 
                                                                                            
 During the height of the disturbances in Sri Lanka there were about one                    
 lakh refugees staying in camps in and around Colombo. The Indian                           
 Government rushed relief material to Sri Lanka including medicines,                        
 food, clothing and utensils. The value of the relief supplies provided                     
 by the Government of India and the Indian Red Cross Society amounted to                    
 Indian Rupees 11 million. The Indian Prime Minister set up a Sri Lanka                     
 Relief Fund of Rs. 10 million to assist those affected in the July                         
 violence.                                                                                  
                                                                                            
 Bilateral exchanges between the two countries under the Indian Technical                   
 and Economic Cooperation Programme and the TCDC activities under UNDP                      
 auspices continued. Training facilities were also provided to Sri Lankan                   
 personnel in India and the services of Indian experts were made                            
 available to Sri Lanka.                                                                    
                                                                                            
 Government of India, in pursuance of the initiative taken by the Prime                     
 Minister, continued its efforts to improve relations with Pakistan                         
 during the year. A concrete manifestation of this effort was the meeting                   
 of the India-Pakistan Joint Commission held in Islamabad from 1 to 4                       
 June 1983. The Indian delegation was led by the Minister of External                       
 Affairs. The Joint Commission consists of 4 sub-commissions dealing with                   
 (i) Economic Matters,                                                                      
 (ii) Trade,                                                                                
 (iii) Information, Culture and Social Sciences, and                                        
 (iv) Travel, Tourism and Consular Matters.                                                 
 Several proposals were made by India for improving relations in these                      
 fields, including those relating to the signing of a Tourism Protocol, a                   
 Cultural Agreement,                                                                        
 -3>                                                                                        
 relaxation of visa formalities, and increase of commercial exchanges on                    
 a nondiscriminatory basis. Suggestions were made for improvements in                       
 telecommunication facilities, reduced postal rates, and increased                          
 cooperation in areas such as health, family welfare, science and                           
 technology, education, archaeology, social sciences, agriculture, and                      
 the performing arts. A few proposals were accepted by the Pakistani side                   
 and several other suggestions are still under their consideration.                         
                                                                                            
 While India continued to seek normalisation and friendship within the                      
 framework of the Simla Agreement, note was taken of various developments                   
 and the orchestrated campaign of vilification against India was viewed                     
 as a negative development which was not conducive to improvement of                        
 relations. This could adversely affect the atmosphere required for                         
 further discussions in regard to larger aspects of our relations. The                      
 Government of India also remain concerned with the increased pace of the                   
 acquisition of sophisticated weaponry by Pakistan and the danger of war                    
 that such a development entailed. The well-being of Khan Abdul Ghaffar                     
 Khan, who was kept under detention, was a matter of anxiety to the                         
 people of India. This concern, as expressed in the Parliament and                          
 outside, was conveyed to the Pakistan authorities.                                         
                                                                                            
 There was no qualitative change in the Afghan situation. The conflict of                   
 attrition continued with increased financial and military assistance to                    
 opposition groups. The Government of India continued to remain concerned                   
 about the negative impace of the situation in Afghanistan on peace and                     
 stability in the region.                                                                   
 Government of India's policy towards Afghanistan continued to reflect                      
 India's abiding interest in the independence, sovereignty,                                 
 non-alignment, stability and security of Afghanistan and, above all, the                   
 well-being of its people.                                                                  
                                                                                            
 India remained committed to resolution of the problems related to                          
 Afghanistan through a negotiated political settlement, and supported the                   
 UN Secretary General's efforts aimed at bringing about a comprehensive                     
 settlement of issues affecting the Afghan situation. It was noted that                     
 discussions held through the intermediary of the UN Secretary General's                    
 personal representative during 1983 made limited progress, and it was                      
 hoped that further progress towards a negotiated political solution                        
 would be possible before long. India continued to be anxious to see an                     
 early return of normalcy to Afghanistan which would enable the Afghan                      
 people to live in peace, free from external interference and                               
 intervention.                                                                              
                                                                                            
 In the bilateral field, there was some increase in economic cooperation                    
 between India and Afghanistan in such areas as public health and small                     
 scale industries. A mid-term review meeting of the Indo-Afghan Joint                       
 Commission was held in Kabul in October 1983.                                              
 -4>                                                                                        
 In keeping with Government's policy of maintaining and further                             
 developing close relations with our immediate neighbours, the friendly                     
 relations that have existed between India and Bangladesh have been                         
 further improved during the period under review.                                           
                                                                                            
 The Indo-Bangladesh Joint Economic Commission, set up in October 1982,                     
 has helped nurture the growth of economic and commercial ties between                      
 the two countries. The second meeting of the JEC, held in Dhaka from 19                    
 to 21 August 1983 at the Ministerial level, provided further impetus to                    
 the growing economic relations between the two countries. It also                          
 provided an opportunity to the Minister of External Affairs, Shri P. V.                    
 Narasimha Rao, to continue the ongoing bilateral dialogue between the                      
 two Governments on matters of mutual interest.                                             
                                                                                            
 Earlier in 1983, the first meeting of the Standing Committee of the JEC                    
 was held in Dhaka on 14 and 15 June 1983 at the level of Secretaries,                      
 during which a Government-to-Government credit of Rs. 20 crores was                        
 extended to Bangladesh by India and an Agreement on Cooperation between                    
 the Indian Council of Agricultural Research and the Bangladesh                             
 Agricultural Research Council was signed. Later during the year, in                        
 August and September 1983, the Export and Import Bank of India concluded                   
 agreements with Bangladesh banks, extending to them commercial credit of                   
 Rs. 40 crores.                                                                             
                                                                                            
 While there has been a steady and continuous improvement in our                            
 bilateral relations with Bangladesh, particularly in the area of                           
 economic cooperation, certain long-pending problems have persisted, such                   
 as the augmentation of Ganga waters at Farakka, the large-scale                            
 infiltration of migrants from Bangladesh to the contiguous Indian states                   
 and the problem of settlement of claim of Indian nationals whose                           
 properties were taken over by the Government of erstwhile East Pakistan,                   
 now Bangladesh, as vested property.                                                        
                                                                                            
 It is recognised by both India and Bangladesh that without the                             
 augmentation of Ganga waters, there will not be enough water to share                      
 between the two countries during the dry season. Efforts to arrive at a                    
 mutually acceptable solution to this problem have continued, even though                   
 the two sides have not been able to begin the pre-feasibility study of                     
 augmentation possibilities. As regards the sharing of Teesta waters, the                   
 two countries signed an agreement in Dhaka on 20 July 1983 on a sharing                    
 formula under which India will have 39 per cent of the waters and                          
 Bangladesh 36 per cent, with 25 per cent remaining unallocated pending                     
 scientific studies which will be jointly carried out and completed at                      
 the end of 1985. As regards vested properties of Indian nationals, we                      
 have conveyed to the Bangladesh Government that such properties be                         
 released to the rightful owners and that the Bangladesh Government                         
 should desist from taking over, disposing or selling these properties                      
 without settling the question of compensation.                                             
                                                                                            
 Further progress has been made in the demarcation of the over 4000                         
 kilometerslong Indo-Bangladesh boundary and despite the legal                              
 difficulties that have arisen,                                                             
 -5>                                                                                        
 India has continued to make effort to implement the terms of the                           
 lease-in-perpetuity of the Tin Bigha area to provide Bangladesh overland                   
 transit facilities through a corridor across Indian territory, enabling                    
 it to have access to its enclaves.                                                         
                                                                                            
 Any increase in economic relations as well as commercial exchanges                         
 between the two countries is dependent upon the availability of better                     
 transport and communication facilities. A new Protocol on Inland Water                     
 Transit and Trade was concluded between the two countries on 8 November                    
 1983. The number of telephone circuits available between Dhaka and New                     
 Delhi, and Bombay and Calcutta, have been doubled during the last year.                    
                                                                                            
 Over 80 Bangladesh scholars have availed of scholarships offered by                        
 India during 1983-84 for pursuing higher studies in Indian universities                    
 and technical institutes. Training facilities have also been made                          
 available to Bangladesh personnel, including two batches of railway                        
 officials, in several technical and scientific institutions. Some Indian                   
 experts have also visited Bangladesh during the year to provide                            
 consultancy in the areas of small-scale and cottage industries, sugar                      
 technology, the application of vegetable dyes, curriculum development at                   
 the school level, maintenance of zoological gardens, etc.                                  
                                                                                            
 The relations between India and Bhutan have been marked by complete                        
 understanding not only in respect of bilateral relations but also                          
 international issues. His Majesty the King of Bhutan attended the                          
 Non-Aligned Summit and took the opportunity of his presence in New Delhi                   
 to discuss bilateral and international relations also with Indian                          
 leaders at the highest level. The Foreign Minister of Bhutan, Lyonpo                       
 Dawa Tsering, besides participating in the New Delhi meeting of the                        
 Foreign Ministers of the SARC held in August 1983, also visited New                        
 Delhi in September 1983 for bilateral discussions.                                         
                                                                                            
 The most important event during the year under review in relations                         
 between India and Bhutan was the signing of the Indo- Bhutan Trade                         
 Agreement, which would ensure continuity of free trade between the two                     
 countries as guaranteed under the Indo- Bhutan Treaty of Peace and                         
 Friendship of 1949. India has assured Bhutan that it would be able to                      
 absorb all the surpluses of Bhutan's agricultural and industrial                           
 production.                                                                                
                                                                                            
 The Rs. 200 crores 336-MW Chukha Hydel Project is slated for                               
 inauguration by May 1985. India is committed to the purchase of all the                    
 power that is surplus to the needs of Bhutan. The inauguration of this                     
 project in 1985 would clear the way for the more ambitious second stage                    
 of the project downstream which would have the capacity to generate 1000                   
 MW of power. In the field of industries, Bhutan is anxious to promote                      
 only those industries which are based on local raw materials and it was                    
 in                                                                                         
 -6>                                                                                        
 this context that the Bhutanese Government approached the Government of                    
 India for help in setting up its second cement plant--the 1500 tonne                       
 per-day Nanglam Cement plant in south- eastern Bhutan.                                     
                                                                                            
 Bhutan is presently in its Fifth Development Plan (1981--87) which has                     
 an outlay of Rs. 433 crores, out of which India has agreed to                              
 under-write to the extent of Rs. 134 crores. During the year under                         
 review a sum of Rs. 24.77 crores was released to Bhutan as plan subsidy.                   
                                                                                            
 India's contribution to Bhutan's economic development outside the scope                    
 of the Plan is also considerable. A number of Government of India                          
 agencies like the Central Water Commission, Geological Survey of India,                    
 Posts and Telegraphs Department, Indian Airlines, etc., are helping                        
 Bhutan to open up and exploit its natural resources and to train                           
 Bhutanese personnel in various technical skills.                                           
                                                                                            
 The start of the construction of the Bhutanese Monastic Complex at Bodh                    
 Gaya, for which Government of India have announced a grant of Rs. 10                       
 lakhs, is a symbol of the close religious and cultural ties between the                    
 two countries. The presence of His Holiness J. Khempo and the Governor                     
 of Bihar underlined this close relationship.                                               
                                                                                            
 The visit by the Prime Minister of Nepal, Shri Surya Bahadur Thapa, to                     
 New Delhi in February 1983 gave an opportunity for an exchange of views                    
 on bilateral relations between the Prime Ministers of the two countries.                   
 As Prime Minister of Nepal, this was Shri Surya Bahadur Thapa's first                      
 official visit abroad and was therefore a symbolic gesture to India. As                    
 a result of these discussions, it was agreed that to oversee the entire                    
 gamut of Indo-Nepal economic relations, which were intensive and                           
 embraced almost all fields of activity, a Joint Commission should be set                   
 up. It was also agreed that there should be sub-commissions dealing with                   
 various aspects of our bilateral economic cooperation. Modalities for                      
 setting up the Joint Commission are under discussion between the two                       
 Governments. It was also agreed that in order to help the accelerated                      
 industrial development of Nepal, joint-venture industrial projects                         
 should be expedited by the two countries, with special emphasis on the                     
 1200 tonnes per- day cement plant to be set up near Udaypur in Nepal at                    
 a total cost of approximately Rs. 100 crores.                                              
                                                                                            
 The Non-Aligned Summit in March 1983 saw His Majesty the King of Nepal                     
 in New Delhi leading his country's delegation and participating in the                     
 deliberations of the Summit.                                                               
                                                                                            
 A few stray incidents towards the latter part of 1983, like the arrest                     
 of some Nepalese in Darjeeling District for violation of the regulations                   
 governing the entry into the restricted/protected areas, deportation of                    
 some Indians from Kathmandu Valley                                                         
 -7>                                                                                        
 into India, the clash between a gang of criminals and the Bihar police                     
 on the Indo-Nepal border and the consequent dust that this raised in                       
 Nepal, the publication of the Harka Bahadur Gurung Report on migration,                    
 and the Press campaign accompanying these developments, gave the                           
 impression of a set-back to Indo-Nepal relations, but the resilience of                    
 the relationship, sanctified by the Indo-Nepal Treaty of Peace and                         
 Friendship of 1950, asserted itself and helped remove the mists of                         
 misunderstanding.                                                                          
                                                                                            
 During the year the Indo-Nepal Treaty of Trade was renewed for another                     
 period of five years. Similarly the Agreement on the control of                            
 Unauthorised Trade was also renewed till March 1988. Another Agreement                     
 signed between the two countries during the year was that relating to                      
 Telecommunications.                                                                        
                                                                                            
 To help Nepal tide over its problem of food shortages, a commodity loan                    
 of 25,000 tonnes of wheat was extended to that country.                                    
                                                                                            
 Water flowing into Indo-Nepal rivers constitutes the most important link                   
 between the two countries. Therefore, harnessing of these waters for the                   
 mutual benefit of our peoples is one of the major concerns of the                          
 Governments of the two countries. For a coordinated approach to this                       
 question frequent discussions are held at higher levels. It was in this                    
 context that the highlevel meeting of the officials of the two countries                   
 at Secretary level was held in April 1983. This meeting, while                             
 discussing a large number of small and medium sized water projects, also                   
 specifically discussed three major water projects, viz. the Karnali and                    
 Rapti multi-purpose projects and the Panchwar Hydro- electric Project.                     
 While the first two projects would be located in Nepalese territory, the                   
 Pancheshwar Project would be on the Indo-Nepal border, on the river                        
 Sharda.                                                                                    
                                                                                            
 In the field of economic cooperation, which is an on-going process, a                      
 number of projects which were earlier under construction have been                         
 completed and many are still in hand. The Devighat Hydro-electric                          
 Project has been completed one and a half years ahead of schedule. The                     
 co-axial Cable Link between Birganj in Nepal and Raxaul in India as well                   
 as the Hanuman Nagar Rajbiraj road were completed and inaugurated during                   
 the year under review. The 300 km central sector of the Mahendra Raj                       
 Marg is fast nearing completion. A sports complex at Pokhra is also                        
 expected to be completed shortly. A scheme for control of goitre by                        
 distribution of iodised salt is continuing. Construction of an                             
 Out-Patient Department Wing at the Bir Hospital in Kathmandu has started                   
 and the total cost of this project, which includes building and                            
 equipment, including equipment for an operation theatre, is expected to                    
 be Rs. 6 crores. Feasibility studies for the industrial estate at                          
 Rajbiraj and the expansion of the Butwal industrial estate have been                       
 completed and construction work would start in the coming year. A report                   
 on accelerated development of horticulture in Nepal has been prepared by                   
 Indian experts. Another team of Indian experts has 2 EA/83--3.                             
 -8>                                                                                        
 prepared a scheme for development of animal husbandry in the country.                      
 Both these schemes will be implemented in the coming year.                                 
                                                                                            
 Traditionally friendly bilateral relations with Burma continued at an                      
 even pace during the year under review. Indigenous medicines from India,                   
 valued at Rs. 140,000 were presented to the Burmese Ministry of Health                     
 on 4 May 1983. A Sanskrit course has been newly organized in Burma and                     
 diplomas in that language were distributed to successful candidates by                     
 the organizers of the course. A contract was signed for the import of                      
 1.5 lakh tons of rice from Burma. This large and significant purchase                      
 introduces a new dimension to India's trade relationship with Burma and                    
 may enhance the over-all scope and range of commercial cooperation.                        
                                                                                            
 India continued to have close political, economic and cultural relations                   
 with the Maldives. The close relationship was characterised by the                         
 exchange of several important visits between the two countries. The                        
 Maldives and India worked in close cooperation under the South Asia                        
 Regional Cooperation Programme.                                                            
                                                                                            
 The Maldivian President, Mr. M. A. Gayoom, accompanied by Madam Gayoom                     
 and the Foreign Minister, paid a six-day State visit to India in                           
 September 1983. The President held useful discussions with our leaders.                    
 The Presidential delegation also visited Aligarh, Bangalore, Cochin and                    
 Madras. At Aligarh, President Gayoom was awarded an honorary Doctor of                     
 Philosophy degree. A Cultural Agreement was also signed between the two                    
 countries, which provides for cultural exchanges in the fields of art,                     
 education, etc. The Minister of Planning, Shri S. B. Chavan, visited the                   
 Maldives in November 1983 to attend the oath-taking ceremony of                            
 President Gayoom for the second term of office.                                            
                                                                                            
 Assistance to the Maldives under India Technical and Economic                              
 Cooperation Programme (ITEC) was continued during the period under                         
 review. Under the ITEC Programme, two Maldivian Foreign Service                            
 officials were given training at the Lal Bahadur Shastri National                          
 Academy of Administration, Mussoorie. Five Maldivian Civil Aviation                        
 officials were trained at the Civil Aviation Training College,                             
 Allahabad. Further, medicines worth Rs. 3.30 lakhs were sent to the                        
 Maldives to fight the diarrhoea epidemic which broke out in the Maldives                   
 during the summer. Two firefighting engines worth Rs. 28 lakhs were                        
 presented to the Maldives under this programme. We had also given                          
 equipment worth Rs. 25,000 for the use of handicapped persons in the                       
 Maldives under the same programme. At present 8 Indian ITEC experts are                    
 also working in the Maldives.                                                              
                                                                                            
 The Indian Airlines commenced a service between Male and the Gan Island                    
 of the Maldives on 6 November 1983. An agreement to this effect was                        
 signed between                                                                             
 -9>                                                                                        
 Indian Airlines and Maldivian International Airlines (MIA) on 12 October                   
 1983. Indian Airlines already operates a service between Trivandrum and                    
 Male.                                                                                      
                                                                                            
 India's friendly and cordial relations with Iran continued to develop on                   
 the basis of historical ties, non-alignment and potential for greater                      
 mutually beneficial cooperation in the economic and technical fields.                      
 Towards this and many visits at various levels were exchanged. The                         
 Minister of External Affairs, Shri P. V. Narasimha Rao, visited Iran                       
 from 18 to 22 July 1983. He was accompanied by a number of senior                          
 officials. The talks covered a wide range of subject of mutual interest                    
 particularly those concerning bilateral matters. A Joint Commission for                    
 economic, trade, scientific, technical and cultural cooperation was set                    
 up and the first meeting was held in Tehran.                                               
                                                                                            
 Symptoms of the deteriorating international situation are most manifest                    
 in the continuing escalation of Great Power military presence in the                       
 Indian Ocean. The facilities available at the Anglo-American base in                       
 Diego Garcia are being expanded. This base is expected to facilitate                       
 deployment of US Ground Forces in the Gulf as well as the African and                      
 the Asian mainland, as also the deployment of B-52 heavy bombers. The                      
 United States has created a new Central Command with operational                           
 responsibility for the western Indian Ocean and Gulf region, while other                   
 non-littoral powers have continued to maintain a steady and constant                       
 presence in the Indian Ocean at the same level as in the recent past.                      
 Military facilities in the littoral states, available for the use of                       
 Great Powers, have been considerably improved.                                             
                                                                                            
 The existence of foreign bases and the military presence of non-littoral                   
 states in the Indian Ocean has been a matter of grave concern for India.                   
 Great Power military presence has a naturally deleterious impact on the                    
 security environment of the countries of the region as it introduces new                   
 tensions and conflicts and accentuates existing ones, thereby                              
 threatening peace and stability in our neighbourhood and in the world in                   
 general.                                                                                   
                                                                                            
 India has continued to strive for the removal of all foreign military                      
 presence from the Indian Ocean. As a first step, it would be useful if                     
 the Great Powers would discuss a mutual reduction of their military and                    
 naval presence in the area. It is our hope that littoral states of the                     
 region, for their own security, would maintain an independent and                          
 non-aligned policy and desist from the temptations of aligning                             
 themselves militarily with Great Powers as such a move is bound to                         
 invite a countervailing reaction in the context of Great Power                             
 conflicts.                                                                                 
 -10>                                                                                       
                                                                                            
 India has also been actively engaged together with other littoral and                      
 non-aligned states in attempts to secure early implementation of the                       
 United Nations Declaration on the Indian Ocean as a Zone of Peace. It is                   
 a matter of regret that the proposed Conference on the subject, which                      
 was originally scheduled to be held in 1981, has been repeatedly                           
 postponed. It is hoped that this Conference will now be held in the                        
 first half of 1984. India has also expressed support for the Mauritian                     
 claim of sovereignty over the Chagos Archipelago, including Diego                          
 Garcia, and has called for an early return of the territory to                             
 Mauritius.                                                                                 
 -11>                                                                                       
                                                                                            
 SOUTH-EAST ASIA                                                                            
                                                                      Top                   
 During the period under review, India maintained the traditionally                         
 friendly bilateral relations with the countries in South-East Asia. This                   
 was characterised by friendly mutual visits and exchanges of views as                      
 well as greater economic and technical cooperation with the countries of                   
 the region. India's Chairmanship of the NAM and hosting of the CHOGM                       
 naturally led to increased interest in India on the part of South-East                     
 Asian countries.                                                                           
                                                                                            
 As before, there was perceptible and steady growth in economic and                         
 technical relations with practically every country in the region. Trade                    
 talks with Malaysia, philippines and Australia helped in identifying                       
 further areas of cooperation. There were moves towards a science                           
 protocol with Thailand, scheduled to be concluded shortly. The 14th                        
 round of Indo-Australian Bilateral Talks in Canberra covered a wide                        
 spectrum of subjects. The first- ever major exhibition of Indian                           
 engineering goods in Australia received excellent response. India                          
 participated in the Trade Fair of Jakarta and Book Fair and other fairs                    
 and seminars in the south-East Asian region, registering a considerable                    
 number of trade enquiries and enhanced interest in our technology. As                      
 usual, a large number of Indian experts continued to function in                           
 South-East Asia, while training in various special disciplines was                         
 accorded to several persons from the South-East Asian countries in                         
 India. All these demonstrated the steadily growing bilateral relations                     
 between India and the South-East Asian countries.                                          
                                                                                            
 India held frank and friendly exchange of views at all levels with the                     
 countries of the region, in both the bilateral and multi-lateral fora,                     
 notably during the NAM and the CHOGM. These talks were particularly                        
 significant in view of the fact that the Kampuchean issue continued to                     
 dominate the South-East Asian Political scene and the national policies                    
 of some South-East Asian countries were at variance. There was better                      
 appreciation of India's national policy at such talks as also at                           
 bilateral official discussions in the ASEAN capitals. While conceding                      
 that differences in perception existed, the Indian side invariably                         
 emphasised that these should not come in the way of friendly bilateral                     
 relations. On Kampuchea itself, while accepting the vacant seat formula                    
 of Havana in the interest of consensus at the New Delhi NAM Summit,                        
 India's national policy of No-Contact with the so-called CGDK, Coalition                   
 Government of Democratic Kampuchea (dominated by the genocidal Pol Pot                     
 regime),                                                                                   
 -12>                                                                                       
 and diplomatic relations with the People's Republic of Kampuchea under                     
 Heng Samrin remained constant. The Government of the People's Republic                     
 of Kampuchea seemed to consolidate itself further in Kampuchea during                      
 the year under review. Regarding solution of the Kampuchean problem,                       
 India is firmly of the view that, as per the formulations in the                           
 resolutions at New Delhi NAM Summit, there should be negotiations among                    
 the countries in the region towards a comprehensive political                              
 settlement.                                                                                
                                                                                            
 India's relations with the three Indo-China countries of Kampuchea, Laos                   
 and Vietnam witnessed considerable growth during the year, especially in                   
 economic and technical areas.                                                              
                                                                                            
 The Prime Minister of Vietnam, Mr. Pham Van Dong, led a 42- member                         
 delegation to the 7th NAM Summit which included the Vietnamese Foreign                     
 Minister, Mr. Co Thach, and the Senior Vice Foreign Minister. A                            
 four-member delegation from Vietnam led by their Vice Minister of                          
 Foreign Trade visited India in October 1983, when potential areas of                       
 further cooperation between the two countries were identified. Another                     
 important visit from Vietnam- was that of their Vice Minister of Water                     
 Resources in February 1983.                                                                
                                                                                            
 Secretary (East) and the Chief of Army Staff visited Vietnam. Smt. Aruna                   
 Asaf Ali, President of the Federation of Indian Women, visited                             
 Kampuchea, Laos and Vietnam. A goodwill delegation from the India Centre                   
 for Studies on Indo-China paid visits to Vietnam and Kampuchea.                            
                                                                                            
 Steps are being contemplated to assist Kampuchea in the fields of                          
 agriculture, industry and public health. Similar efforts are being made                    
 to step up cooperation with Laos.                                                          
                                                                                            
 A cotton expert and a rubber expert were deputed to Vietnam to assess                      
 the possibility of cooperation in these fields. The rubber expert also                     
 visited Kampuchea. Indian experts are helping the Vietnamese authorities                   
 at a Rice Research Centre and a Buffalo Breeding Centre. Several                           
 Vietnamese, Kampuchean and Laotian students are receiving training in                      
 India. A contract has been concluded for the supply of Indian                              
 locomotives to Vietnam for the first time.                                                 
                                                                                            
 In the cultural field, a dance troupe led by Smt. Sonal Man Singh                          
 visited Kampuchea, Laos and Vietnam.                                                       
 -13>                                                                                       
 India's relations with Indonesia were characterized by considerably                        
 increased common endeavours towards strengthening the existing cordial                     
 relations in various fields, especially in economic and technical                          
 fields. India participated in the Jakarta Trade Fair with a wide range                     
 of machine tools, diesel engines, tractors and textiles. An Agreement                      
 was signed in Jakarta by the HMT and the Indonesian Director General for                   
 Small Scale Industries for setting up a tool-room-cum-industrial                           
 training centre in Surabaya. The value of HMT's supply is estimated at                     
 about Rs. 5 crores.                                                                        
                                                                                            
 Foreign Minister Mochtar Kusumatmadja's presence at the NAM Summit was                     
 also utilized for exchange of views on bilateral, regional and                             
 international issues.                                                                      
                                                                                            
 Annual bilateral talks between India and Malaysia were held from 7 to 8                    
 February 1983. The Malaysian side was led by Secretary-General Y. B. Tan                   
 Sri Datuk Zakaria Bin Haj Mohamed Ali and the Indian side by Secretary                     
 (East). Bilateral, regional and international issues were discussed in a                   
 friendly and frank manner.                                                                 
                                                                                            
 Efforts were made to further strengthen India's friendly relations with                    
 the Philippines. The first meeting of the Indo- Philippines Joint Trade                    
 Committee (JTC) was held in Manila from 21 to 23 June 1983. The Indian                     
 delegation was led by Deputy Minister, Ministry of Commerce, Shri P. A.                    
 Sangma. A protocol was signed between the two countries with a view to                     
 enlarging the scope of bilateral trade.                                                    
                                                                                            
 Secretary (East), Shri K. S. Bajpai, visited Manila from 26 to 29 May                      
 1983 and held discussions with the Foreign Minister, various Deputy                        
 Ministers and senior officials of the Philippines.                                         
                                                                                            
 Shri K. S. Bajpai visited Singapore from 11 to 12 January 1983 and had                     
 detailed exchange of views with senior officials of the Singapore                          
 Foreign Office and the Foreign Minister. Economic and trade relations                      
 registered steady growth during the period under review.                                   
                                                                                            
 India's relations with Thailand continued to be firm and friendly. At                      
 the invitation of the Thai Government Secretary (East), Shri K. S.                         
 Bajpai, visited Bangkok from 13 to 15 September 1983 and held                              
 wide-ranging talks on bilateral relations and regional                                     
 -14>                                                                                       
 and international issues with senior Thai leaders. A science protocol is                   
 expected to be signed with Thailand shortly.                                               
                                                                                            
 The 14th round of Indo-Australian bilateral talks was held in a warm and                   
 friendly atmosphere in Canberra in May 1983. The Indian delegation was                     
 led by Secretary (East), Shri K. S. Bajpai.                                                
                                                                                            
 A three-day symposium entitled 'India Today', coinciding with Gandhi                       
 Jayanti, was held in Australia. The first ever major exhibition of                         
 Indian engineering goods was held in Australia from 6 to 10 June 1983.                     
                                                                                            
 Brunei became fully independent at the turn of the year at mid-night on                    
 31 December 1983. India has felicitated Brunei on its independence and                     
 looks forward to friendly relation with that newly-independent country.                    
                                                                                            
 India sent medicines worth Rs. 5 lakhs to Fiji for the benefit of the                      
 victims of a devastating cyclone.                                                          
 -15>                                                                                       
                                                                                            
 EAST ASIA                                                                                  
                                                                      Top                   
 The year witnessed efforts to further improve relations with China and                     
 achieve progress on the boundary question. The Third Round of                              
 official-level talks was held in Beijing from 29 January to 2 February                     
 1983 followed by the Fourth Round in New Delhi from 24 to 30 October                       
 1983.                                                                                      
                                                                                            
 In keeping with the desire of both sides to continue to develop and                        
 normalise bilateral relations, detailed discussions took place during                      
 the Fourth Round of talks on exchanges in fields like culture, science                     
 and technology and trade during 1984. Appreciable progress was made in                     
 this direction. On the boundary question, the early and just settlement                    
 of which remains the final test of genuine normalisation of India-China                    
 relations, extensive discussions took place, with some common ground                       
 covered by way of working out common guidelines for future discussions.                    
 However, identity of views could not be established on certain aspects                     
 so that it was finally decided to pick up the threads once again at the                    
 next round of talks which should now be held in Beijing some time in                       
 1984.                                                                                      
                                                                                            
 In the cultural field, the highlights of the year were the visit to                        
 China by the renowned Indian Sitar Maestro Pandit Ravi Shankar in                          
 August/ September 1983 and performances by the "Beijing Opera" in some                     
 Indian cities in December 1983.                                                            
                                                                                            
 Efforts continued to consolidate and expand existing cordial relations                     
 between India and Japan. The Japanese Prime Minister was among the world                   
 leaders to whom our Prime Minister wrote about the conclusions of the                      
 7th NAM Summit in New Delhi.                                                               
                                                                                            
 Finance Minister Shri Pranab Mukherjee paid a visit to Japan from 18 to                    
 20 May 1983 and called on the Prime Minister, the Finance Minister, the                    
 Minister for Trade and Industry, and the Minister of Economic Planning                     
 of Japan. He conveyed our Prime Minister's appreciation to Prime                           
 Minister Nakasone for taking up some of the issues faced by developing                     
 countries at the Williamsburg Summit. Earlier, Prime Minister Nakasone                     
 had paid high tribute to Prime Minister Mrs. Gandhi for her leadership                     
 of the NAM Conference.                                                                     
 -16>                                                                                       
                                                                                            
 The meeting of the India-Japan Study Committee was held in Tokyo in                        
 November. Increased cooperation in the field of science and technology                     
 between the two countries was the principal recommendation of the                          
 meeting.                                                                                   
                                                                                            
 Indo-Japanese trade talks were held in New Delhi from 16 to 17 December                    
 1983. The Japanese delegation was led by the Deputy Minister for Foreign                   
 Affairs, Mr. Nakajima, while the Indian side was headed by the Commerce                    
 Secretary. Both sides agreed to try to rectify the trade imbalance and                     
 also identify new areas of cooperation between the two countries. The                      
 symbol of Indo- Japanese industrial collaboration, the Suzuki-Maruti                       
 venture, was commissioned on 14 December 1983.                                             
                                                                                            
 The Minister for External Affairs paid a visit to the Republic of Korea                    
 (ROK) from 7 to 10 May 1983, returning a visit by the ROK Foreign                          
 Minister, Bum Suk Lee, to Delhi in January 1983. During these visits,                      
 the expanding bilateral relations, especially in the economic and trade                    
 fields, were reviewed.                                                                     
                                                                                            
 The President of the Republic of Korea was scheduled to visit India from                   
 11 to 14 October 1983. However, on account of the tragic bomb explosion                    
 in Rangoon at the Martyrs' Mausoleum on 9 October, where President Chun                    
 Doo Hwan was to place a wreath, the visit was postponed indefinitely.                      
 The bomb explosion resulted in the loss of the lives of 17 Koreans,                        
 including 4 Cabinet Ministers.                                                             
                                                                                            
 Our Prime Minister expressed her shock at this outrageous violence which                   
 resulted in the loss of so many innocent lives. The view was also                          
 expressed that such acts deserved to be condemned.                                         
                                                                                            
 India participated in the 70th IPU Conference in Seoul from 2 to 13                        
 October 1983. The Indian delegation was led by the Lok Sabha Speaker,                      
 Shri Balram Jakkar, who had visited Seoul earlier also in May as the                       
 Head of a Parliamentary delegation.                                                        
                                                                                            
 The Special Envoy of President Chun Doo Hwan, Dr. Tae Sup Lee, paid a                      
 visit to India from 6 to 9 December 1983. He called on the President,                      
 the Prime Minister, the Vice President, the Speaker and the Foreign                        
 Minister.                                                                                  
                                                                                            
 In the cultural field an exhibition of South Korean ceramics was                           
 organised in New Delhi in cooperation with the ICCR. A dance troupe from                   
 the ROK also visited India on the eve of the scheduled visit of                            
 President Chun Doo Hwan in October 1983.                                                   
                                                                                            
 The delegation of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea (DPRK) at                      
 the 7th Non-Aligned Summit in New Delhi was headed by Vice President Pak                   
 Song Chol. India was represented at the 25th Anniversary of the Founding                   
 of the Democratic                                                                          
 -17>                                                                                       
 People's Republic of Korea in Pyongyang on 9 September by Shri Shyam Lal                   
 Yadav, Deputy Chairman of Rajya Sabha. Subsequently, the Minister of                       
 State for Education and Culture, Smt. Sheila Kaul, paid a visit to the                     
 DPRK in the second half of September to participate in the First                           
 Conference of the Education Ministers of the Non-Aligned Countries.                        
 Apart from these visits a number of Members of Parliament were invited                     
 to the DPRK by various organisations.                                                      
                                                                                            
 Indo-DPRK trade talks were held in New Delhi from 22 to 26 July 1983.                      
 The DPRK delegation to these talks was headed by Vice Minister of                          
 Foreign Trade, Mr. Kim Song Log.                                                           
                                                                                            
 The Health Minister, Shri B. Shankaranand, paid a visit to Mongolia in                     
 August/ September 1983 and signed the programme for the implementation                     
 of the protocol between the two countries in the field of health and                       
 family welfare.                                                                            
                                                                                            
 Several rounds of Sino-British talks on the future of Hong Kong took                       
 place during 1983 but no decision was made known. This uncertainty about                   
 the future had some adverse effect on the economy of Hong Kong.                            
                                                                                            
 For the first time, Hong Kong participated in the India International                      
 Trade Fair in New Delhi in November 1983. Despite the uncertainty about                    
 the future of Hong Kong, bilateral trade between India and Hong Kong                       
 continued to increase. In the first six months of 1983 India exported                      
 goods worth HK $ 577.78 million to Hong Kong as against Hong Kong's                        
 total export to India, including re-exports, of HK $ 264.91 million.                       
                                                                                            
 On his way to the ROK, the Minister for External Affairs paid a transit                    
 visit to Hong Kong in May 1983.                                                            
 India participated in the Hong Kong Trade fair from 21 to 26 November                      
 1983.                                                                                      
 India also took part in the Hong Kong International Hockey Championships                   
 in December 1983.                                                                          
 -18>                                                                                       
                                                                                            
 WEST ASIA AND NORTH AFRICA                                                                 
                                                                      Top                   
 To underline India's close relationship with the Arab world, President                     
 Giani Zail Singh visited Bahrain and Qatar in December 1983. During the                    
 visit discussions were held on strengthening India's relations with                        
 these two countries in all spheres.                                                        
                                                                                            
 The situation in West Asia during the period under review continued to                     
 remain one of great concern to Government of India. The presence of                        
 Israeli forces in Lebanon since their invasion of June 1982, their                         
 incessant acts of provocation, increased settlement activities in the                      
 West Bank, and policies leading to a mass exodus of Palestinians, the                      
 rapid accumulation of arms in the area, the presence of an increasing                      
 number of foreign troops in Lebanon and foreign warships along Lebanese                    
 shores, were the substantial factors threatening peace and security in                     
 West Asia.                                                                                 
                                                                                            
 At the 7th Non-Aligned Summit held in New Delhi in March 1983, a                           
 Committee was set up at Heads of State Government level consisting of                      
 Algeria, Bangladesh, Cuba, India (Chairman), PLO, Senegal, Yugoslavia                      
 and Zambia, to cooperate with the 7-member Arab Committee to support the                   
 rights of the Arab Palestinian people. The Committee was asked to work                     
 with the various forces influential in the Middle East conflict for the                    
 achievement of a just, durable and comprehensive peace in the Middle                       
 East which would enable the Palestinian people to exercise their rights                    
 to freedom and sovereignty in their independent homeland.                                  
                                                                                            
 In May-June 1983, in view of the deteriorating situation in West Asia, a                   
 senior official of the Ministry of External Affairs was deputed by the                     
 Prime Minister, in her capacity as the Chairperson of the Non-Aligned                      
 Movement, to visit several Arab countries for consultations in the                         
 context of the mandate given by the Non-Aligned Summit to the                              
 Non-Aligned Committee on Palestine.                                                        
                                                                                            
 The first meeting of the Non-Aligned Committee was held in New Delhi at                    
 official level on 30-31 October 1983. In November 1983, in view of the                     
 eruption of armed hostilities amongst Palestinian freedom fighters in                      
 Northern Lebanon, and                                                                      
 -19>                                                                                       
 messages of concern received from other non-aligned countries in this                      
 regard, the Prime Minister convened an urgent meeting of the Committee                     
 on Palestine at ministerial level which met in New Delhi on 18 and 19                      
 November 1983. In pursuance of the Committee's recommendations, a                          
 ministerial group led by Foreign Minister Shri P. V. Narasimha Rao, and                    
 comprising the Foreign Ministers of Cuba and Yugoslavia and the                            
 Permanent Representative of Senegal to the United Nations, visited                         
 Kuwait and Damascus.                                                                       
                                                                                            
 In Kuwait, the ministerial group availed of the opportunity to have an                     
 extensive exchange of views with the Kuwaiti Deputy Prime Minister and                     
 Foreign Minister, H. E. Shaikh Sabah Al-Ahmed Al- Jabar. In Damascus,                      
 the ministerial group met the Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign Minister                   
 of Syria, H. E. Mr. Abdul Haleem Khaddam, the Speaker of the Palestine                     
 National Council, Mr. Khalid Al-Fahoum, and Mr. Abdul Muhsen Abu Maizer,                   
 member and official spokesman of the Executive Committee of PLO and                        
 former Lebanese Prime Minister Rashid Karame. The ministerial group also                   
 met leaders from the opposing side in the Fatah calling itself the                         
 "Upheaval Movement", Abu Saleh, Abu Musa, Abu Akbar, Qadri and others in                   
 the presence of Mr. Fahoum, Mr. Abu Maizer, and Mr. Muhammed Khalifa and                   
 Mr. Talal Naji, members of the Executive Committee of the PLO.                             
                                                                                            
 As a result of these meetings the ministerial group secured a commitment                   
 by the opposing side to protect and safeguard the ceasefire without any                    
 time limit, on the understanding that the ceasefire would be respected                     
 by both sides. The group was also given an assurance by the opposing                       
 side that they would take all necessary steps, within the Palestinian                      
 framework, to solve by peaceful means all their internal differences.                      
 The above assurances were given by the opposing side in deference to the                   
 request of the Non-Aligned ministerial group that further bloodshed and                    
 danger to the city of Tripoli should be avoided.                                           
                                                                                            
 India remained concerned with the continuing conflict between two                          
 members of the Non-Aligned Movement, Iran and Iraq. During the 7th                         
 Non-Aligned Summit, Prime Minister Smt. Indira Gandhi, in her capacity                     
 as the Chairperson, made an appeal to the two countries on behalf of the                   
 entire Non-Aligned community to bring hostilities to an immediate end                      
 and to come to an honourable, just and enduring peace through                              
 negotiations and peaceful means. India has continued to remain in touch                    
 with both Iran and Iraq and other members of the Non-Aligned Movement to                   
 see what could be done to bring an end to the war.                                         
                                                                                            
 The Minister of State for External Affairs visited several Gulf                            
 countries-Saudi Arabia, UAE, Kuwait, Bahrain, Oman and the Yemen Arab                      
 Republic-to look into the welfare of the large number of Indians working                   
 in these countries.                                                                        
 -20>                                                                                       
 The Foreign Minister of the Yemen Arab Republic, H. E. Dr. Ahmed Mohamed                   
 Al-Asbahi, visited India in December 1983. The Indo-YAR Cultural                           
 Agreement was signed. India agreed to increase her technical assistance                    
 to that country.                                                                           
                                                                                            
 In November 1983, Bahrain's Labour Minister, H. E. Shaikh Khalifa bin                      
 Sulman bin Mohamed Al-Khalifa, visited India.                                              
                                                                                            
 Bilateral relations were strengthened with Iraq, Libya and Saudi Arabia                    
 through the meetings of the 8th Session of the Indo- Iraqi Joint                           
 Commission, the 4th Session of the Indo-Libyan Joint Commission, and the                   
 1st Session of the Indo-Saudi Joint Commission respectively. In                            
 September 1983, an agreement was signed to establish the Indo-Egyptian                     
 Joint Commission.                                                                          
 -21>                                                                                       
                                                                                            
 AFRICA (SOUTH OF THE SAHARA)                                                               
                                                                      Top                   
 India continued to strengthen its relations with countries of the                          
 African region and paid particular attention to the escalating political                   
 and military situation in Southern Africa arising out of oppression,                       
 brutality and aggressive actions of the racist regime of South Africa.                     
 On several occasions India's consistent policy of firm opposition to                       
 apartheid, condemnation of the racist regime, and support to Liberation                    
 Movements found forceful reiteration in the UN and other international                     
 fora. As the current Chairman of the Non-Aligned Movement and in line                      
 with our own position, our leadership expressed unequivocal support to                     
 the oppressed and the exploited people of South Africa and Namibia, and                    
 called upon the international community to take effective action to                        
 force the racist regime to grant independence to Namibia without any                       
 further delay in full consonance with the various UN resolutions on the                    
 subject. India further riterated the need to take effective steps                          
 against the racist regime for its continuing defiance of world opinion                     
 against apartheid and racial discrimination, and its constant attempts                     
 to destabilise the frontline States and subject them to repeated armed                     
 aggression. We rejected in no uncertain terms the Pretoria regime's                        
 fraudulent means of consolidating apartheid by the introduction of                         
 so-called constitutional reforms in South Africa, which are intended to                    
 constitutionalise the already institutionalised system of apartheid.                       
                                                                                            
 The hallmark of our policy towards Africa during 1983 was the attainment                   
 of closer understanding through personal meetings between our leaders                      
 and those of Africa. Opportunities for wide- ranging exchange of views                     
 at the highest political level were first provided by the 7th                              
 Non-Aligned Summit in March 1983 and later by the Commonwealth Summit in                   
 November 1983, both of which were held in New Delhi. A large number of                     
 Heads of State or Government from Africa actively participated in the                      
 two Summits and had exchange of views with our leaders on matters of                       
 mutual interest, thus giving tremendous boost to our relations with the                    
 African states.                                                                            
                                                                                            
 Our bilateral relations continued to grow and we received the former                       
 President of Nigeria, Mr. Shehu Shagari, as the Chief Guest for the                        
 Republic Day celebrations                                                                  
 -22>                                                                                       
 in 1983. During this visit a trade agreement and a protocol on                             
 collaboration between the Nigerian Building and Road Research Institute                    
 and the Indian Council of Scientific and Industrial Research were                          
 signed. The Instruments of Ratification of the Cultural Agreement, which                   
 was signed in Lagos in September 1982, were also exchanged.                                
                                                                                            
 The Prime Minister of Mauritius, H. E. Mr. Anerood Jugnauth, paid an                       
 official visit to India in February 1983. During the visit of the                          
 Mauritian Prime Minister, India agreed to extend a                                         
 government-to-government credit of Rs. 50 million and of Rs. 50 million                    
 by EXIM Bank under an earlier commitment.                                                  
                                                                                            
 The President of the African National Congress (ANC), Mr. Oliver Tamboo,                   
 as well as the President of the South West African Peoples Organisation                    
 (SWAPO), Mr. Sam Nujoma, also paid official visits to India in the first                   
 quarter of the year. Both these Presidents visited India in March 1983                     
 for the NAM Summit and the SWAPO President was in India for the third                      
 time at the time of the Commonwealth Summit.                                               
                                                                                            
 Numerous other visits also took place, important among which were those                    
 by the Deputy Prime Minister of Mauritius, Foreign Ministers of Upper                      
 Volta and Guinea Bissau, and ministerial level visits from Mali,                           
 Ethiopia, Tanzania, etc. A large number of delegations were exchanged                      
 between India and the countries in Africa to further strengthen                            
 bilateral cooperation and have mutual exchange of views in diverse                         
 fields. The notable visits by Indian Ministers to African countries were                   
 those of the Minister of Education and the Minister of Labour.                             
                                                                                            
 The increasing trend of economic and technical cooperation with the                        
 countries of Africa was characterised by visits of delegations,                            
 deputation of Indian experts in diverse fields, and grant of                               
 scholarships to African students in various educational and specialised                    
 institutions in India. The total number of African students in India                       
 under bilateral and multilateral scholarships or on self-financing basis                   
 at present exceeds 8,000.                                                                  
                                                                                            
 As a mark of our concern for the economic difficulties faced by the                        
 countries of the region due to natural calamities, India provided relief                   
 assistance of Rs. 1 lakh each to Mozambique, Comores and Ethiopia. Rs. 5                   
 lakhs were spent on medicines which were given as a gift to the Central                    
 African Republic. Our moral, material and diplomatic support to                            
 liberation movements increased during the year under review and                            
 humanitarian aid of Rs. 12 lakhs was sanctioned for SWAPO and Rs. 6                        
 lakhs for ANC.                                                                             
 -23>                                                                                       
                                                                                            
 EUROPE WESTERN EUROPE                                                                      
                                                                      Top                   
 India's relations with the countries of Western Europe are friendly, and                   
 cooperation in different fields continued to grow. The year under review                   
 witnessed exchange of several important visits, facilitating greater                       
 mutual understanding of each other's viewpoints. European countries                        
 welcomed the assumption by India of the Chairmanship of the Non-Aligned                    
 Movement. India's views, as leader of the Non-Aligned Movement, were                       
 solicited by West European countries on international economic and                         
 political issues. West Europe continued to play a significant role in                      
 the economic development of India through financial assistance, transfer                   
 of technology and technical assistance.                                                    
                                                                                            
 Queen Elizabeth of Britain visited India from 17 to 26 November 1983 at                    
 the time of the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting (CHOGM), when                     
 she had an opportunity of seeing the developments that have taken place                    
 in the country since her last visit in 1961. Prime Minister Margaret                       
 Thatcher, who was also here for the Commonwealth Meeting, availed of the                   
 opportunity to discuss bilateral and international issues. During the                      
 year under review, British Ministers of Foreign Trade, Defence                             
 Procurement, Overseas Development and Home Affairs visited India. Our                      
 Foreign Minister visited Britain from 31 October to 4 November 1983.                       
                                                                                            
 The year under review witnessed the strengthening of relations with                        
 France. The Foreign Minister of France, Claude Cheysson, made a                            
 stop-over visit in India on 28 March 1983 when he held discussions with                    
 our Foreign Minister. On her way to New York for the 38th UN General                       
 Assembly meeting, our Prime Minister made a stop-over in Paris, when she                   
 discussed international economic and political issues with President                       
 Mitterand. Our Minister of State for Electronics also visited France                       
 during the period under review.                                                            
 -24>                                                                                       
                                                                                            
 The Ministry of External Affairs assisted the India International Centre                   
 in organising an Indo-French Colloquium from 24 to 26 October 1983 at                      
 which leading intellectuals, scientists, and journalists exchanged ideas                   
 for strengthening Indo-French and international relations.                                 
                                                                                            
 Economic relations with France witnessed the consolidation of                              
 cooperation in various technological fields, particularly energy, power,                   
 coal and electronics. In June 1983, the Indo-French Memorandum of                          
 Understanding on cooperation in the fields of electronics, computers and                   
 informatics was signed. There are now fourteen Memorandum of                               
 Understanding Protocols between India and France, covering cooperation                     
 in various technical areas. Agreement has been reached on the details                      
 relating to the establishment in India of an Indo-French Centre for                        
 Advanced Research. The French Minister of Industry & Research, Mr.                         
 Laurent Fabius, visited India from 12 to 18 December 1983 and held wide-                   
 ranging discussions with Indian Ministers on ways and means of                             
 strengthening cooperation in technical and scientific fields. The French                   
 Minister of Agriculture, Mr. Michel Rocard, also visited India from 28                     
 December 1983 to 4 January 1984 and held discussions with Indian                           
 Ministers regarding cooperation in the fields of agriculture, irrigation                   
 and rural development.                                                                     
                                                                                            
 There was a steady growth in bilateral relations between India and the                     
 Federal Republic of Germany, especially in the economic and commercial                     
 fields. The transit visit of the Federal German Chancellor, Dr. Helmut                     
 Kohl, from 5 to 6 November 1983 provided an opportunity for exchange of                    
 views on bilateral and international matters. This first high-level                        
 contact between the Heads of the two Governments in the past decade                        
 supplemented exchange of views on bilateral technical levels. The                          
 Federal German Minister of Communications, Mr. Schwarz-Schilling,                          
 visited India in May 1983 which was followed by the visit of the Federal                   
 German Minister for Economic Cooperation, Dr. Juergen Warnke, to hold                      
 discussions relating to economic, industrial and technological                             
 collaboration. Our Minister of Agriculture visited the Anuga Fair in                       
 Cologne and held talks on bilateral matters with his Federal German                        
 counterpart. The Foreign Secretary visited Bonn from 21 to 22 April 1983                   
 for bilateral consultations.                                                               
                                                                                            
 Indo-FRG trade has continued to record a steady growth over the years                      
 and attempts are being made to diversify the commodity range. German                       
 interest in Indian industry has been growing and a large number of                         
 Indo-FRG joint collaboration proposals have been received. India will                      
 participate as partner country in the Hanover Fair scheduled to be held                    
 in April 1984. This will be India's largest participation in an                            
 industrial exhibition abroad. Our participation in the Fair has received                   
 encouragement and support from the FRG authorities.                                        
                                                                                            
 The Prime Minister made an official visit to Austria from 17 to 22 June                    
 1983 during which she inaugurated the Indo-West European Dialogue                          
 Congress in Alpbach.                                                                       
 -25>                                                                                       
 The Seminar helped to clear perceptions of the two regions, promote                        
 inter-regional cooperation and build bridges for strengthening                             
 relations. The Vice Chancellor of, Austria, Dr. Norbert Steger (who                        
 holds the portfolios of Commerce, Industry and Trade) visited India from                   
 3 to 7 December 1983 and co-chaired the first meeting of the                               
 Indo-Austrian Mixed Commission.                                                            
                                                                                            
 The Prime Minister visited Norway, Finland and Denmark from 9 to 16 June                   
 1983. During the visit, matters relating to the international situation                    
 and bilateral relations were discussed. A Memorandum of Understanding on                   
 Environment was signed with Norway and a Cultural Agreement with                           
 Finland. India's relations with the Scandinavian countries continued to                    
 be cordial. The Scandinavian countries extend substantial economic                         
 assistance to India, especially for projects in the rural development                      
 and social welfare fields.                                                                 
                                                                                            
 For the first time in a decade, the Belgian Foreign Minister visited                       
 India from 15 to 19 January 1983. He held extensive discussions with                       
 various Cabinet Ministers on matters relating to strengthening of                          
 Indo-Belgian relations. Our Foreign Minister paid a working visit to                       
 Belgium and held discussions with the Belgian and EEC authorities. A                       
 Belgian Technological and Industrial Delegation led by Prince Albert                       
 visited India in November 1983.                                                            
                                                                                            
 The EEC continued to be an important trading partner of India,                             
 accounting for almost 27 per cent of India's foreign trade. The second                     
 session of the EEC-India Joint Commission, established under the                           
 Cooperation Agreement signed in 1981, took place in Brussels from 30 to                    
 31 May 1983 when bilateral trade, trade promotional measures, industrial                   
 cooperation, transfer of technology, third-country projects and                            
 cooperation in science and technology were specifically discussed. India                   
 continued to receive food aid and financial and technical assistance                       
 from the EEC. A major Indo-EEC Conference on Industrial Technology and                     
 Investment was held in New Delhi in January 1983. In pursuance of the                      
 Indo-EEC Agreement of 1982, the European Community established its                         
 Delegation in India and the Head of the Delegation assumed charge in                       
 June 1983.                                                                                 
                                                                                            
 Indo-Swiss bilateral relations on trade, economic cooperation and                          
 investment came up for discussion at the meeting of the Indo- Swiss                        
 Joint Commission held in February 1983 in New Delhi. A working group was                   
 established to ensure proper follow-up of the initiatives taken by the                     
 Joint Commission. The Vice President paid a visit to Switzerland in                        
 connection with Red Cross activities.                                                      
 -26>                                                                                       
                                                                                            
 The Italian Minister of State for Foreign Affairs visited India from 11                    
 to 13 April 1983 for consultations on bilateral and international                          
 matters.                                                                                   
                                                                                            
 The instruments of ratification of the Cultural Agreement, signed                          
 between India and Spain in 1982 were exchanged at New Delhi during 1983.                   
                                                                                            
 The Prime Minister visited Cyprus and Greece from 20 to 24 September                       
 1983. An Agreement on Economic, Scientific and Technical Cooperation                       
 with Greece was signed during the visit.                                                   
                                                                                            
 Minister for Foreign Trade of the Netherlands, Mr. Frederik Bolkestein,                    
 visited India from 5 to 9 February 1983. An Agreement on Economic and                      
 Technical Cooperation between the two countries was signed during the                      
 visit. The Indo-Netherlands Joint Business Council and the                                 
 Indo-Netherlands Joint Committee on Economic and Technical Cooperation                     
 met in New Delhi in March 1983. The Minister of Development Cooperation                    
 of the Netherlands, Mrs. Eegje Schoo, visited India from 12 to 22                          
 December 1983 and held discussions with Economic Ministries on various                     
 aspects of Indo- Dutch economic and technical cooperation.                                 
                                                                                            
 Three countries from West Europe (UK, Malta and Cyprus) participated in                    
 the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting in New Delhi in November                      
 1983. It was the largest CHOGM gathering, with 42 of the 44 Commonwealth                   
 countries being represented. The leaders reviewed the global political                     
 and economic situation.                                                                    
 THE USSR AND EASTERN EUROPE                                                                
                                                                                            
 India's friendly and cordial relations with Soviet Union and the other                     
 countries of East Europe developed satisfactorily during the year. The                     
 major high-level visits from India were those of President Giani Zail                      
 Singh to Czechoslovakia, Prime Minister Smt. Indira Gandhi to                              
 Yugoslavia, and Minister of External Affairs to the Soviet Union,                          
 Romania and Hungary. The Speaker of the Lok Sabha also led Parliamentary                   
 delegations to Czechoslovakia and the GDR. Our economic relations with                     
 the countries in the area also continued to grow during 1983.                              
                                                                                            
 The Minister of External Affairs paid a brief visit to Moscow in                           
 September 1983 and had talks with the First Deputy Chairman of the USSR                    
 Council of Ministers and Foreign Minister, Mr. Gromyko.                                    
 -27>                                                                                       
 Indo-Soviet trade and economic cooperation expanded further during the                     
 period under review. The Soviet Union continued to be India's leading                      
 trading partner.                                                                           
                                                                                            
 The Soviet First Deputy Premier, Mr. I. V. Arkhipov, visited India in                      
 May 1983 and had discussions with the Minister of External Affairs as                      
 well as other Ministers in the Union Cabinet on matters relating to                        
 economic cooperation. He was the chief guest at the inauguration of the                    
 Mathura Oil Refinery. Mr. Arkhipov visited India again in December 1983                    
 to attend the Eighth Session of the Indo-Soviet Joint Commission for                       
 Economic, Scientific and Technical Cooperation of which he is                              
 Co-chairman on the Soviet side. The Indian side to these talks was led                     
 by the Minister of External Affairs. The Joint Commission session                          
 provided an opportunity for an in-depth review of economic cooperation                     
 in diverse fields and for examining means of increasing cooperation.                       
 Another visit of note was that of Vice- Premier and Chairman of the USSR                   
 State Committee for Science and Technology, Mr. G. I. Marchuk.                             
                                                                                            
 In September 1983, the Commerce Minister, Shri V. P. Singh, paid an                        
 official visit to Moscow, during which there was a review of Indo-Soviet                   
 trade relations and discussion on the prospects for 1984. The Trade Plan                   
 for 1984 was agreed on in December 1983 and provides for a substantial                     
 increase in the turnover as compared to that in 1983.                                      
                                                                                            
 The Working Groups under the Joint Commission in the sectors of coal,                      
 machinebuilding, power, steel and non-ferrous metallurgy met as                            
 scheduled during the period under review. The sub- commission for                          
 Science and Technology also held its meeting in New Delhi in December                      
 1983 and finalised a programme of cooperation for 1984-87. Education,                      
 Culture, Public Health and Medicine were other areas which featured in                     
 bilateral cooperation during the period under review.                                      
                                                                                            
 Other important visitors from India during the period under review were                    
 the Minister of Defence, the Minister of State for Information &                           
 Broadcasting and the Minister of State for Education, Culture and Social                   
 Welfare.                                                                                   
                                                                                            
 India played host to a delegation led by the Vice-President of the                         
 Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the USSR and the President of the                       
 Uzbek SSR, Mr. Usmankhodjaev, which attended the Independence Day                          
 celebrations. The visit was in response to an invitation by the Friends                    
 of the Soviet Union.                                                                       
                                                                                            
 President Zhivkov of Bulgaria paid a State visit to India in December                      
 1983 and had talks with the President, Vice-President and Prime Minister                   
 on questions of international and bilateral interest. President Zhivkov                    
 was accompanied by Foreign Minister, Mladenov and Foreign Trade Minister                   
 Hristov and senior officials. Just prior to the visit of the Bulgarian                     
 President, there was an inter-sessional meeting of the Indo-Bulgarian                      
 Joint Commission for Economic, Scientific and Technical Cooperation,                       
 -28>                                                                                       
 the two sides being led respectively by the Bulgarian Minister of                          
 Foreign Trade and the Minister of Agriculture, Shri Rao Birendra Singh.                    
 The meeting facilitated a review of economic cooperation and an                            
 examination of ways of expanding it. The two sides agreed to increase                      
 bilateral economic interchanges on a balanced basis, and to diversify                      
 imports from India. Another important visitor from Bulgaria was Mr. O.                     
 Doinov, Member of the Politburo and Secretariat of the Central Committee                   
 of the Bulgarian Communist Party and President of the Bulgarian Economic                   
 Association.                                                                               
                                                                                            
 The President of India, Giani Zail Singh, paid a State visit to                            
 Czechoslovakia in December 1983. During the visit, talks were held with                    
 President Husak on bilateral subjects as well as important international                   
 questions. The visit gave an impetus to the development of relations                       
 between the two countries. A Parliamentary Delegation led by the Speaker                   
 of the Lok Sabha visited Czechoslovakia in July 1983. The exchange of                      
 views with the leaders of Czechoslovakia led to a reaffirmation of good                    
 bilateral relations. The Minister of Industry, Shri N. D. Tiwari,                          
 visited Czechoslovakia in September 1983 and discussed matters relating                    
 to Indo-Czechoslovak trade and economic cooperation. The Trade Plan for                    
 1984 was also signed in New Delhi in December 1983.                                        
                                                                                            
 A Parliamentary Delegation led by the Speaker of the Lok Sabha visited                     
 the GDR in June 1983. Talks were held with the GDR leaders on bilateral                    
 and international questions. The Deputy Chairman of the GDR Council of                     
 Ministers, Dr. G. Weiss, visited India in November 1983. The Protocol                      
 signed during the visit made a comprehensive review of Indo-GDR economic                   
 cooperation and identified possibilities of growth. These and other                        
 exchanges in the economic field contributed to an expansion of economic                    
 relations.                                                                                 
                                                                                            
 Foreign Minister Shri P. V. Narasimha Rao visited Hungary in September                     
 1983 and had talks with Hungarian leaders on bilateral and international                   
 questions. Both sides expressed satisfaction with the steady development                   
 of bilateral relations in different fields. There was an exchange of                       
 economic and trade delegations during the period under review as part of                   
 the effort by both sides to expand trade and economic cooperation on a                     
 balanced basis.                                                                            
                                                                                            
 The Indo-Polish Joint Commission for Economic, Scientific, and Technical                   
 Co-operation held its eighth meeting in December 1983. The two sides                       
 were led by                                                                                
 -29>                                                                                       
 Deputy Premier Obodowski on the Polish side and the Minister of Energy                     
 on the Indian side. Bilateral economic relations, particularly in fields                   
 such as coal mining and heavy industry were reviewed.                                      
                                                                                            
 The Minister of External Affairs visited Romania in September 1983 and                     
 held discussions with his counterpart and other Romanian leaders,                          
 including President Ceausescu. The visit was an occasion for discussing                    
 bilateral relations as well as for an exchange of views on international                   
 questions. On this occasion, as well as during the visits exchanged by                     
 economic and commercial delegations, possibilities of expanding trade                      
 and economic relations were discussed. The Trade Plan for 1984 provides                    
 for an increased turnover.                                                                 
                                                                                            
 In June 1983 Prime Minister Smt. Indira Gandhi paid an official visit to                   
 Yugoslavia. Discussions with the President and Prime Minister of                           
 Yugoslavia covered major international issues, the Non-Aligned Movement                    
 as well as bilateral relations.                                                            
                                                                                            
 The Prime Minister, Smt. Indira Gandhi's visit to Yugoslavia coincided                     
 with the meeting of the Indo-Yugoslav Joint Committee for Economic,                        
 Scientific and Technical Cooperation. Measures were agreed on at this                      
 meeting for maintaining the growth of bilateral trade. Both sides                          
 reiterated their resolve to continue the expansion of economic relations                   
 for mutual benefit.                                                                        
 -30>                                                                                       
                                                                                            
 THE AMERICAS NORTH AMERICA                                                                 
                                                                      Top                   
 The momentum generated in bilateral relations between India and the                        
 United States following the Prime Minister's visit to USA in July-August                   
 1982 was maintained to an extent by follow-up activities in various                        
 fields. A number of decisions taken during the visit were implemented in                   
 varying degrees in 1983. Despite differences in perception on a number                     
 of regional and global questions, India endeavoured to strengthen                          
 bilateral relations with the United States and to place them on an even                    
 keel.                                                                                      
                                                                                            
 The meeting between the Prime Minister and the US President on the                         
 occasion of the Prime Minister's visit to the United Nations in                            
 September 1983 provided an opportunity for an exchange of views at the                     
 highest level on a variety of bilateral and multilateral issues. The two                   
 leaders continued their correspondence on various matters of mutual                        
 concern.                                                                                   
                                                                                            
 The sequence of high-level contacts was kept up by the US Secretary of                     
 State's visit to India in June-July 1983. The Secretary of State held                      
 exhaustive discussions with the Foreign Minister on a number of                            
 questions of mutual interest. He also called on the Prime Minister. The                    
 visit enabled the Sixth Session of the Indo-US Joint Commission to take                    
 places in New Delhi.                                                                       
                                                                                            
 Other visitors from the United States to India during the year were                        
 Senator Patrick Moynihan in January 1983; a delegation from the House                      
 Appropriations Committee led by Congressman Addabbo in August 1983;                        
 Congressman Stephen Solarz in September 1983; and Congressmen Brown and                    
 Sensenbrenner of the House Science & Technology Committee in December                      
 1983. The former US Secretary of State Mr. Edmund Muskie, visited India                    
 at the invitation of the Government of India in connection with the                        
 Roosevelt Centenary celebrations. The Director of the USIA, Charles                        
 Wick, was in India in October 1983 and Assistant Secretary Gregory                         
 Newell in January 1983.                                                                    
                                                                                            
 The US decision to supply sophisticated arms to Pakistan, beyond that                      
 country's legitimate defence needs, continued to cast a shadow over its                    
 relations with India. In                                                                   
 -31>                                                                                       
 particular, the decision, to supply the Harpoon missiles caused an                         
 outcry in this country. There was also great concern that the stated                       
 reason for supplying arms to Pakistan was widened from the situation in                    
 Afghanistan with its repercussions on Pakistan, to the situation in the                    
 Indian Ocean and Pakistan's role in the Gulf.                                              
                                                                                            
 During Secretary of State Shultz's visit to India, the United States                       
 announced its willingness to supply those spare parts for the Tarapur                      
 Atomic Power. Station which were not available from other sources. As a                    
 result, India began exploring the possibility of acquiring the spare                       
 parts from Western Europe. However, the year-end saw the spare parts                       
 issue still unresolved.                                                                    
                                                                                            
 The US decision to grant a visa to the leader of the so-called Khalistan                   
 movement, Jagjit Singh Chauhan, to enter the United States and to carry                    
 out political activity there caused considerable controversy. The                          
 Government of India made known its unhappiness over this decision to the                   
 US Government.                                                                             
                                                                                            
 The Indo-US Joint Commission held its Sixth Session in Delhi during the                    
 visit of Secretary of State Shultz. The Sub- Commissions on Education &                    
 Culture, on Economic and Commercial matters met in April and December                      
 1983 in San Francisco and New Delhi respectively. The Indo-US Senior                       
 Scientists Panel, which was established as the result of an agreement                      
 during the Prime Minister's visit to the USA in 1982 also held its first                   
 meeting in January 1983.                                                                   
                                                                                            
 In pursuance of the desire to step up commercial contacts, a delegation                    
 from the Overseas Private Investment Corporation (OPIC) of the USA                         
 visited India in February-March 1983. The delegation held fruitful                         
 meetings with Government officials and private sector organisations. The                   
 Engineering Export Promotion Council of India organised a Seminar in                       
 Houston (Texas) in November 1983 which was widely attended by US                           
 commercial organizations, and also by the US Secretary of Commerce, Mr.                    
 Malcolm Baldrige. Opportunities for trade and joint ventures with India                    
 and third countries were identified.                                                       
                                                                                            
 Relations between India and Canada were further strengthened during the                    
 period under review, which saw the visit of Canadian Prime Minister                        
 Pierre Trudeau to India for the Commonwealth Heads of Government                           
 Meeting. The Minister for Health Shri B. Shankaranand attended the                         
 Commonwealth Health Ministers meeting in Ottawa during October 1983. The                   
 Indian delegation to the ICAO meeting held in Montreal in September 1983                   
 was led by the Secretary, Ministry of Tourism & Civil Aviation, Shri                       
 M.M. Kohli.                                                                                
                                                                                            
 The Canadian Deputy Prime Minister and Secretary of State for External                     
 Affairs, Mr. Allan MacEachen, paid an official visit to India in July                      
 1983. The talks focussed both on the international situation and on                        
 bilateral economic and commercial matters, 2 EA/83-6                                       
 -32>                                                                                       
 The Canadian Deputy Prime Minister also held discussions with the                          
 Finance Minister and the Minister of Industry.                                             
 A delegation from the province of British Columbia led by the provincial                   
 Minister of Finance, Huge Curtis, visited India in October 1983.                           
 CENTRAL AND SOUTH AMERICA AND THE CARIBBEAN                                                
 Relations between India and Central and South America and the Caribbean                    
 continued to be market by increasing cooperation. The year began with                      
 the meeting of Foreign Ministers of Non-Aligned countries at Managua                       
 (Nicaragua) where India played a moderating role in finalising the                         
 Document subsequently used during the Non- Aligned Summit at New Delhi.                    
                                                                                            
 The mediation effort known as the Contadora Initiative began in January                    
 1983 when Mexico, Panama, Colombia and Venezuela commenced their efforts                   
 to defuse the tension in the Central American region. India issued a                       
 statement on 24 August 1983 welcoming and supporting the efforts made by                   
 these four countries to find a peaceful negotiated solution to the                         
 crisis in Central America.                                                                 
                                                                                            
 The Bahamas, Barbados and Colombia became full members of the                              
 Non-Aligned Movement during the 1983 Summit, while Antigua and Barbuda                     
 participated as Observers. Guest status was accorded to the Dominican                      
 Republic. The Non-Aligned Summit also saw the visit to New Delhi of the                    
 Presidents of Argentina, Cuba, Guyana, Nicaragua, Suriname as well as                      
 several Foreign Ministers from the region.                                                 
                                                                                            
 On 24 October 1983 USA and six Caribbean countries Jointly invaded                         
 Grenada. The invasion followed an internal power struggle in Grenada in                    
 which Prime Minister Maurice Bishop and some Cabinet Ministers were                        
 killed on 19 November 1983 and power was seized by the army. The                           
 invasion was widely criticised. The Government of India made a statement                   
 on 26 October 1983 strongly opposing interference and intervention by                      
 any country in another country and urging the immediate withdrawal of                      
 all foreign forces from Grenada.                                                           
 -33>                                                                                       
 The Minister of State for Home Affairs, Shri P. Venkatasubbaiah,                           
 represented India on the occasion of the independence celebrations of                      
 St. Christopher-Nevis.                                                                     
                                                                                            
 The President of India sent a message of congratulations to the new                        
 Argentine President, Raul Alfonsin. The Minister of State for External                     
 Affairs, Shri A. A. Rahim, represented India during the inaugural                          
 ceremonies.                                                                                
 The Trade Fair Authority of India participated successfully in the                         
 International Trade Fair held at Caracas in May 1983. The Chief Minister                   
 of Jammu & Kashmir, Shri Farooq Abdullah, inaugurated the Indian                           
 Pavilion as well as the film "Gandhi".                                                     
                                                                                            
 The Governments of India and Mexico have exchanged the Instruments of                      
 Ratification of the Agreement on Economic Cooperation signed in November                   
 1982.                                                                                      
                                                                                            
 In the cultural field, India paid homage to the memory of Simon Bolivar,                   
 the 'Liberator' of Latin America. A stamp was released on the occasion                     
 of the Simon Bolivar Bicentenary, and a plaque was erected on Simon                        
 Bolivar Marg in New Delhi to commemorate his memory. Gift sets of the                      
 stamp were presented to the President and other leading personalities of                   
 Venezuela, and a translation into Hindi of SalcedoBastardo's famous                        
 biography of Bolivar has been undertaken and is expected to be completed                   
 by March 1984. It is to be published by the ICCR. The Venezuelan Embassy                   
 in New Delhi also organised a pictorial exhibition on Bolivar's life                       
 which was inaugurated by the President, Giani Zail Singh. A seminar and                    
 essay competition on Simon Bolivar was also organised.                                     
                                                                                            
 In September 1982 the Indian Embassy in Buenos Aires had organised an                      
 "India Week" which was inaugurated by the President of Argentina and                       
 which proved to be a great success. The exhibition was later set up in                     
 Paraguay and Uruguay. The Argentine Embassy in New Delhi in turn,                          
 organised a similar "Argentina Week" in New Delhi in May 1983. A                           
 portrait of Mahatma Gandhi by an Argentine artist was gifted to the                        
 Minister for Information & Broadcasting, Shri Vasant Sathe.                                
                                                                                            
 A number of visits were exchanged during the year. The Minister for                        
 External Affairs, Shri P. V. Narasimha Rao, and the Minister of                            
 Commerce, Shri V. P. Singh, visited Buenos Aires to attend the Group of                    
 77 meeting in April 1983 and                                                               
 -34>                                                                                       
 Shri Narasimha Rao stayed on after conclusion for a bilateral visit. The                   
 Chief of the Argentine Air Force, Brig. Gen. Augusto Jorge Hughes,                         
 visited India in November 1983 during which he called on the Prime                         
 Minister in addition to having official discussions with Air Chief                         
 Marshal Dilbagh Singh. The Argentinian Air Force has assisted the Indian                   
 expeditions to the Antarctic.                                                              
                                                                                            
 The indian Minister of State for Agriculture, Shri Arif Mohd. Khan, and                    
 the Minister of Agriculture for Argentina, Senor Victor Hug Santirs,                       
 exchanged visits during the course of the year. An Argentinian business                    
 delegation also visited India as a follow-up to the visit of Dr. Felix                     
 Pena in 1982 and in accordance with the IndoArgentinian Agreement on                       
 Economic Cooperation. A Shipping Agreement was signed between the                          
 Argentine shipping company, ELMA, and the Shipping Corporation of India                    
 in October 1983 in Singapore. The ratification of this agreement is                        
 awaited.                                                                                   
                                                                                            
 In connection with the Non-Aligned Summit meeting the Cuban Vice                           
 President Carlos Rafael Rodriguez and the Deputy Minister for Foreign                      
 Affairs of Cuba, Jose Viera, visited India in February 1983 while                          
 Secretary in the Ministry of External Affairs, Shri K. S. Bajpai,                          
 visited several Non-Aligned countries of Latin America. Two members of                     
 Parliament, S/Shri Arun Nehru and Udaya Singh Gaekwad, represented India                   
 at the 30th Anniversary of the Attack on the Moncada Garrison in Cuba in                   
 July 1983. Dr. Fidel Castro Diaz Balart, son of President Fidel Castro                     
 Ruz of Cuba, was in India from 25 September to 6 October 1983 as a guest                   
 of the Chairman, Atomic Energy Commission Dr. Diaz-Balart is the                           
 Executive Secretary, Executive Secretariat for Nuclear Affairs of the                      
 Council of Ministers of Cuba. A Cuban trade delegation came to India in                    
 October 1983 and stayed for over a month. An agreement was entered into                    
 by them with CIMMCO Industries, Bombay for the export of various goods                     
 to Cuba.                                                                                   
                                                                                            
 Shri D. P. Jadeja, M.P., visited several countries in Latin America and                    
 the Caribbean in his capacity as President of the Indian Society for                       
 Latin America, and was present in Caracas (Venezuela) for some of the                      
 celebrations of the Simon Bolivar Bicentenary. Dr. Karan Singh, M.P.                       
 covered Mexico, Trinidad & Tobago, Suriname and Guyana in his study tour                   
 of Latin America during May 1983. Mrs. Margaret Alva went to Havana at                     
 the invitation of the Cuban Institute of Friendship and Culture with the                   
 Peoples at the end of September 1983.                                                      
                                                                                            
 The Indian Cricket team played matches against the West Indies in the                      
 Caribbean from April to May 1983 and in India from October 1983.                           
 -35>                                                                                       
 Mrs. Viola Forbes Burnham, First Lady of Guyana, visited India from 17                     
 to 22 November 1983 to view small-scale and cottage industries, mainly                     
 pertaining to coir and banana fibre. She also visited the Prototype                        
 Development Training Centres in Madras and Delhi. The Commonwealth                         
 Finance Ministers' Meeting was held in Port- of-Spain, Trinidad &                          
 Tobago, from 20 to 23 September 1983. The Indian delegation was led by                     
 the Governor, Reserve Bank of India, Dr. Manmohan Singh, and Finance                       
 Secretary, Department of Economic Affairs, Shri P. K. Kaul. From                           
 Port-of-Spain the delegation proceeded to Washington for the IMF/World                     
 Bank Meeting held from 22 to 30 September 1983.                                            
 -36>                                                                                       
                                                                                            
 UNITED NATIONS AND INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCES                                               
                                                                      Top                   
 During the year under review, India played an active and constructive                      
 role in the field of multilateral diplomacy at the United Nations, in                      
 the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and at various other international                   
 fora. The Seventh Conference of Heads of State or Government of                            
 Non-Aligned Countries was held in New Delhi from 7 to 12 March 1983                        
 under the Chairmanship of Prime Minister Shrimati Indira Gandhi. At the                    
 New Delhi Summit, the members of the Movement adopted a comprehensive                      
 statement on the political and economic situation of the world. The                        
 views of the Movement were summed up in the New Delhi Message. A                           
 comprehensive report on the Summit was given in a Supplement to the                        
 Annual Report of the Ministry of External Affairs for 1982-83.                             
 Summit Level Gathering in New York                                                         
                                                                                            
 After the New Delhi Non-Aligned Summit, the Prime Minister addressed                       
 letters to leaders of Member countries of the UN highlighting some of                      
 the crucial issues facing the world which were considered at the New                       
 Delhi Conference, and apprised these leaders of the main conclusions and                   
 recommendations of the Summit. The Prime Minister urged Heads of State                     
 or Government of Member States of UN to utilise the opportunity offered                    
 by the 38th Session of the UN General Assembly to undertake a collective                   
 appraisal with a view to finding speedy and just solution to some of the                   
 major problems of the world.                                                               
                                                                                            
 In response to this call, 24 Heads of State/Government met in New York                     
 in two informal get togethers on September 27 and 29 under the                             
 Chairmanship of Prime Minister Shrimati Indira Gandhi. Both the                            
 President of the General Assembly and the UN Secretary General were                        
 present during these meetings. Prime Minister also met other Heads of                      
 State/Government, e.g. President Reagon of the USA and Prime Minister                      
 Thatcher of UK who did not take part in the consultations. This unique                     
 gathering was a representative one, and cut across ideological,                            
 geographical and economic frontiers. It provided a rare opportunity to                     
 the participants to demonstrate their common concern at the continuing                     
 deterioration in the international situation and their collective                          
 commitment to reducing international tension, strengthening peace                          
 -37>                                                                                       
 and security and, above all, promoting economic development. The main                      
 subjects which engaged the attention of the leaders were the issues of                     
 peace, disarmament, development and strengthening of the UN. The world                     
 economic crisis and problems of development which are of immediate                         
 concern came up for detailed consideration. In spite of different                          
 approaches on some issues, the leaders displayed a sense of realism and                    
 common purpose in addressing themselves to these important issues of                       
 human survival and development. They agreed that the meetings were                         
 useful and that the dialogue should continue involving other leaders                       
 also.                                                                                      
                                                                                            
 The Prime Minister officially led the Indian delegation to the 38th                        
 Session of the UNGA. Addressing the Assembly on 28 September 1983 Prime                    
 Minister formally conveyed the message of the New Delhi Summit to the                      
 world body. She called for new initiatives from the industrialised world                   
 in bringing about economic reform and in calling a halt to the arms                        
 race. The thrust of her address was on peace, disarmament, and                             
 development. Prime Minister also elaborated on the role of the                             
 Non-Aligned Movement in the present world context and called for greater                   
 support to the United Nations.                                                             
                                                                                            
 India also, participated actively, and at a high level, at other                           
 international meetings, under the aegis of the UN and the G-77. These                      
 included the International Conference on the Question of Palestine in                      
 Geneva, the International Conference in Support of the Struggle of the                     
 Namibian People for Independence in Paris, the Ministerial Conference of                   
 the Group of 77 in Buenos Aires and UNCTAD VI in Belgrade. India's role                    
 and participation in the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, of which it                    
 assumed the Chairmanship in March 1983 are dealt with in another section                   
 of this Report. India also played host to the CHOGM in New Delhi in                        
 November 1983.                                                                             
                                                                                            
 India's stature and role in world affairs were reflected also in its                       
 successufl election to various UN Organs and bodies during the year. The                   
 most important of these is the Security Council, to which India was                        
 elected by an impressive margin for the fifth time. During 1983 India                      
 was also elected to the Population Commission, the Industrial                              
 Development Board of UNIDO, the Committee for Programme and the                            
 Commission on Narcotic Drugs. A representative of India was also elected                   
 to the Advisory Committee on Administration and Budgetary Questions.                       
 Political Issues                                                                           
 In all the three main forums dealing with the question of disarmament                      
 within the UN system, namely, the Committee on Disarmament, the UN                         
 Disarmament Commission and the First Committee of the General Assembly,                    
 India continued to play a constructive role during the year under                          
 review. In the Committee on Disarmament in Geneva, which is the sole                       
 multilateral negotiating body on disarmament matters, India has                            
 consistently tried to keep the focus of negotiations on the most urgent                    
 -38>                                                                                       
 measures in the field of nuclear disarmament through active involvement                    
 in the work of ad hoc working groups on nuclear test ban, on the one                       
 hand, and by demanding the establishment of ad hoc working groups on                       
 prevention of nuclear war and on nuclear disarmament, on the other. In                     
 addition, the Indian delegation fully cooperated with the ad hoc working                   
 group on chemical weapons in its progress towards an early conclusion of                   
 the negotiations for elaboration of an international convention banning                    
 chemical weapons. It has been the constant endeavour of India to ensure                    
 that the Committee on Disarmament does not detract from the most crucial                   
 issues before it, namely prevention of nuclear war and the cessation and                   
 reversal of the nuclear arms race.                                                         
                                                                                            
 In the UN Disarmament Commission also, which is a deliberative organ on                    
 disarmament issues, India has tried, in cooperation with the Non-Aligned                   
 group of countries to work out an effective and purposeful approach                        
 towards the crucial disarmament issues before the world, particularly                      
 those relating to nuclear disarmament. While reiterating its commitment                    
 to general and complete disarmament under effective international                          
 control, India carried out extensive discussions with the members of the                   
 Disarmament Commission to ensure that the priorities in this field were                    
 not disrupted and peripheral issues were not allowed to distract                           
 international attention from the principal task of elimination of                          
 nuclear weapons.                                                                           
                                                                                            
 In the First Committee of the UN General Assembly, at its 38th session,                    
 India again tabled resolutions on a Convention on prohibition of the use                   
 of nuclear weapons and on the freeze on nuclear weapons. The purpose                       
 behind this exercise was to reaffirm the importance and significance of                    
 these immediate measures, the adoption of which would considerably                         
 minimise the threat of a nuclear war. Both these resolutions were                          
 supported by an overwhelming majority of member nations of the UN. In                      
 all, 62 resolutions came up for vote before the First Committee, dealing                   
 with various issues on disarmament, of which India co-sponsored 10 and                     
 voted in favour of 43. As for resolution pertaining to matters which, in                   
 the view of the Indian delegation, were not of immediate priority or                       
 which served to trivialise, or defer, the need to come to grips with the                   
 most essential question of nuclear disarmament, India held serious                         
 reservations. In the explanation of its negative votes on two and                          
 abstentions on 17 resolutions, India put forth its principal position                      
 behind its dissenting vote. Through active consultations with members of                   
 the Non- Aligned group it was possible to make a constructive                              
 contribution to the work of the First Committee.                                           
                                                                                            
 India participated actively during the year in the work of the United                      
 Nations Council for Namibia, the legal administering authority                             
 established by the United Nations for the territory until independence,                    
 of which it is a founder member and Vice- President. The Minister of                       
 State for External Affairs led the Indian delegation to the                                
 International Conference on the Struggle of the Namibian People for                        
 Independence, held in Paris from 25 to 29 April 1983 and made a                            
 statement in his capacity                                                                  
 -39>                                                                                       
 as special reptresentative of the Chairperson of the Movement of                           
 Non-Aligned Countries. The Minister of External Affairs personally                         
 participated in the debate in the Security Council on the Namibian                         
 question in May 1983 and opened the debate on behalf of the Non-Aligned                    
 Movement. In the context of consideration of the issue by the General                      
 Assembly, the Indian delegation participated actively in the drafting of                   
 the five resolutions on Namibia.                                                           
                                                                                            
 On the question of Apartheid, the 38th General Assembly, after an                          
 extensive debate, adopted as many as twelve resolutions. All these                         
 resolutions were drafted by the Special Committee against Apartheid.                       
 India, being an active member of the Special Committee, played a leading                   
 and constructive role in making these resolutions more cohesive and                        
 meaningful. Eleven of these resolutions were adopted by an overwhelming                    
 majority vote, with only a handful of Western countries either voting                      
 against or abstaining. India, while co-sponsoring seven of these, voted                    
 in favour of all the resolutions. The twelfth resolution entitled United                   
 Nations Trust Fund for South Africa, which was also co- sponsored by                       
 India, was, adopted without vote. The resolutions adopted also included                    
 a new resolution by which the General Assembly firmly rejected the                         
 so-called New Racial Constitution of South Africa by 141 votes to none                     
 with seven abstentions. This resolution was also co-sponsored by India.                    
                                                                                            
 The Indian delegate, in his statement on the subject, expressed                            
 disappointment over the fact that some of the affluent and                                 
 industrialised nations, who proclaimed their support to the cause of                       
 human rights, equality and justice in other parts of the world continued                   
 to collaborate with the racist regime of South Africa in various fields,                   
 thereby, giving a fresh lease of life to that regime. He said such                         
 collaboration emboldened the racist regime to trample upon the human                       
 rights and dignity of the vast majority of the population of that                          
 country and to flout the numerous resolutions adopted by the United                        
 Nations on the subject. India once again appealed to the international                     
 community for the imposition of sanctions against the racist regime of                     
 South Africa and for moral and material support to the Frontline States.                   
                                                                                            
 The volatile situation in Central America remained a focal point of                        
 international concern throughout the period under review. The Security                     
 Council was called into session on three occasions during 1983 following                   
 complaints by Nicaragua. The General Assembly also considered this                         
 matter as a new item on its agenda. India spoke twice in the Council on                    
 behalf of the Non- Aligned countries and also convened several meeting                     
 of the Non- Aligned Coordinating Bureau to consider the threat to peace                    
 and security in the region particularly in the light of ostensible                         
 external interference and intervention in the area. The adoption by the                    
 General Assembly of a resolution by consensus, for which primary credit                    
 must go to the perseverance of the Contadora Group of countries                            
 (Colombia Mexico, Panama and Venezuela) as also to the flexibility and                     
 statesmanship of Nicaragua, was one of the most significant achievements                   
 of the 38th session. As 1983 drew to a close, the positive efforts of 2                    
 EA/83-7                                                                                    
 -40>                                                                                       
 the Contadora Countries and the spirit of accommodation demonstrated by                    
 the Government of Nicaragua had produced a distinct and positive change                    
 in the situation, although speculation about possible external                             
 intervention persisted.                                                                    
                                                                                            
 The massive military intervention in Grenada by the United States and                      
 some Caribbean countries cast an ominous shadow on international                           
 relations, particularly those between East and West. India joined others                   
 in participating in the Security Council debate on the subject                             
 maintaining inter alia, that the invasion could not be justified and was                   
 inconsistent with the basic laws of international behaviour and that the                   
 developments in Grenada had caused deep disquiet and grave concern among                   
 the Non-Aligned countries. The draft resolution before the Council was                     
 vetoed by the USA. Subsequently, the matter was taken up by the General                    
 Assembly which adopted a resolution deeply deploring the armed                             
 intervention and calling for the immediate withdrawal of foreign troops                    
 from Grenada. India voted in favour of the resolution, along with 107                      
 other countries.                                                                           
                                                                                            
 In pursuance of the decision of the General Assembly, an International                     
 Conference on the question of Palestine was convened in Geneva from 29                     
 August to 7 September 1983 to seek effective ways and means to enable                      
 the Palestinian people to attain and exercise their inalienable rights.                    
 The Conference adopted, by acclamation, the Geneva Declaration on                          
 Palestine and Programme of Action for the achievement of Palestinian                       
 rights. The highlight of the Geneva Declaration was the call for the                       
 convening of an International Peace Conference on the Middle East under                    
 the auspices of the UN with the aim of achieving a comprehensive, just                     
 and lasting solution to the Arab-Israeli conflict, an essential element                    
 of which would be the establishment of an indpendent Palestinian State                     
 in Palestine. The Indian delegation to the Conference was led by the                       
 Foreign Minister, Shri Narasimha Rao who addressed the Conference on                       
 behalf of the Chairperson of the Movement of Non-Aligned countries.                        
 India played an important and constructive role at the conference to                       
 evolve acceptable formulations on contentious issues and served as the                     
 Chairman of the Drafting Committee.                                                        
                                                                                            
 The Middle East problem received considerable attention from the General                   
 Assembly which adopted a number of resolutions, many of which were                         
 co-sponsored by India. The new major elements in the resolutions were                      
 the recognition of the time factor in achieving a just solution to the                     
 problem of Palestine, the endorsement by the General Assembly of the                       
 Geneva Declaration on Palestine, and the call for convening an                             
 International Peace Conference on the Middle East in conformity with                       
 certain guidelines which, inter alia, include the invitation to all                        
 parties to the Arab-Israeli conflict, including the PLO as well as the                     
 USA, USSR and other concerned States "to participate in the                                
 international peace conference on an equal footing with equal rights".                     
 Another resolution, co-sponsored by the Arab countries on the agreements                   
 following the Memorandum of Understanding between the US and Israel, was                   
 approved by the General Assembly by 81 votes in favour, 7 against and 29                   
 abstentions. The resolution demands that all States, particularly the                      
 USA (in light of the said agreements)                                                      
 -41>                                                                                       
 refrain from taking any step that would support Israel's war                               
 capabilities and consequently its aggressive acts.                                         
                                                                                            
 A number of Arab and Islamic countries placed their reservations on the                    
 credentials of the delegation of Israel to the 38th session, voicing                       
 their indignation over Israel's flagrant and persistent violation of the                   
 principles of international law and the United Nations Charter. An                         
 Iranian amendment to the report of the Credentials Committee, seeking                      
 the rejection of the credentials of Israel, was however not accepted by                    
 the General Assembly. Taking note of the reservations made on the                          
 Israeli credentials, the Indian representative observed that this                          
 reflected a sense of outrage by the overwhelming majority of the member                    
 States of the UN over the defiant refusal by Israel to comply with the                     
 relevant UN resolutions and violation of its Charter obligations.                          
                                                                                            
 During the period under review the General Assembly again adopted a                        
 resolution on the armed Israeli aggression against Iraqi nuclear                           
 installations. While voting for the resolution, the Indian delegate                        
 stated that the gravity of the Israeli crime would have been equally                       
 reprehensible even if Iraq had not been a signatory to the                                 
 NonProliferation Treaty (NPT). It was clarified that India's support to                    
 the resolution was without prejudice to its well-known views on                            
 references to the NPT and the related full-scope safeguards which                          
 figured in the resolution.                                                                 
                                                                                            
 As in previous years the General Assembly adopted a resolution on the                      
 cooperation between the UN and the Organisation of the Islamic                             
 Conference seeking to expand the institutional linkage between the UN                      
 and the Islamic Conference. The resolution was adopted without vote. In                    
 this context, India reiterated its view that a narrow sectarian approach                   
 in dealing with political, economic, social, cultural or humanitarian                      
 questions or the use of religious sentiments for promoting sectarian                       
 interests should be discouraged.                                                           
                                                                                            
 The UN General Assembly once again considered the question of                              
 Afghanistan and adopted a resolution which was similar to the one                          
 adopted in 1982 by 116 votes in favour, 20 against and 17 abstentions.                     
 India, as in previous years, abstained. The Indian delegate                                
 participating in the debate once again stressed the need to prevent                        
 escalation of tensions in the region and to take effective action to                       
 defuse them. He urged all concerned to work for the evolution of a                         
 political solution based on a dialogue between the parties directly                        
 involved. He said that the prospect for a satisfactory solution lay in                     
 the success of the Secretary General's efforts.                                            
                                                                                            
 The situation in Kampuchea also received the attention of the General                      
 Assembly. While a number of delegations, including India, expressed                        
 their reservations on the credentials of Democratic Kampuchea, there was                   
 no formal move in the General Assembly to challenge its credentials. The                   
 substantive resolution on Kampuchea was                                                    
 -42>                                                                                       
 adopted by 105 votes in favour, 23 against and 19 abstentions. As in                       
 previous years India abstained on the ground that the adoption of a                        
 resolution that satisfied only one side would obstruct rather than                         
 encourage constructive contacts. India advocated a compehensive                            
 political solution as recommended by the Movement of Non-Aligned                           
 Countries.                                                                                 
                                                                                            
 Consequent upon the adoption by the Security Council of Resolution 540                     
 on 31 October 1983 on the situation between Iran and Iraq, which was                       
 rejected by Iran, the debate on the agenda item dealing with the                           
 Iran-Iraq conflict in the General Assembly was postponed to the resumed                    
 session, in consultation with the parties concerned. It was felt that a                    
 debate on this item in the Assembly may lead to strong statements which                    
 may impede the Secretary General's mediation efforts.                                      
                                                                                            
 The prospects for convening a conference on the Indian Ocean receded                       
 further when the General Assembly adopted without vote a resolution                        
 requesting the Ad hoc Committee on the Indian Ocean "to make decisive                      
 efforts in 1984 to complete preparatory work relating to the conference                    
 on the Indian Ocean, in consideration of the political and security                        
 climate in the region with a view to enabling the opening of the                           
 conference in Colombo in the first half of 1985". The Western powers                       
 maintained that there was no possibility of convening a conference                         
 unless there was an improvement in the political and security climate in                   
 the region, a reference to the foreign intervention in Afghanistan. In                     
 addition, they wanted the Ad hoc Committee to harmonise views with                         
 regard to the concept of zone of peace and the objectives of the                           
 conference. This was strongly opposed by the Socialist countries who                       
 accused the Western countries of introducing elements extraneous to the                    
 convening of the conference and complicating the preparatory work. The                     
 Socialist countries called for a separate vote on the relevant                             
 paragraphs of the resolution and abstained on them. The US also                            
 dissociated itself from support for the resolution while accusing the                      
 USSR of breaking the tradition of consensus and indicated that while the                   
 US was willing to join the consensus, in view of USSR's action it would                    
 not participate in the decision on this item. The resolution, which was                    
 prepared after months of intensive negotiations, therefore could not be                    
 adopted by consensus as in previous years, due to the inflexible                           
 attitude of some powers, though it was adopted without a vote.                             
                                                                                            
 The Unilateral Declaration of Independence (UDI) by the Turkish Cypriot                    
 community in Cyprus on 15 November 1983 exacerbated tensions on the                        
 island and caused a serious setback to the efforts of the UN Secretary                     
 General to bring about a negotiated settlement. The Security Council                       
 adopted a resolution which, inter alia, deplored the declaration of                        
 purported secession of a part of the Republic of Cyprus and considered                     
 it legally invalid, calling for its withdrawal. Pakistan cast the lone                     
 negative vote on this text and Jordan abstained. India participated in                     
 the debate in the Council, expressing shock and concern at the Turkish                     
 Cypriot UDI, urging its revocation and stressing                                           
 -43>                                                                                       
 that no support through recognition or other means be given by any                         
 member State of the UN to the so-called Turkish Republic of Northern                       
 Cyprus. India also availed itself of the opportunity to express the firm                   
 position of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries on the Cyprus                            
 question, supporting the independence, sovereignty, territorial                            
 integrity, unity and Non-Alignment of the Republic of Cyprus. In our                       
 statement we also urged that the intercommunal talks be resumed under                      
 the auspices of the UN Secretary General.                                                  
                                                                                            
 Subsequently, the five-member Commonwealth Action Group on Cyprus set up                   
 by the CHOGM visited New York, at the Ministerial level, and had a                         
 meeting with the UN Secretary General on 19 December 1983. The Minister                    
 of External Affairs represented India at this meeting. The members of                      
 the Action Group informed the Secretary General of their intention to                      
 conduct their activities in a manner consistent with and supportive of                     
 his efforts to implement the relevant Security Council resolutions.                        
                                                                                            
 The unfortunate incident involving the shooting down of a Korean                           
 Airlines aircraft generated considerable tension and served to                             
 exacerbate the deterioration in the international climate. The matter                      
 was considered by the Security Council, where a large number of                            
 countries deplored the destruction of a civilian aircraft. Other                           
 delegations did not feel it advisable to pass judgement before securing                    
 the full facts relating to the incident and yet others supported the                       
 contention that the aircraft had behaved in a suspicious manner and was                    
 probably being used for intelligence purposes. The USSR felt constrained                   
 to veto the draft resolution tabled in the Council which, inter alia                       
 sought to deeply deplore the incident. The statement made by the                           
 official spokesman of the Government of India on 7 September 1983 was                      
 circulated as an official document of the Council. India deeply deplored                   
 the incident and in various fora demanded that full facts of the                           
 incident should be clearly established before reaching any conclusions.                    
 The Indian spokesman cautioned that in an atmosphere of growing                            
 international tension surcharged with suspicion, there was always a risk                   
 of even an error leading to calamity. The incident also figured in the                     
 proceedings of the 5th General Assembly of the World Tourism                               
 Organisation, held in Delhi in October 1983.                                               
                                                                                            
 India acceded to the Antarctic Treaty on 19 August 1983 and was accorded                   
 Consultative status under the Treaty at the 5th Special Consultative                       
 Meeting held in Canberra on 12 September 1983. Having been accepted as a                   
 Consultative Party, India participated in the 12th Regular Antarctic                       
 Treaty Consultative Meeting held in Canberra from 13 to 27 September                       
 1983. A number of issues with reference to Antarctica focussing on                         
 Environment, Natural Resources, Telecommunication, Scientific Research                     
 and Tourism and governmental expeditions were discussed. The meeting                       
 also adopted a draft recommendation proposed by India declaring that the                   
 plaque commemorating the visit of the first Indian expedition, at the                      
 site Dakshin Gangotri, be added to the list of historic monuments.                         
 -44>                                                                                       
 For the first time the General Assembly discussed the question of                          
 Antarctica at its 38th Session. The initiative to inscribe this item in                    
 the agenda of the General Assembly came primarily from Malaysia.                           
 Earlier, the Seventh Non-Aligned Summit held in New Delhi had urged that                   
 the UN should undertake a comprehensive study on Antarctica with a view                    
 to promoting wider international cooperation in the area. The debate on                    
 this item in the General Assembly revealed wide concern among many                         
 Non-Aligned Countries about the exclusivity provisions of the Antarctic                    
 Treaty and its decision-making process. These countries stressed that                      
 Antarctica be considered the common heritage of mankind. On the other                      
 hand, the treaty powers stressed that the Antarctic Treaty regime had                      
 preserved international peace and security, promoted peaceful                              
 cooperation and scientific research in the area. reconciled conflicting                    
 territorial claims and maintained the area as a nuclear-free zone. After                   
 a debate, the General Assembly adopted a resolution by consensus, which                    
 requested the Secretary General "to prepare a comprehensive, factual and                   
 objective study on all aspects of Antarctica, taking fully into account                    
 the Antarctic Treaty system and the relevant factors". The resolution                      
 was the result of intensive negotiation between the Non-Aligned and the                    
 developing countries on the one hand and the Antarctic Treaty                              
 Consultative Parties (ATCPs) on the other. India, as Chairman of the                       
 Non-Aligned Movement and as an ATCP played a constructive role in the                      
 deliberations and contributed significantly to the evolution of a                          
 consensus.                                                                                 
                                                                                            
 On the question of the Falkland Islands (Malvinas), the General Assembly                   
 adopted a resolution very similar to the one adopted in 1982,                              
 reiterating its request to the Governments of Argentina and UK to resume                   
 negotiations in order to find, as soon as possible, a peaceful solution                    
 to the sovereignty dispute relating to the islands and requesting the                      
 Secretary General to continue his renewed mission of good offices. India                   
 voted in favour of the resolution.                                                         
                                                                                            
 Consistent with its traditional active role on decolonisation issues in                    
 general, India participated in the debate on this item in the Fourth                       
 Committee and plenary of the General Assembly and in the deliberations                     
 of the UN Special Committee on Decolonisation, of which India is also a                    
 founding member. Among the major achievements of the 38th General                          
 Assembly session in this context was the adoption of a consensus                           
 resolution on the question of Western Sahara. It is hoped that, with the                   
 significant developments that have taken place on this question in the                     
 last year in the Organisation of African Unity and the UN, this                            
 long-standing problem would be resolved without much further delay.                        
                                                                                            
 During the course of the debate on the agenda item on International                        
 Cooperation to Avert New Flows of Refugees, the Indian representative                      
 said that the Tamils in Sri Lanka felt particularly unnerved by recent                     
 events and were wanting to seek refuge in India. The resolution on this                    
 question, which inter alia, had commended the work of the Expert Group                     
 on the subject, was adopted without a vote by the General Assembly.                        
 -45>                                                                                       
 The 27th Regular Session of the International Atomic Energy Agency                         
 (IAEA) General Conference met in Vienna from 10 to 14 October 1983.                        
 India was once again designated for membership of the IAEA's Board of                      
 Governors. The statement by the leader of the Indian delegation, Dr.                       
 Raja Ramanna, was welcomed by most delegations for its clarity,                            
 forthrightness and its positive tone. The 27th regular session of the                      
 General Conference of the IAEA also approved the entry of the People's                     
 Republic of China into the Agency. The General Conference also adopted                     
 major resolutions on the consequences of the Israeli military attack on                    
 the Iraqi nuclear research reactor and the need to bring South Africa's                    
 nuclear establishment under IAEA inspection. Resolutions on these issues                   
 were adopted by 23 majority. India continued to maintain its principled                    
 position on issues such as the nuclear non-proliferation treaty and                        
 full-scope safeguards.                                                                     
                                                                                            
 The International Conference on Radio-active Waste Management sponsored                    
 by the IAEA and the US Department of Energy was held in Seattle, USA, in                   
 March 1983. It demonstrated clearly that technology is available today                     
 for the setting, design, construction and operation of waste management                    
 systems. This was the most comprehensive conference yet held on nuclear                    
 waste management.                                                                          
                                                                                            
 Through a unanimous resolution adopted by the 38th session of the UN                       
 General Assembly it was decided that the UN Conference for the Promotion                   
 of International Cooperation in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy be                     
 held in 1986. Its 5th PRECOM will be held for a 2-week period in June                      
 1984 at Vienna.                                                                            
                                                                                            
 The Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space met at New York in                       
 November-December 1983. However, at the 38th session of the UN General                     
 Assembly consensus eluded the deliberations of the Committee on the                        
 Peaceful Uses of Outer Space mainly on account of disagreement over the                    
 issues of militarisation of Outer Space. Whereas the US delegation                         
 adopted the view that the Committee was not mandated to consider the                       
 question of militarisation of Outer Space, the East European Group as                      
 well as the Group of 77 were of the view that the subject needed to be                     
 discussed in the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space. The                        
 differences of opinion on this question and minor differences on the                       
 question of definition and delimitation of space. the character and                        
 utilization of geostationary orbit, consideration of the local                             
 implications of remote sensing of earth from space, etc., prevented the                    
 Committee from arriving at a consensus. Accordingly, the omnibus                           
 resolution on Outer Space was adopted with 124 votes in favour, 12                         
 against and 8 abstantions. The West European and Other Group either                        
 voted against or abstained.                                                                
                                                                                            
 The work of the Legal Sub-Committee of the Committee on the Peaceful                       
 Uses of Outer Space has, consequently, become more difficult on the                        
 questions of remote sensing, use of nuclear power sources in Outer Space                   
 and definition and delimitation                                                            
 -46> of Outer Space. Despite India's best efforts no progress could be                     
 achieved at the 22nd session of the Legal Sub-Committee held in New York                   
 from 21 March to 8 April 1983.                                                             
 Economic Issues                                                                            
 At the UN, India's effort was directed at giving a practical thrust to                     
 the concerns of the developing countries as already expressed in the                       
 Economic Declaration adopted by the 7th Summit of the Non-Aligned Heads                    
 of State Government in New Delhi in March 1983. More particularly it was                   
 to see if effective shape could be provided to the three-pronged                           
 strategy relating to the Global Negotiations, the Programme of Immediate                   
 Measures and the convening of the International Conference on Money and                    
 Finance for Development with universal participation.                                      
                                                                                            
 The exchanges, both formal and informal, during the 38th session of the                    
 UN General Assembly showed only a marginal change in the negative                          
 attitudes of the developed countries. In the case of the Programme of                      
 Immediate Measures, there was no attempt on the part of the developed                      
 countries to permit the adoption of any action-oriented resolution.                        
 Similarly, on the proposal to convene the International Conference on                      
 Money and Finance for Development (ICMFD), it was generally clear that                     
 the developed countries would not agree to the UN being directly                           
 involved either in the preparatory or the final process for the                            
 convening of the Conference.                                                               
                                                                                            
 At different world forums India's role was active and as usual motivated                   
 towards achieving to the greatest extent possible, within the                              
 limitations of the existing negative atmosphere, some movement towards                     
 meeting the urgent needs of the developing countries, Feeling that more                    
 time was necessary to realise the full benefits of the political                           
 initiatives launched by the Seventh NAM Summit and the Prime Minister of                   
 India's initiatives at the New York consultations, India motivated the                     
 Group of 77 to keep its options open by accepting that neither on                          
 Programme of Immediate Measures nor on the ICMFD should any decisions be                   
 adopted which were not secured by consensus.                                               
                                                                                            
 The Second Committee of the 38th General Assembly Session adopted all                      
 the resolutions in areas of critical importance by consensus. Among                        
 these were two resolutions on Energy, and resolutions on Immediate                         
 Measures, the Report of the UNCTAD-VI, Industrial Development                              
 Cooperation, Conversion of UNIDO into a Specialised Agency, Long-term                      
 Financing System for Science and Technology for Development. UNDP,                         
 Operational Activities for Development, Consumer Protection and                            
 Protection against products Harmful to Health and Environment. The                         
 resolution,on Protectionism and Structural Adjustment which deals with                     
 an area of crucial importance to developing countries was deferred to                      
 the 39th General Assembly.                                                                 
 -47>                                                                                       
 The consensus on important resolutions was achieved by a substantial                       
 dilution of the original positions of the Group of 77. A salient feature                   
 during these negotiations was the feeling that the international                           
 political and economic environment was not conducive to the achievement                    
 of any real progress on the establishment of a dialogue.                                   
                                                                                            
 India took the initiative in the decision to hold an open- ended                           
 informal meeting in order to determine what was the actual position on                     
 contribution by both the developed and developing countries to the                         
 Long-Term Financing System for Science and Technology for Development.                     
 The outcome was not encouraging as only a few developed countries were                     
 willing to provide an indicative figure of their contributions.                            
                                                                                            
 On immediate implementation of the Nairobi Programme of Action for New                     
 and Renewable Sources of Energy and the Development of Energy Resources                    
 of Developing Countries, our interests were taken into account                             
 particularly in the areas of mobilisation of resources. A strong                           
 position on these issues has always been maintained by India and for the                   
 first time a resolution focussing on the problems of energy-deficient                      
 developing countries was adopted by the General Assembly, thus bringing                    
 energy under the purview of the UN.                                                        
                                                                                            
 India participated in two meetings in Madrid and Vienna for setting up                     
 an International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology. India                   
 became its founder member by signing the Statutes along with 25 other                      
 countries. India is among the front- runners for the location of the                       
 Centre.                                                                                    
 Information-related Issues                                                                 
                                                                                            
 Another important item which was considered in the Special Political                       
 Committee this year related to the question of Information. The Indian                     
 delegate participating in the debate on the question relating to                           
 Information in the Committee reiterated India's continued commitment to                    
 and cooperation in the attainment of a new, more just and more effective                   
 world information and communication order intended to strengthen peace                     
 and international understanding, based on the free circulation and wider                   
 and better balanced dissemination of information. The Indian delegate                      
 noted with satisfaction that the Department of Public Information of the                   
 UN had continued to strengthen its cooperation with the pool of news                       
 agencies as well as with regional news agencies of the developing                          
 countries. She, however, felt that there was still further scope for                       
 broadening and strengthening such cooperation.                                             
 Administrative and Financial Issues                                                        
 On personnel questions India, along with China and Pakistan, urged that                    
 proper weightage must be given to countries with larger population and                     
 low per capita income in the calculation of posts available to them in                     
 the UN.                                                                                    
 -48>                                                                                       
 Social and Humanitarian Issues                                                             
 India's perception of and participation in the work of the Human Rights                    
 bodies within the UN system is moulded by democratic institutions,                         
 Fundamental Freedoms guaranteed in the Constitution and Rule of Law                        
 obtaining in the national context, and a projection of these very                          
 institutions and principles internationally. It has been our view that                     
 Human Rights bodies within the UN system should provide a forum for                        
 impartial deliberation of human rights issues and situations, for                          
 consciousnessraising on a global scale, as a means of generating moral                     
 pressure on countries, governments and peoples guilty of gross and                         
 flagrant violations of human rights and for the evolution of norms and                     
 standards relating to Human Rights. India's participation in the work of                   
 the Human Rights Commission, the central coordinating body of the UN on                    
 Human Rights matters, the Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination                   
 and Protection of Minorities, and expert subsidiary organ of the Human                     
 Rights Commission, and several working groups set up by these bodies on                    
 specific questions like torture, slavery-like practices, apartheid,                        
 minorities etc., has been aimed at enabling these bodies to perform                        
 their role in a more effective manner for the protection and promotion                     
 of Human Rights and fundamental freedoms.                                                  
                                                                                            
 As a member of the Human Rights Commission, in keeping with past                           
 practice, India continued to press for universal condemnation of and                       
 unified as well as strong action against such phenomena of gross and                       
 flagrant violations of Human Rights as the abhorrent practices of                          
 apartheid in South Africa and Namibia and the injustices perpetrated                       
 against the Palestinian and other Arabs in territories occupied by                         
 Israel. India has been represented in the ad-hoc working group of                          
 experts on Southern Africa set up by the Commission which catalogues and                   
 monitors on a continuing basis the Human Rights situation in Southern                      
 Africa. In the evolution of Human Rights norms, India has taken the lead                   
 in establishing and promoting the concept of Right to Development as a                     
 Human Right, a concept which embraces both individual and collective,                      
 legal and moral aspects India is playing an active part in a working                       
 group of the Commission which is drafting a Declaration on the Right to                    
 Development.                                                                               
                                                                                            
 India has acceded to several international instruments on Human Rights,                    
 including the Covenants on Civil and Political Rights, Covenant on                         
 Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, International Convention on the                      
 Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination and International                        
 Convention on the suppression and punishment of the crime of Apartheid.                    
 Our periodic Report was submitted before the Committee on Elimination of                   
 Racial Discrimination during the period under review and our initial                       
 report was submitted before the Group of Three on Convention on                            
 Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid.                                      
                                                                                            
 India participated in the Second World Conference to combat Racism and                     
 Racial Discrimination in Geneva from 1 to 12 August 1983 and actively                      
 worked to draft a Declaration and Programme of Action for the Second                       
 Decade to combat Racism.                                                                   
 -49>                                                                                       
 Other Conferences                                                                          
                                                                                            
 The 12th Congress of the World Energy Conference was held in New Delhi                     
 from 1 to 23 September 1983. This Conference was hosted by the Indian                      
 National Committee headed by the Secretary in the Ministry of Energy.                      
                                                                                            
 The 5th Session of the WTO General Assembly was successfully held in New                   
 Delhi from 3 to 14 October 1983. The General Assembly meets every two                      
 years and it was held in India for the first time.                                         
                                                                                            
 The International Air Transport Association held its annual meeting in                     
 New Delhi on 24 and 25 October 1983. The meeting was hosted jointly by                     
 the Air India and the Indian Airlines.                                                     
 Activities of the Non-Aligned Movement                                                     
                                                                                            
 Throughout the period under review, the Non-Aligned Movement remained                      
 actively seized of developments in various parts of the world,                             
 particularly in the Middle East, Central America and Southern Africa, in                   
 conformity with and in pursuance of the decisions taken at the Seventh                     
 Summit. Meetings of the Coordinating Bureau were held at regular                           
 intervals and at times when the need arose.                                                
                                                                                            
 The Movement was very active on the question of Palestine. The                             
 Coordinating Bureau of the Movement heard statements from the                              
 representative of the Palestine Liberation Organisation at its meetings                    
 of 14 April and 27 July 1983 held at the United Nations Headquarters, on                   
 developments in the occupied territories including the reported mass                       
 poisoning of Arab schoolgirls in the occupied West Bank and the killings                   
 of students in Al Khalil (Hebron), Nablus and at Bir Zeit University.                      
                                                                                            
 The Minister of External Affairs, representing the Chairperson of the                      
 Movement participated in the International Conference on the question of                   
 Palestine held in Geneva from 29 August to 7 September 1983 as also in                     
 the earlier regional preparatory meeting in Kuala Lumpur from 3 to 7 May                   
 1983.                                                                                      
                                                                                            
 The Chairperson of the Non-Aligned Movement, Prime Minister Indira                         
 Gandhi, convened an official-level meeting of the Non- Aligned Committee                   
 on Palestine in New Delhi on 30 and 31 October 1983. Subsequently, on 18                   
 November 1983 a Ministeriallevel meeting of the Committee was also                         
 convened. Following this meeting the Prime Minister as Chairperson                         
 deputed a four-member Non-Aligned Ministerial Group led by the Minister                    
 of External Affairs, Shri P.V. Narasimha Rao, to visit some Arab                           
 capitals regarding the situation in the Middle East including Northern                     
 Lebanon. The Ministerial Group visited Kuwait and Damascus and held                        
 consultations with various leaders there. During its visit, the Group                      
 was able to obtain from the concerned leaders assurances in respect of a                   
 ceasefire without any time limit.                                                          
 -50>                                                                                       
                                                                                            
 Another area of concern was the situation in Southern Africa. At the                       
 request of the Frontline States, a Plenary meeting of the Non-Aligned                      
 Countries was convened at UNESCO House, Paris, on 29 April 1983 to                         
 consider the question of the proposed sale of Marconi Radar equipment by                   
 the Government of the the United Kingdom to South Africa. The meeting                      
 adopted a Communique on the subject.                                                       
                                                                                            
 A meeting of the Coordinating Bureau, held on 28 June 1983 was devoted                     
 to the situation in South Africa, at which representatives of the                          
 African National Congress and the Pan Africanist Congress of Azania made                   
 statements, informing the Movement of South Africa's latest acts of                        
 aggression and provocation. This meeting also adopted a Communique on                      
 the situation in South Africa. At the Plenary meeting of NonAligned                        
 countries held in New York on 12 September 1983 the representative of                      
 Lesotho informed the Movement of recent developments between Lesotho and                   
 South Africa. The Prime Minister of Zimbabwe, Mr. Robert Mugabe,                           
 addressed the Coordinating Bureau in New York at a special meeting on 22                   
 September regarding the situation in Southern Africa and other important                   
 issues. Another meeting of the Bureau was held on 14 November 1983 in                      
 which the representative of Sierra Leone made a statement, in his                          
 capacity as Chairman of the African Group at the UN, informing the                         
 members of the moves of the racist regime of South Africa to impose a                      
 new racist constitution.                                                                   
                                                                                            
 The Movement has been particularly active in the context of the question                   
 of Namibia. This included high-level participation on the part of                          
 several Non-Aligned countries at the International Conference in support                   
 of the struggle of the Namibian People for Independence, held at UNESCO                    
 House in Paris from 25 to 29 April 1983. The Minister of State for                         
 External Affairs, Shri A.A. Rahim, addressed the Conference in his                         
 capacity as Special Representative of the Chairperson of the Movement.                     
                                                                                            
 At a Plenary meeting of Non-Aligned countries held on 4 August 1983 the                    
 Movement addressed itself to the proclamation by South Africa of a                         
 so-called "State Council" in Namibia, which has been established in                        
 order to prepare a "Constitution" for the territory, in violation of                       
 relevant UN resolution. The meeting also issued a Communique on the                        
 subject.                                                                                   
                                                                                            
 The Minister of External Affairs, Shri P. V. Narasimha Rao, opened the                     
 debate in the Securlty Council in May 1983 on the question of Namibia,                     
 on behalf of the Non-Aligned countries. A large number of Ministers from                   
 Non-Aligned countries personally attended this meeting, on the basis of                    
 a mandate given by the Seventh Summit.                                                     
                                                                                            
 Special emissaries of the Chairperson were also sent to Iran and Iraq in                   
 pursuance of the mandate given to the Chairperson of the Movement to                       
 take appropriate action in respect of the Iran- Iraq conflict.                             
 -51>                                                                                       
 The Non-Aligned countries also kept under review the increasingly tense                    
 situation in Central America. The Coordinating Bureau heard statements                     
 from the reprsentative of Nicaragua regarding latest developments in                       
 that region at its meetings of 14 April, 4 May, 27 July, and 28 November                   
 1983 held in New York, Following the meetings held on 14 April and 27                      
 July the Bureau also adopted a Communique on the subject. The situation                    
 in Central America was also on the agenda of a Plenary meeting held on                     
 12 September 1983.                                                                         
                                                                                            
 The Coordinating Bureau of the Movement discussed the developments in                      
 Grenada in its meetings held on 26 and 28 October 1983 and adopted a                       
 Communique.                                                                                
                                                                                            
 A meeting of Ministers and Heads of Delegations of the Non- Aligned                        
 countries to the 38th Session of the UN General Assembly was held in New                   
 York from 4 to 7 October 1983. The meeting adopted a comprehensive                         
 Communique covering international political issues. The same meeting                       
 also deliberated on economic issues in compliance with paragraph 44 of                     
 the Economic Declaration of the New Delhi Summit and included an                           
 economic part to the Communique covering the main areas of concern                         
 relating to the three-pronged strategy in relation to the 38th Session                     
 of the UN General Assembly.                                                                
                                                                                            
 A commemorative meeting was held on 19 September 1983 to observe the Day                   
 of Non-Alignment.                                                                          
                                                                                            
 The Chairperson of the Movement, Prime Minister Indira Gandhi, had been                    
 given a mandate by the Seventh Summit to take action, as deemed                            
 appropriate, on the modalities for organising the necessary political                      
 support for the successful negotiation of global economic issues through                   
 high-level meetings with leaders of the developed countries.                               
                                                                                            
 With regard to certain specific proposals put forward in this regard at                    
 the Summit, an informal Ministerial Meeting was convened at New Delhi                      
 from 29 to 30 April 1983 where the strategy for discussions with                           
 developed countries on international economic issues was considered. In                    
 pursuance of the decision taken at the meeting, Prime Minister Shrimati                    
 Indira Gandhi personally addressed letters to the leaders of the Council                   
 for Mutual Economic Assistance (CMEA) through President Honccker of the                    
 German Democratic Republic on these issues, Similarily, the Minister of                    
 External Affairs, Shri P. V. Narasimha Rao, wrote to the Secretary                         
 General of OECD.                                                                           
                                                                                            
 The Minister of External Affairs, in response to a request made by the                     
 UN Secretary-General on the subject of obtaining full support of the                       
 developing countries to the launching of the Long- Term Financing System                   
 for Science and Technology for Development, addressed letters to all the                   
 Foreign Ministers of the Member States of the Movement requesting that                     
 the concerned Governments give attention, on a priority                                    
 -52>                                                                                       
 basis, to this important matter, affirmative of the importance that the                    
 Non-Aligned countries attached to cooperation in Science and Technology                    
 and their readiness to contribute to the financing systems.                                
 India was invited as Chairperson of the, Non-Aligned Movement to the UN                    
 sponsored International Conference on the Alliance between South Africa                    
 and Israel held in Vienna from 11 to 13 July 1983 and was elected its                      
 Rapporteur. The Indian delegation drew attention to the relevant                           
 extracts from the Declaration of the 7th Non-Aligned Summit, recalled                      
 India's anti-apartheid struggle emanating from pre-independence days,                      
 and underlined the new that to world peace posed by the capabilities of                    
 and the collaboration between Israel and South Africa in the field of                      
 Nuclear Weapons.                                                                           
                                                                                            
 As Chairperson of the Movement, India participated in the second                           
 Inter-governmental Follow-up and Coordination Committee (IFCC) Meeting                     
 in Tunis, held in September 1983.                                                          
                                                                                            
 The countries of the Non-Aligned Movement, in pursuance of the Economic                    
 Declaration of the Seventh Summit, convened meetings of the Ministers of                   
 Health on 4 May 1983 in Geneva, in the context of the meeting of the                       
 World Health Assembly. Similarly, the Ministers of Labour of the                           
 Non-Aligned Countries met on 14 June 1983 in Geneva. A Conference of                       
 member State of the Movement on Small Island Developing Countries was                      
 held in Grenada from 13 to 16 September 1983.                                              
                                                                                            
 A meeting of Ministers of Education and Culture of Non-Aligned countries                   
 was held in Pyongyang from 24 to 28 September 1983. The Conference was                     
 attended by delegations of 77 countries and 20 international                               
 organisations and inaugurated by the Indian Minister of State for                          
 Education, Culture and Social Welfare, Smt, Shiela Kaul. The Indian                        
 delegation played a very active part in the conference which adopted a                     
 Declaration and an Action Programme.                                                       
                                                                                            
 In accordance with the Summit Declaration, a meeting of Ministers of                       
 Information of Non-Aligned countries met in Jakarta from 26 to 30                          
 January 1984.                                                                              
                                                                                            
 An international Seminar of Non-Aligned countries on Training of Sports                    
 Cadres will be held at the Netaji Subhas National Institute of Sports,                     
 Patiala, from 5 to 18 March 1984.                                                          
                                                                                            
 The Group of Coordinating Countries in the field of Use of Nuclear                         
 Energy for Peaceful Purposes, set up under the Action Programme for                        
 Economic Cooperation adopted by the New Delhi Summit, met in Havana from                   
 12 to 14 April 1983 while the meeting of the coordinating countries, on                    
 Standardisation, Weights and Measures was held in Rome on 4 and 5 July                     
 1983. The Coordinating Group on Housing met in Colombo from 25 to 27                       
 October 1983.                                                                              
 -53>                                                                                       
 Several Plenary meetings of the Non-Aligned countries were held in New                     
 York with a view to finalising the Draft Statute for the Centre for                        
 Science and Technology of the Non-Aligned and other Developing                             
 Countries.                                                                                 
 Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting                                                   
 The Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting took place in New Delhi                       
 from 23 to 29 November 1983. 42 out of 44 full Members of the                              
 Commonwealth participated in the Meeting; 34 at the level of President                     
 of Prime Minister. It was thus the largest Summit Meeting in                               
 Commonwealth history. A majority of the Commonwealth members were                          
 Non-Aligned nations. A few belonged to the industrial North, and to                        
 military alliances. There was great diversity in their size, population,                   
 and stages of development. It was, therefore, natural that this                            
 gathering represented a kaleidoscope of the world's concerns and                           
 problems.                                                                                  
                                                                                            
 The Summit's attention was focussed on a few important issues; the tense                   
 world political scene and the nuclear threat, the difficult global                         
 economic situation, and the need for North-South Dialogue and specific                     
 issues as the independence of Namibia, and the developments in Grenada                     
 and Cyprus. In her opening statement at CHOGM, the Prime Minister                          
 outlined the major problems of peace and security, disarmament and                         
 development and called upon the Commonwealth to be clear in its                            
 objectives but responsive to changing situations in dealing with the                       
 world problems through dialogue.                                                           
                                                                                            
 There was a large measure of agreement on important issues. The                            
 Conference adopted the "Goa Declaration on International Security", the                    
 "New Delhi Statement on Economic Action" and the "Final Communique".                       
 India's views on important issues were adequately reflected in the CHOGM                   
 documents.                                                                                 
                                                                                            
 During the period under review, India played host to two major                             
 international events-the 7th Non-Aligned Summit, and the Commonwealth                      
 Heads of Government Meeting. These events have raised the country's                        
 prestige abroad and in the comity of nations.                                              
 International Law : Developments and Activities                                            
 During 1983, the International Law Commission considered all the topics                    
 on its current programme. The Commission gave a preliminary                                
 consideration to the first comprehensive draft of a convention on the                      
 law of the non-navigational uses of international watercourses prepared                    
 by the Special Rapporteur on the topic, Mr. Jens Evensen. The Commission                   
 also considered other topics such as State Responsibility,                                 
 Jurisdictional Immunities of States and their Property, Status of the                      
 Diplomatic Courier and the Diplomatic Bag not accompanied by Diplomatic                    
 Courier,                                                                                   
 -54>                                                                                       
 Draft code of offences against Peace and Security of Mankind, and                          
 Relations between States and International Organizations (second part of                   
 the topic), While maintaining the general objectives and priorities                        
 determined during its 34th (1982) Session the Commission took the                          
 position that it will keep open the question whether greater progress                      
 can be made at its future sessions in regard to certain topics on the                      
 current programme, taking into account the resolutions of the General                      
 Assembly, the state of progress on a given topic and other practical                       
 considerations. The General Assembly, at its 38th session, has                             
 recommended that the Commission should continue its work on all the                        
 topics in its current programme.                                                           
                                                                                            
 The Preparatory Commission for the International Sea-bed Authority and                     
 the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea, established pursuant                    
 to Resolution No. 1 of the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of                   
 the Sea adopted on 30 April 1982 held its First Session in Jamaica from                    
 15 March to 8 April 1983. 99 Member countries of the Commission and 17                     
 Observers attended the Session. India also participated in the work of                     
 the Commission.                                                                            
                                                                                            
 The Preparatory Commission is required to make practical arrangements                      
 for the setting up of the International Sea-bed Authority and for the                      
 International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea, which have been                             
 established by the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea. It is also                         
 called upon to prepare draft rules, regulations and procedures of the                      
 International Sea-bed Authority and its various organs. It is further                      
 responsible for the implementation of the Resolution governing                             
 preparatory investments in pioneer activities relating to polymetallic                     
 nodules.                                                                                   
                                                                                            
 At its resumed first Session held in Kingston Jamaica, from 15 August to                   
 9 September 1983 the Preparatory Commission established its                                
 organisational structure consisting of the Plenary as the principal                        
 organ and four Special Commissions of equal status which were allocated                    
 their respective functions. Officers were elected for the Bureau of the                    
 Plenary and the Special Commissions. The Bureau of the Plenary consists                    
 of a Chairman, 14 Vice-Chairmen and a Rapporteur General. India was                        
 elected a Vice- Chairman of the Plenary. A Chairman and four                               
 Vice-Chairmen for each of the Special Commissions were also, elected.                      
 The Rules of Procedure of the Preparatory Commission including those                       
 relating, to decision-making were adopted.                                                 
                                                                                            
 Of particular interest to India was the adoption by the Preparatory                        
 Commission of procedures and guidelines for registration of pioneer                        
 investors in accordance with Resolution 11 of the Third United Nations,                    
 Conference on the Law of the Sea. Under these procedures and guidelines                    
 a pioneer investor State named in Resolution II, which is a signatory to                   
 the Convention, may submit an application to the PREPCOM for                               
 registration which will be recorded and acknowledged by the                                
 Secretary-General. The document containing procedures and guidelines                       
 sets out the contents and data required to be included in the                              
 application, and procedures for examination and registration of the                        
 applications and allocation of sites to the pioneer investors and the                      
 Enterprise.                                                                                
 -55>                                                                                       
 However, pending the adoption of the Rules of Procedure, applications                      
 submitted in accordance with Resolution 11 shall be recorded and the                       
 particulars so recorded shall be circulated to all participants of the                     
 Preparatory Commission. Before the document on procedures and guidelines                   
 was adopted, the Chairman of the PREPCOM made a statement to the effect                    
 that the elaboration and adoption of rules, regulations and procedures                     
 for the implementation of Resolution II shall be considered as a matter                    
 of high priority by the Preparatory Commission at its next session.                        
                                                                                            
 The Special Commissions held their first meetings and requested the                        
 Special Representative of the Secretary-General of the United Nations to                   
 prepare, before the next Session of the PREPCOM, working papers and                        
 background papets on the subjects allocated to the Special Commissions,                    
 so as to enable them to expeditiously carry out their functions. The                       
 next Session of the Preparatory Commission will be held in Kingston,                       
 Jamaica, in March April 1984.                                                              
                                                                                            
 India continued to participate in the deliberations of the Legal                           
 Sub-Committee of the UN Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space.                     
 The Sub-Committee held its twenty-second session in New York from 21                       
 March to 8 April 1983 and continued discussions on draft principles                        
 regarding remote sensing of the earth from Outer Space, the possibility                    
 of supplementing the norms of international law relevant to the use of                     
 nuclear power sources in Outer Space, the definition of Outer Space and                    
 questions relating to geostationary orbit.                                                 
                                                                                            
 For several years, the Legal Sub-Committee has been working on legal                       
 principles relating to remote sensing to meet the concerns of States                       
 regarding their being "sensed" without their permission and as to                          
 whether and on what basis the data so obtained would be made available                     
 to themselves and other States.                                                            
                                                                                            
 The five draft principles which engendered the most discussion at the                      
 twentysecond session related to : (i) A State's responsibility for all                     
 remote sensing activities whether carried out by government or                             
 non-government agencies; (ii) Prior notification to sensed States of                       
 proposed sensing activities, (iii) Prior consultation, if requested,                       
 with a State whose territory was to be sensed; (iv) Provision to a                         
 sensed State of preliminary information, final results and conclusions                     
 relating to the natural resources, the territorial sea and maritime                        
 areas under its jurisdiction; and (v) Preventing sensing States from                       
 disseminating information, results or conclusions relating to a sensed                     
 State's natural resources without approval of the sensed State.                            
 No progress could be achieved on any of these controversial texts.                         
 On the question of nuclear power sources in Outer Space, discussions in                    
 the Working Group concentrated on the format and procedure of                              
 notification. Agreement had been reached previously with regard to the                     
 contents of such notification. The Working Group agreed that information                   
 in any notification should include data on 2 EA/83-9                                       
 -56>                                                                                       
 the system parameters, such as the name of launching State or States,                      
 the address of the authority which might be contacted for additional                       
 information or assistance in case of accident, international                               
 designation, date and territory or location of launch, and information                     
 required for best prediction of orbit life-time, trajectory and impact                     
 region and general functions of space craft. Information should also be                    
 included on the radiological risk of nuclear power sources including                       
 type of nuclear power source and the probable physical form, amount and                    
 general radiological characteristics of the fuel and contaminated and or                   
 activated components likely to reach the ground. All data should also be                   
 transmitted to the Secretary-General of the UN.                                            
                                                                                            
 In considering a definition of Outer Space, the Sub-Commitee discussed                     
 whether or not nations should agree on a particular altitude or degree                     
 of atmospheric density as the point at which, for legal purposes Outer                     
 Space would be divided from 'air space'. Another approach advocated by                     
 France and others could be to forgo a definition of Outer Space and                        
 instead define 'space activities'.                                                         
                                                                                            
 The Sub-Committee also debated matters related to the geostationary                        
 orbit-located 22,300 miles directly above the equator and the only orbit                   
 capable of providing continuous contact with ground stations via a                         
 single satellite. Because of problems of interference between                              
 too-closely spaced radio frequencies, the orbit can be occupied by only                    
 a limited number of satellities at any one time. Concern has been                          
 expressed regarding over-crowding and space available for nations that                     
 have yet to develop or obtain the necessary technology. Many nations;                      
 felt that since the geostationary orbit was a limited resource, it                         
 should be regulated on an equitable basis taking into account the needs                    
 of the developing countries.                                                               
                                                                                            
 The Sixteenth Session of the UN Commission on International Trade Law                      
 (UNCITRAL) was held in Vienna from 24 May to 3 June 1983. India has been                   
 a member of this Commission since the beginning and has played an                          
 important role in the codification of law relating to international                        
 trade. At this Session the Commission concluded the discussion and                         
 adopted the draft rules on contract clauses relating to damages and                        
 penalty upon failure of performance in international sale of goods. The                    
 rules provide that the parties have the freedom to stipulate an agreed                     
 sum as a penalty or as compensation upon the failure of performance by                     
 either party. The agreed sum shall not be reduced by a court or arbitral                   
 tribunal unless the agreed sum is substantially disproportionate in                        
 relation to the loss that has been suffered by the obligee. The                            
 Commission also considered and took note of the progress reports                           
 relating to other subjects, viz, international payments, international                     
 commercial arbitration and New International Economic Order.                               
                                                                                            
 India was invited to the second session of the Special Commission of the                   
 Hague Conference on Private International Law which is engaged in the                      
 task of codifying rules relating to conflict of laws applicable to                         
 contracts for the international sale of goods. The Special Commission                      
 completed the drafting of the Convention on the                                            
 -57>                                                                                       
 subject. The draft was adopted by consensus. The Hague Conference will                     
 now call a diplomatic/plenipotentiary conference to discuss and adopt                      
 the draft in the form of the convention on the above subject. This draft                   
 convention, when adopted, will fill a gap in the law relating to                           
 international sale of goods.                                                               
                                                                                            
 At the 38th Session of the UN General Assembly, the Sixth Committee                        
 considered the report of the Ad Hoc Committee on the Drafting of an                        
 International Covention against the Recruitment, Use, Financing and                        
 Training of Mercenaries on the work of its third session (A/38/43)                         
 -agenda item 129. The Ad Hoc Committee consists of 35 members, including                   
 India. Most of the developing countries, who are the primary vicims of                     
 the activities of mercenaries, supported the early conclusion of a                         
 comprehen sive convention in which the definition of a mercenary,                          
 contained in Article 47, paragraph 2, of Additional Protocol 1 to the                      
 1949 Geneva Conventions, could be expanded to include contexts other                       
 than that of international armed conflict. They also referred to the                       
 usefulness of other criteria for establishing a definition of mercenary,                   
 such as the methods of the mercenary's recruitment, the activities aimed                   
 at and nationality other than that of the target country. They                             
 emphasized that such a Convention should also include clear provisions                     
 on State responsibility and reparation or damages.                                         
                                                                                            
 On the other hand, the Western countries, including the United States,                     
 stressed the usefulness of the definition of "mercenary" contained in                      
 Article 47, paragraph 2, of Additional Protocol 1 to the 1949 Geneva                       
 Conventions and did not consider it necessary to establish a distinction                   
 between international and non- international armed conflicts. In their                     
 view, it was important to include in the definitio the criterion of                        
 direct participation in an agreed prohibited category of offences for                      
 finding a mercenary guilty. The future convention should contain a                         
 special provision reaffirming the right of a mercenary to fundamental                      
 guarantees when captured so that he could not be executed or punished                      
 without due process of law. With regard to the responsibility of States,                   
 they considered it essential to adhere to the general principles of                        
 international law existing on the subject and opposed in this connection                   
 the concept of reparation or damages. The Socialist countries supported                    
 the viewpoint of the developing countries. However, all those who spoke                    
 supported renewal of the mandate of the Ad Hoc Committee.                                  
                                                                                            
 On 1 December 1983 the Sixth Committee adopted draft resolution                            
 A/C/.6/38/L.5, as orally revised by consensus. On 19 December the                          
 General Assembly adopted the draft resolution on the subject recommended                   
 by the Sixth Committee by consensus. Under that resolution, the Ad Hoc                     
 Committee shall continue its work, with the goal of drafting, at the                       
 earliest possible date, an international convention against the                            
 recruitment, use, financing and training of mercenaries. The General                       
 Assembly requested the Ad Hoc Committee to make every effort to complete                   
 its mandate at the next session. The General Assembly further decided to                   
 include the item in the agenda of its 39th (1984) Session.                                 
 -58>                                                                                       
                                                                                            
 At the 38th Session of the General Assembly the Sixth Committee                            
 considered the report of the Secretary-General called for under General                    
 Assembly resolution 36/109 of 10 December 1981 and its addenda                             
 containing the communications received from Governments and                                
 intergovernmental organizations on measures to prevent international                       
 terrorism-agenda item 123. The discussion in the Sixth Committee on the                    
 report of the Secretary-General evinced keen interest of delegations in                    
 the context of the outrageous act of violence at the Martyrs' Mausoleum                    
 in Rangoon on 9 October 1983 which resulted in the loss of precious                        
 lives of so many dignitaries of the Republic of Korea, including the                       
 Foreign Minister H. E. Mr. Lee Bum Suk. Several delegations, including                     
 India, made statements which specifically referred to the Rangoon                          
 incident. After careful and intensive negotiations among concerned                         
 delegations, including India, the Sixth Committee succeeded in its                         
 efforts to adopt a non-controversial resolution on the subject by                          
 consensus. This resolution avoids reference to any specific incident of                    
 terrorism, much less condemning any country. It deeply deplores the loss                   
 of innocent human lives and the pernicious impact of acts of                               
 international terrorism on triendly relations, among States as well as                     
 on international cooperation, including cooperation for development. The                   
 resolution urges all States unilaterally and in cooperation with other                     
 States as well as relevant UN organs, to contribute to the progressive                     
 elimination of the causes underlying international terrorism. It urges                     
 States to cooperate with one another, more closely, especially through                     
 exchange of relevant information concerning the apprehension and                           
 prosecution of the perpetrators of such acts. It further calls upon all                    
 States to fulfil their obligations under international law to, refrain                     
 from organizing, instigating, assisting or participating in acts of                        
 civil strife or terrorist acts in another State. The resolution appeals                    
 to all States which have not yet done so to consider becoming parties to                   
 the existing international conventions relating to various aspects of                      
 the problem of international terrorism, and calls upon them to observe                     
 and implement the recommendations of the Ad Hoc Committee on                               
 International Terrorism relating to practical measures of cooperation                      
 for the speedy elimination of the problem of international terrorism                       
 submitted in 1979. The Ad Hoc Committee consists of 35 members,                            
 including India. On 19 December 1983 the General Assembly adopted the                      
 resolution on the item recommended by the Sixth Committee by consensus                     
 and decided to include the item in the agenda of its 40th Session.                         
                                                                                            
 The 23rd session of the Asian-African Legal Consultative Committee                         
 (AALCC) was held in Tokyo from 16 to 20 May 1983. Four topics were taken                   
 up for substantive discussion, namely, the Law of the Sea; Optimum                         
 Utilization of the Fishary Resources of the Exclusive Economic Zone;                       
 Promotion and Protection of Investments; and Reciprocal Judicial                           
 Assistance related to Service of Process and Recording of Evidence both                    
 in Civil and Criminal Cases.                                                               
                                                                                            
 On the 'Law of the Sea', discussions in the Committee focussed on issues                   
 such as the binding nature of the Law of the Sea Convention, review of                     
 the work of the                                                                            
 -59>                                                                                       
 Preparatory Commission and the possible areas in which the work of the                     
 AALCC might be contemplated for the implementation of the Convention in                    
 cooperation with the Office of the Law of the Sea in the UN Secretariat.                   
 The general consensus was that the Committee should help promote                           
 ratification of the Convention and render assistance to its member                         
 governments in regard to the Work of the Preparatory Commission and                        
 undertake studies on specific issues of practical importance to                            
 governments for the purposes of implementation of the Convention. An                       
 important issue on which the Committee's secretariat was asked to                          
 initiate work was the question of practical implementation of the                          
 provisions of the Convention in regard to the question of delimitation                     
 between States opposite or adjacent in relation to their exclusive                         
 economic zone and the continental shelf. A similar study is also to be                     
 undertaken on landlocked States in regard to their right of access as                      
 also their rights and interests in the living resources of the exclusive                   
 economic zone.                                                                             
                                                                                            
 With regard to the Optimum Utilization of the Fishery Resources of the                     
 Exclusive Economic Zone, the Committee took note of the model                              
 legislation on fisheries as also the model drafts of agreements related                    
 to fishing by foreign nationals in the exclusive economic zone and                         
 models of joint venture arrangements recommended by the Expert Group. It                   
 was decided that the Committee should continue its examination of the                      
 question of promoting regional or sub-regional cooperation taking into                     
 account the interests of landlocked. and geographically- disadvantaged                     
 States. The Committee's secretariat was asked to prepare some                              
 alternative models for joint venture arrangements.                                         
                                                                                            
 On the topic of Promotion and Protection of Investments, the Committee                     
 considered the drafts of three possible models of agreements for                           
 promotion and protection of investments on bilateral basis. After                          
 general exchange of views, it was decided that the Secretary-General                       
 should continue to consult with member governments and other interested                    
 governments and institutions and thereafter decide upon convening                          
 another expert group meeting for further consideration of the texts of                     
 the model drafts. It was also decided that the Committee's secretariat                     
 should prepare a compendium on the investment agreements of the region                     
 as also a study on investment incentives. As regards the topic 'Mutual                     
 Assistance for the Service of Process, Issues of Letters Rogatory and                      
 taking of Evidence both in Civil and Criminal matters', the Committee                      
 considered drafts for model bilateral arrangements one relating to civil                   
 or commercial matters and the other for issue of letters, rogatory in                      
 criminal cases. It was decided that the Secretariat of the Committee                       
 should invite comments from member govornments on the two drafts of                        
 model arrangements and submit them before the next session of the                          
 Committee with a view to the making of final recommendations.                              
                                                                                            
 It may be mentioned that four other topics were taken up for preliminary                   
 discussion, namely, Economic, Scientific and Technical Cooperation in                      
 the use of the Indian Ocean; Protection of the Marine Environment; Law                     
 of International Rivers; and Status and Treatment of Refugees. In                          
 addition, the work programmes of the UNCTAD and the UNCITRAL were                          
 reviewed by a sub- committee during the session.                                           
 -60>                                                                                       
 During 1983, India concluded 59 treaties and agreements of which a list                    
 is given at Appendix 1.                                                                    
 Elections to UN bodies and other International Institutions                                
                                                                                            
 During the year under review, India was elec'ed to several UN bodies and                   
 other international organisations. India was elected as a non-permanent                    
 member of the Security Council for the years 1984-85. India was                            
 re-elected to the Governing Council of the UN Development Programme,                       
 securing the highest number of votes among the Asian candidates. India                     
 was also re-elected to the International Civil Aviation Organization                       
 (ICAO) Council with the highest number of votes among twelve contesting                    
 countries belonging to Category 11 which make the largest contribution                     
 to the provision of facilities for international civil air navigation.                     
 The Secretary of the Ministry of Civil Aviation, Shri M. M. Kohli, was                     
 elected as the First Vice-President of the 24th session of the                             
 International Civil Aviation Organization Assembly held in Montreal in                     
 September 1983. This was the first time in the 39-year history of ICAO                     
 that India was elected to the second highest office in the ICAO                            
 Assembly. India was also re-elected to the Industrial Development Board                    
 of UN Industrial Development Organization with the highest number of                       
 votes among the Asian candidates. India was also elected re-elected to                     
 the following bodies : UN Commission on Narcotic Drugs, UN Population                      
 Commission, UN Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary                          
 Questions, UN Committee for programme and coordination, FAO Committee on                   
 Food Aid Policies and Programmes, Executive Board of International Fund                    
 for Agricultural Development, and Food and Agriculture Organization                        
 Council. The election of distinguished Indians to some of the                              
 international bodies was as follows : Dr. Bal Ram Jakhar, Hon. Speaker                     
 of Lok Sabha, as a member of the Executive Committee of the Inter                          
 Parliamentary Union; Dr. M. S. Swaminathan as an Independent Chairman of                   
 the FAO Council; and Shri S. K. Das, Director-General of Meteorology, as                   
 a member of the Executive Committee of the World Meteorological                            
 Organization.                                                                              
 Lists of major international conferences/meetings/seminars organised by                    
 governmental/non-governmental organisations, in which India participated                   
 and of which India became a member, are at Appendices II, III and IV.                      
 -61>                                                                                       
                                                                                            
 FOREIGN ECONOMIC RELATIONS                                                                 
                                                                      Top                   
 The grave economic crisis facing the world economy, which has                              
 characterised the last few years, continued to cause deep concern during                   
 the year under review. Although the crisis has affected all countries,                     
 the worst sufferers have been the developing countries, who continue to                    
 face increasing balance of payments deficits, mounting debt burden and                     
 deteriorating terms of trade. There have been signs of recovery in a few                   
 industrialised countries. Indications, however, are that the recovery is                   
 unlikely to be sustained.                                                                  
                                                                                            
 International economic issues figured prominently in a number of                           
 important gatherings during the year. The Seventh Non-Aligned Summit                       
 held in New Delhi put forward constructive proposals for dealing with                      
 the current crisis. The emphasis was on cooperation and on the need for                    
 avoiding confrontation and thetoric. The major thrust of the New Delhi                     
 Economic Declaration adopted by the Summit was to suggest a parallel                       
 strategy comprising both immediate measures as well as fundamental                         
 structural changes. It suggested a three-pronged approach consisting of;                   
 -- Global Negotiations for a comprehensive restructuring of                                
 international economic relations;                                                          
 -- A Programme of Immediate Measures including an International                            
 Conferance on Money and Finance for Development with universal                             
 participation; and -- A renewed commitment to the strengthening of                         
 Collective Self- reliance.                                                                 
                                                                                            
 The developing countries have been pressing for quite some time for                        
 Global Negotiations aimed at restructuring international economic                          
 relations. Although there is agreement in principle on the launching of                    
 Global Negotiations, it has not yet proved possible to overcome the                        
 procedural hurdles which relate mainly to the question of the competence                   
 of existing institutions. In an effort to break this deadlock the                          
 Non-Aligned Summit suggested a new approach for launching the                              
 negotiations, in two phases. It was proposed that issues which do not                      
 raise the question of competence be taken up in the first phase and                        
 simultaneously efforts be made to resolve the procedural problems so                       
 that negotiations on other issues can begin in the second phase. There                     
 were intensive informal consultations during the 38th Session of the UN                    
 General                                                                                    
 -62>                                                                                       
 Assembly in an effort to break the deadlock. The discussions, however,                     
 remained inconclusive and are to be resumed during 1984.                                   
                                                                                            
 The Non-Aligned Summit took the view that while discussions' continued                     
 on the launching of Global Negotiations, there were some grave problems                    
 facing the world economy, particularly the developing countries, which                     
 required urgent action. To this end the NAM Summit proposed a Programme                    
 of Immediate Measures in areas of critical importance to developing                        
 countries, viz. money and finance, trade, raw materials, energy and                        
 food. The basic objective of the proposed programme was to bring about                     
 an early recovery in the world economy with particular emphasis on the                     
 reactivation of the development process in developing countries.                           
                                                                                            
 Although the approach suggested at the Non-Aligned Summit was widely                       
 recognised as reasonable, there was little positive response to the NAM                    
 proposals and the virtual stalemate in the so-called 'North-South                          
 Dialogue' continued. The general approach of the NAM Summit was welcomed                   
 by the Ministerial Meeting of the Group of 77 held in Buenos Aires in                      
 April 1983, which put forward specific proposals for negotiations at                       
 UNCTAD VI in Belgrade in June 1983. The results achieved at UNCTAD VI,                     
 however, were very disappointing. While a large number of resolutions                      
 were adopted, mostly reiterating earlier decisions, there was no                           
 significant advance in any of the areas of vital concern to developing                     
 countries. More recent events have shown that there has been a                             
 slide-back in a number of important areas. For example, it has not so                      
 far proved possible to reach agreement on the seventh replenishment of                     
 the International Development Association (IDA VII) at a level higher                      
 than $ 9 billion as against the level of $ 12 billion for IDA VI. At the                   
 meeting of the Interim Committee of the IMF held in September 1983 a                       
 retrograde decision was taken to reduce the access to IMF funds. These                     
 are serious set-backs which particularly affect the poorest developing                     
 countries at a time when they are facing their gravest crisis.                             
                                                                                            
 Considerable interest has been aroused by the NAM Summit proposal for an                   
 International Conference on Money and Finance for Development. Many                        
 developed countries have also taken the view that the time has come for                    
 a review of the international monetary and financial system which was                      
 established nearly 40 years ago. Proposals for an international monetary                   
 conference were put forward by President Mitterrand of France and Prime                    
 Minister Muldoon of New Zealand. The Williams burg Summit of the leading                   
 industrialised nations held in May 1983 decided to initiate a study of                     
 the international monetary system by Finance Ministers and the part                        
 which might in due course be played in this process by a high-level                        
 international monetary conference. A preparatory process has begun                         
 within the Non-Aligned Movement. India, in its capacity as the Chairman,                   
 established a Group of Five Experts comprising Algeria, India, Mexico,                     
 Tanzania and Yugoslavia for a thorough examination of the various                          
 aspects of the NAM proposal. The Group held its first meeting in New                       
 Delhi                                                                                      
 -63>                                                                                       
 from 2 to 5 December 1983. It had a detailed discussion on the                             
 deficiencies of the present system, possible ways of overcoming them and                   
 the modalities of the proposed conference. The Group is expected to hold                   
 two more meetings and finalise its report by May 1984.                                     
                                                                                            
 International economic issues also figured prominently at the                              
 Summit-level discussions held in New York in September 1983 under the                      
 Chairmanship of Prime Minister, Smt. Indira Gandhi and at CHOGM in New                     
 Delhi in November 1983. The New York Summit focussed on the economic                       
 difficulties facing all countries and on the urgency of dealing with the                   
 current crisis. There were wide- ranging discussions on matters of                         
 common interest, taking into account the reality of interdependence                        
 between the industrialised and developing countries. Everyone agreed                       
 that the informal exchanges had proved very useful and that the momentum                   
 generated by the New York dialogue should be maintained.                                   
                                                                                            
 The discussions at CHOGM centred mainly round the question of the reform                   
 of the existing institutions, based on the report of the Commonwealth                      
 Expert Group entitled "Towards a New Bretton Woods". The meeting addpted                   
 a New Delhi Statement on Economic Action which recognised the need both                    
 for immediate measures to deal with the current economic crisis as well                    
 as with long-term structural problems. The meeting decided to establish                    
 a Commonwealth Consultative Group consisting of eight countries, viz.                      
 Britain, Canada, Fiji, India, New Zealand, Tanzania, Trinidad & Tobago                     
 and Zimbabwe, for the purpose of promoting a consensus on the issues                       
 covered by the Statement. The Statement noted the various proposals                        
 relating to the monetary and financial system including the NAM proposal                   
 for an International Conference on Money and Finance for Development. It                   
 affirmed the widespread belief that it would be necessary to discuss the                   
 issues relating to money and finance at an international conference with                   
 universal participation. It also recognised that the present                               
 institutions must develop and adopt to the conditions of the 1980s and                     
 beyond.                                                                                    
                                                                                            
 Increasing attention continued to be paid to greater cooperation among                     
 developing countries both in the Non-Aligned Movement and in the Group                     
 of 77. The Non-Aligned Summit adopted a Declaration on Collective                          
 Self-reliance, in which the Heads of State1 Government undertook a                         
 pledge to impart a fresh impetus to collective self-reliance and to                        
 mobilise all necessary resources and deploy the requisite means in                         
 support of sub-regional, regional and inter-regional cooperation among                     
 Non-Aligned and other developing countries. The Summit also adopted a                      
 detailed action programme for economic cooperation. This matter figured                    
 prominently in the ministerial-level meetings of NAM and Group . of 77.                    
 These meetings provided an occasion for a review of the on-going                           
 programmes and for giving policy guidelines for the future.                                
                                                                                            
 Work continued during the year on the follow-up of the Caracas Programme                   
 of Action for Economic Cooperation among Developing Countries. A number                    
 of sectoral meetings took place in the field of technical cooperation                      
 among developing countries, 2 EA/83-10                                                     
 -64>                                                                                       
 energy, industrialisation and finance. The reports of these meetings                       
 were considered by the Inter-Governmental Follow-up and Coordination                       
 Committee which met in Tunis in September 1983. One of the important                       
 initiatives taken under the Caracas Programme in which progress has been                   
 made is the establishment of a Global System of Trade Preferences (GSTP)                   
 for which negotiations have started. About 40 developing countries have                    
 so far signified their willingness to join the negotiations.                               
                                                                                            
 A historic step was taken during the year under review towards South                       
 Asian Regional Cooperation. The Foreign Ministers of the seven South                       
 Asian countries held their first meeting in New Delhi in August 1983 and                   
 adopted the SARC Declaration setting out the broad objectives and                          
 principles of South Asian Regional Cooperation and incorporating                           
 provisions regarding institutional and financing arrangements. A                           
 Standing Committee was established at the level of Foreign Secretaries                     
 for coordination and monitoring. Nine Technical Committees were                            
 established which will be responsible for the implementation,                              
 coordination and monitoring of the programmes of cooperation in the                        
 areas of agriculture, rural development, telecommunications,                               
 meteorology, health & population, postal services, transport services,                     
 science & technology and sports, arts & culture. It was also decided to                    
 continue cooperation among the National Planning Organisations and                         
 academic institutions of the countries of the region.                                      
                                                                                            
 Intensive work has begun at the technical level for the implementation                     
 of the agreed programmes of cooperation within the SARC framework. The                     
 various Technical Committees held their meetings during the period                         
 October 1983 to January 1984 and their reports were considered by the                      
 Standing Committee of Foreign Secretaries at a meeting held in New Delhi                   
 at the end of February 1984. There will be a meeting of Foreign                            
 Ministers in July 1984 in the Maldives.                                                    
                                                                                            
 The Indian Technical and Economic Cooperation Programme (ITEC), which                      
 has been in operation since 1964, continued to play an increasing role                     
 in promoting India's economic relations with other developing countries.                   
 Starting with a modest annual outlay of Rs. 4.46 lakhs, the programme                      
 has grown substantially over the years. The amount earmarked for ITEC                      
 during the period under review was Rs. 7.13 crores.                                        
                                                                                            
 The ITEC programme provides for training facilities in India for                           
 nationals of other developing countries, deputation of Indian experts to                   
 those countries on short-and long-term assignments, feasibility studies                    
 and techno-economic surveys in other developing countries, consultancy                     
 services, undertaking of special projects, and gifts in certain                            
 circumstances. It is also designed to assist foreign dignitaries in the                    
 economic and technical fields to receive an exposure to India in those                     
 fields.                                                                                    
                                                                                            
 During the year 1983-84 over 800 slots were earmarked for the training                     
 of nominees of several developing countries. Over 700 Indian experts                       
 have been deputed on long-term assignments to various developing                           
 countries since the inception of the                                                       
 -65>                                                                                       
 ITEC Programme and over 50 during the current year. The main                               
 beneficiaries during 1983-84 were Mauritius, Zambia, and People's                          
 Democratic Republic of Yemen (PDRY). To Mauritius alone 17 short-term                      
 and long-term experts in sugar technology and engineering were seconded                    
 in 1983-84. ITEC assistance was extended this year to the Economic                         
 Commission for Africa in the form of equipment and to certain countries,                   
 in the form of sports goods, musical instruments, dental equipment,                        
 electrical equipment, agricultural equipment, miscellaneous educational                    
 equipment and wheat and tomato seeds. Nigeria, Seychelles, Madagascar,                     
 Mauritius, PDRY, Sudan, Malawi and Tanzania were the main recipients. In                   
 addition, six serious cardiac patients from Mauritius were successfully                    
 treated in the All India Institute of Medical Sciences under this                          
 programme during the year.                                                                 
                                                                                            
 An emergency team of Indian experts visited the Yemen Arab Republic                        
 (YAR) to survey the earthquake-devastated area, as a follow-up to which                    
 two Indian experts are being deputed there to advise on the                                
 rehabilitation and re-construction programme.                                              
                                                                                            
 Consultancy services were provided and feasibility studies undertaken in                   
 several countries. Consultancy services in pharmaceuticals, battery                        
 cells (dry), accumulator battery cells manufacture and gypsum panels                       
 were provided to PDRY. Similarly, consultancy services worth                               
 approximately Rs. 6 lakhs were provided to Tanzania for setting up                         
 village workshops. Feasibility studies for modernisation of -the                           
 airport, setting up of a small-scale industrial centre and of a State                      
 Trading Corporation in Mauritius were conducted by the international                       
 Airports Authority of India, NSIC and STC respectively. A feasibility                      
 study team in respect of small-scale industries was deputed to Botswana.                   
 A techno-economic feasibility study pertaining to rail connections at                      
 Bassar (Togo) has recently been completed by RITES. A feasibility study                    
 for setting up a workshop for repairs and maintenance of transport in                      
 PDRY was done.                                                                             
                                                                                            
 A number of delegations of an economic nature visited India from                           
 Mauritius, Maldives, Madagascar, Zimbabwe, Zambia, Tanzania, Congo,                        
 Liberia, Ethiopia, Sudan and Nigeria during the period under review.                       
                                                                                            
 Apart from training facilities under ITEC, India also extended                             
 assistance to a number of African and Asian countries for the                              
 recruitment of doctors, engineers, school-teachers, professors and other                   
 professionals on a bilateral basis. Among the countries so assisted were                   
 Mauritius, Ethiopia, Nigeria, Libya, Algeria, Iran, PDRY and YAR.                          
 -66>                                                                                       
                                                                                            
 POLICY PLANNING                                                                            
                                                                      Top                   
 The Policy Planning & Review Division, consisting of a corps, of foreign                   
 service and research cadre officers and with supporting staff and                          
 facilities including a modern library, continued to function under the                     
 overall guidance of the Foreign Secretary and the supervision of an                        
 Additional Secretary.                                                                      
                                                                                            
 During the year under review, the Policy Planning & Review Division                        
 prepared background papers and briefs for the 7th Non- Aligned Summit,                     
 the Conference of Indian Heads of Mission in South Asian Countries held                    
 in New Delhi from 27 to 30 July 1983 asd the Commonwealth Heads of                         
 Government Meeting (CHOGM) held in New Delhi from 24 to 29 November                        
 1983. In addition to this work, the Division prepared about dozens of                      
 policy papers and background notes on various topics relating to the                       
 external relations of India. The Division interacted with other                            
 Divisions in the Ministry as well as with other Ministries and                             
 Departments in order to cover all aspects as well as to impart multiple                    
 perspective to the studies. As in the past, several such studies were                      
 circulated to Missions abroad and Territorial Divisions of the Ministry                    
 as well as to other concerned departments and agencies of the Gover                        
 nment.                                                                                     
                                                                                            
 The officers of the Division took part in various, seminars relating to                    
 India's foreign policy as well as to international affairs. Particular                     
 mention may be made of the seminar on the Non-Aligned Movement organised                   
 at Hyderabad and Bombay by the Centre for Research in Rural and                            
 Industrial Development, Chandigarh; the seminar on Disarmament which the                   
 UN Division and this Division co-hosted along with the UN Centre for                       
 Disarmament in New Delhi; and the seminar on long-term relations,                          
 between India and Indo-China organised in New Delhi by the Indian Centre                   
 for Studies on Indo-China, New Delhi. These seminars served to clarify                     
 and heighten awareness of the various issues involved in these matters.                    
 The Division continued to maintain contact with Area Studies Centres of                    
 various universities where scholars are involved in research and study                     
 of international affairs. Scholars and other experts were invited to the                   
 Ministry for discussions, while visiting Indian Ambassadors were                           
 requested to hold discussion with officers of the Division.                                
                                                                                            
 Several studies commissioned during the last year have been completed or                   
 are expected to be ready shortly.                                                          
 As in earlier years, the Division coordinated the work relating to the                     
 Annual Report of the Ministry.                                                             
 -67>                                                                                       
                                                                                            
 EXTERNAL PUBLICITY                                                                         
                                                                      Top                   
 In the context of the request made to India to host the 7th Non-Aligned                    
 Summit in March 1983 in New Delhi, the subsequent assumption by India of                   
 the Chairmanship of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) with its attendant                      
 responsibilities, and additionally the obligations assumed by India in                     
 terms of the decisions of the Common-wealth Heads of Government Meeting                    
 (CHOGM) held in November 1983 in New Delhi, India undertook a variety of                   
 foreign policy initiatives during the year under review which were                         
 designed to promote a just international political, economic and                           
 information order. The External Publicity (XP) Division provided the                       
 requisite publicity and public relations support in this regard.                           
                                                                                            
 India's participation in the informal consultations at Summit level in                     
 New York in September 1983, and the visits of the President and the                        
 Prime Minister of India abroad, were utilised by the Division to project                   
 not only India's views but the aspirations of the developing countries                     
 in general towards securing a New World Order. In this regard India's                      
 contribution and capability, in cooperation with other developing                          
 countries, was highlighted. Efforts were also made to project India's                      
 firm commitment to democracy, non-alignment and world peace, peaceful                      
 use of nuclear energy and Outer Space, moral and material commitment                       
 against apartheid and in support of majority rule in Namibia and support                   
 for the Palestinian cause.                                                                 
                                                                                            
 The External Publicity Division continued to be closely involved in                        
 promoting a New International Information Order, both within the forum                     
 of the Non-Aligned Movement and in other fora like the United Nations                      
 and UNESCO.                                                                                
                                                                                            
 An additional dimension was added to the work of the External Publicity                    
 Division when the Joint Secretary in charge of it was designated as the                    
 nodal point for coordinating the promotion of sports, arts and culture                     
 among the South Asian Regional Cooperation (SARC) countries.                               
 During the year special attention was paid to the following:                               
 (a) Organisation of publicity arrangements for the 7th Non- Aligned                        
 Summit and the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting 1983.                              
 (b) Improvement of the production values of the principal organ of                         
 publicity of the Ministry, the colour fortnightly, Indian and Foreign                      
 Review.                                                                                    
 -68>                                                                                       
 (c) Augmentation of the printing capacity of the External Publicity                        
 Division.                                                                                  
 (d) Maintenance of a steady supply of visual material, particularly good                   
 documentaries, colour photographs and transparencies, to augment and                       
 improve the stock of such material in our Missions abroad.                                 
 (e) Provision of help to our Missions and Posts abroad who organised                       
 special shows of Richard Attenborough's film on Mahatma Gandhi.                            
 Seventh NAM Summit                                                                         
                                                                                            
 The External Publicity Division collaborated with the PIB in setting up                    
 the required media facilities at Palam airport, designated hotels and                      
 the Media Centre at Vigyan Bhavan to cater to the 1733 correspondents                      
 (1024 visiting correspondents, 59 India based Indian journalists working                   
 for foreign papers, 150 foreign correspondents based in India and 500                      
 Indian journalists). A briefing room was organised in the Vigyan Bhavan                    
 Annexe with simultaneous translation facilities in French, Spanish and                     
 Arabic, and frequent daily briefings were given throughout the period                      
 1-12 March 1983. XP Division helped the Directorate of Audio-Visual                        
 Publicity to organise in one of the foyers of Vigyan Bhavan an                             
 exhibition of photographs, on earlier NAM Summits, the Asian Relations                     
 Conference, the Bandung Conference and the Brioni Meeting. The Division                    
 also prepared suitable literature highlighting India's progress and role                   
 in the Non-Aligned Movement, which was included in the Press Kit                           
 presented to the correspondents. A one-hour long documentary on the 7th                    
 NAM Summit was produced by the Films Division with assistance and help                     
 from XP Division. The publicity arrangements described above evoked high                   
 praise in the media, both abroad and in India.                                             
 CHOGM 83                                                                                   
 In collaboration with PIB, the XP Division provided media facilities                       
 similar to those provided at the 7th NAM Summit, during the Commonwealth                   
 Heads of Government Meeting at the following places: Palam Airport,                        
 designated hotels in which visiting media personnel stayed, and at the                     
 Media Centre at Vigyan Bhavan, which catered to 1129 media personnel                       
 (visiting foreign correspondents 419, India based journalists working                      
 for foreign papers 49, foreign correspondents based in India 79, Indian                    
 journalists 582). The Joint Secretary (XP), who was a member of the                        
 Publicity Committee, apart from assisting the staff of the Information                     
 Directorate of the Commonwealth Secretariat both at New Delhi and at                       
 Goa, held special briefings during the Conference for Indian media. A                      
 set of 12 brochures, Land and People, How We Govern Ourselves, India and                   
 Non-Alignment, The Economy, Agriculture, Industrial Development, Energy,                   
 Science and Technology, Human Settlements, Social Development and Rural                    
 Welfare. The New 20-Point Programme and The Media Scene, were published                    
 by the XP Division and presented to Heads of Delegations. The XP                           
 Division also published a pamphlet                                                         
 -69>                                                                                       
 on "Panchsheel : The Five Principles of Peaceful Co-existence" by Dr.                      
 Mulk Raj Anand and Shri B. R. Nanda, which was also supplied to Heads of                   
 Delegations. In addition, delegates were provided with general                             
 information brochures on India. These publicity arrangements were                          
 commended by the media both abroad and in India.                                           
 Printing                                                                                   
                                                                                            
 The External Publicity Division continued to bring out the following                       
 regular publications :                                                                     
 (1) Indian & Foreign Review-fortnightly colour magazine.                                   
 (2) Courrier de L'Inde--fortnightly in French.                                             
 (3) Foreign Affairs Record-monthly.                                                        
                                                                                            
 The visual quality and editorial content of Indian and Foreign Review                      
 were up graded substantially. The fortnightly is being printed on art                      
 paper with an increased number of colour illustrations. A drive to enrol                   
 more subscribers has started.                                                              
 As regards occasional publications 28 booklets on important                                
 pronouncements by the Prime Minister and the Foreign Minister on foreign                   
 policy matters, India's scientific and cultural advancement and India's                    
 economic progress have been brought out by the XP Division.                                
 Transmission                                                                               
 The External Publicity Division continued to keep our Missions informed                    
 of matters of contemporary interest in India's relations with other                        
 countries as well as on important political, economic, scientific and                      
 technological developments in India through twice- daily transmissions                     
 covering important foreign policy statements by the Government. 27                         
 Missions received these transmissions through the Overseas                                 
 Communications Service (OCS); eight Missions in North and South America                    
 received them through Satellite, and 27 through PTI links with foreign                     
 news, agencies, 39 Missions received bi-weekly telexes, five Missions                      
 were covered by bi- weekly press cables, and 44 Missions received                          
 cyclostyled copies of transmissions by diplomatic bag.                                     
                                                                                            
 Visiting Journalists                                                                       
 The Division continued to organise visits of journalists, from abroad,                     
 with a view to projecting developments in India in full and correct                        
 perspective. During the nine-month period ending December 1983, 41                         
 journalists visited India as guests of the                                                 
 -70>                                                                                       
 Government (21 availed partial hospitality and 20 full hospitality).                       
 Another 3,322 journalists who visited India on their own, or accompanied                   
 foreign VVIPs on State visits to India, were accorded necessary                            
 assistance during their stay here (1,733 correspondents covered the 7th                    
 NAM Summit, 17 accompanied the US Secretary of State, George Shultz, 22                    
 came with the FRG Chancellor, 55 accompanied the British Queen, 1129                       
 correspondents attended CHOGM 83 and the number of delegates for the                       
 NAMEDIA Conference was 220). 58 television photographic teams visited                      
 India for making documentaries till December 1983 and 27 are expected to                   
 come by March 1984.                                                                        
 Audio-Visual Publicity                                                                     
                                                                                            
 During the year under review 567 prints of a number of documentaries                       
 produced by the Films Division were sent to Missions abroad. These                         
 depicted items such as various aspects of India's industrial                               
 development, cultural heritage and places of tourist interest. "Indian                     
 Industry Comes of Age" was purchased from its Producers, Shri Rajbans                      
 Khanna, for circulation to Missions.                                                       
                                                                                            
 Forty prints of feature films were supplied, in addition to the films                      
 already in circulation, to our Missions abroad.                                            
 Films were supplied for 7 film festivals/film weeks to Alexandria,                         
 Panama City, Brussels, Belgrade, Copenhagen, Niger and Manila. During                      
 the President's visit to Prague, Doha and Bahrain and the Prime                            
 Minister's visit to Oslo, Belgrade, Copenhagen, Helsinki, Vienna,                          
 Nicosia, Athens, Paris and New York, documentaries were sent to these                      
 Missions for suitable telecasting in the local television media in these                   
 countries.                                                                                 
                                                                                            
 The film on Mahatma Gandhi by Richard Attenborough made an astonishing                     
 impact in various parts of the world wherever it was screened. Many of                     
 our Heads of Mission organised suitable special shows of the film and                      
 distributed literature on Mahatma Gandhi and also, alongwith their                         
 colleagues, took part in seminars1 symposia and radio and TV programmes                    
 on Gandhiji's contribution to civilisation. The External Publicity                         
 Division gave them full support.                                                           
 Our Missions have been supplied 11,000 black and white photographs, 267                    
 colour transparencies and 424 colour photographs upto mid-December 1983.                   
 Our Mission in Os1o was assisted in holding a photographic exhibition on                   
 Jawaharlal Nehru, and the photographic exhibition, "India Today", which                    
 has been under circulation to various Missions abroad, was exhibited                       
 during the year at Beijing, San Francisco, Hanoi, Dhaka and New York.                      
 The External Publicity Division also assisted our Mission in Doha to                       
 hold a photographic exhibition highlighting India's Islamic heritage.                      
 -71>                                                                                       
 News Agencies and Feature Agencies                                                         
 The Division has subsidised the location of Indian correspondents                          
 belonging to the four Indian news agencies in various countries since                      
 January 1980. The Division continued to subscribe to the special feature                   
 news services of news agencies and commissioned special feature articles                   
 on various aspects of development in India. The publication of special                     
 supplements on India on national occasions, such as Republic Day and                       
 Independence Day, as also on the occasions of the visits of the Prime                      
 Minister to various countries abroad, were encouraged with the                             
 cooperation of The Trade Fair Authority of India.                                          
                                                                                            
 The news service to Indian Missions abroad, which was started last year                    
 by supplying them daily press round-ups covering reports and comments on                   
 foreign affairs in the Indian Press, was maintained. In addition another                   
 daily round-up of development news was organised during 1983-84 and                        
 supplied to them.                                                                          
 Special Inquiries                                                                          
                                                                                            
 Special inquiries received through Indian Missions on various subjects                     
 were handled by the External Publicity Division and necessary responses                    
 information conveyed to them. A large number of Press releases were                        
 issued by the Division on events of interest to India. The World Press                     
 Review, containing comments, summaries and analyses of foreign press                       
 comments on India or of interest to India in foreign newspapers and                        
 periodicals continued to be brought out in cyclostyled form.                               
 Non-Aligned News Agencies Pool                                                             
 India sent a three-member delegation consisting of the Deputy General                      
 Manager of PTI, Shri P. Unnikrishnan, Joint Secretary, Ministry of                         
 Information & Broadcasting, Shri J. K. Bhattacharya, and Director,                         
 External Publicity Division, Shri B. B, lyer, to the 9th Coordination                      
 Committee Meeting of the News Agencies Pool of the Non-Aligned countries                   
 held in Nicosia during 1-2 June 1983. The Meeting finalised the                            
 modalities for the functioning of the Monitoring and Technical                             
 Committees of the Pool, which is expected to improve the functioning of                    
 the Pool.                                                                                  
 Namedia Conference                                                                         
 The National Preparatory Committee of the "NAMEDIA-Media Conference of                     
 the Non-Aligned Countries", which met in New Delhi during 9-12 December                    
 1983 was assisted by the External Publicity Division by helping the                        
 organisers with Conference Services and providing local hospitality to                     
 two members from each delega                                                               
 -72>                                                                                       
 tion. Local hospitality to over 100 journalists from NAM countries                         
 attending the Conference was provided. The Conference was inaugurated by                   
 the Prime Minister.                                                                        
 Study Group Technical Committee Meeting on Sports, Arts and Culture of                     
 SARC Countries                                                                             
                                                                                            
 At the Fourth Meeting of Foreign Secretaries of SARC countries at Dhaka                    
 on 28-30 March 1983, it was decided that India should coordinate the                       
 required regional cooperation in Sports, Arts and Culture. The External                    
 Publicity Division, which was designated by the Government as the nodal                    
 point for organising requisite action, convened a Study Group Meeting in                   
 this regard at New Delhi on 27-28 June 1983. For considering                               
 implementation of the recommendations which were endorsed by the SARC                      
 Foreign Ministers' Meeting in August 1983, the Technical Committee on                      
 Sports, Arts and Culture of SARC met in New Delhi on 13-14 January 1984.                   
 Regional Conference on the World Disarmament Campaign                                      
                                                                                            
 In connection with this Conference held in Vigyan Bhavan, New Delhi                        
 during 22-26 August 1983 help was provided to the Department of                            
 Disarmament Affairs, United Nations, New York to bring out a brochure                      
 for the Conference, to screen some films on Doordarshan as well as                         
 broadcast some talks on disarmament on AIR. In collaboration with DAVP,                    
 External Publicity Division also helped them to hold an exhibition on                      
 disarmament. The Under Secretary General of the United Nations, Mr. Jan                    
 Martenson, and Joint Secretary (XP) held a joint Press Conference at the                   
 Vigyan Bhavan on 22 August 1983. A TV interview with the UN Team of                        
 Officials was also arranged, Consequent to the help provided by the                        
 External Publicity Division, there was substantial coverage of the above                   
 meeting in all media.                                                                      
 -73>                                                                                       
                                                                                            
 CULTURAL RELATIONS                                                                         
                                                                      Top                   
 The Indian Council for Cultural Relations continued to function as the                     
 principal agency for promoting India's cultural relations with foreign                     
 countries.                                                                                 
                                                                                            
 During the period under review, the Council received about 80                              
 distinguished visitors in fields such as fine arts, literature,                            
 education and the sciences. They came from Austria, Bangladesh, Bhutan,                    
 Egypt, France, Hong Kong, Nigeria, Portugal, UK, USA and USSR.                             
                                                                                            
 Under the programme of incoming performing arts delegations, nearly 20                     
 troupes visited India from Cuba, France, Portugal, China, UK and USSR,                     
 The Council, in collaboration with the Institute of Romani Studies                         
 organised an International Roma (Gypsy) Festival in Chandigarh. Five                       
 troupes from various countries participated in the Festival. These                         
 troupes also performed in New Delhi. The other performing troupes                          
 besides performing in New Delhi, also staged performances in Bombay,                       
 Bangalore, Calcutta, Madras, Chandigarh and Trivandrum.                                    
                                                                                            
 In pursuance of the policy of maintaining and promoting close and                          
 friendly relations with neighbouring countries, particularly Bhutan, the                   
 Council received the following delegations from Bhutan: (i) 12-member                      
 Officers delegation; (ii) 12-member Judicial Officers delegation; and                      
 (iii) 12-member Scholars delegation. A 12-member Women's delegation from                   
 Bhutan will come to India very soon.                                                       
                                                                                            
 As part of the cultural projection effort abroad, more than 50 visitors                    
 and 70 performing delegations were sent out to various countries. The                      
 individual visitors who were academicians, educationists, writers,                         
 poets, artists and critics, participated in conferences and seminars,                      
 delivered lectures, held exhibitions, and carried on their research. The                   
 performing delegations visited a number of countries including North                       
 America, West Asia, South-East Asia, Afghanistan, Nepal and U.K, Some of                   
 the important troupes which were sent abroad were those of Pt. Ravi                        
 Shankar to China, a 12-member Rajasthani Musicians group to Edinburgh,                     
 UK, and USSR. a 16-member Bharatiya Kala Kendra group to USSR and                          
 Poland, a 30-member Naya Theatre troupe to participate in the London                       
 International Theatre Festival, and the Dagar Brothers to USA.                             
                                                                                            
 The Council also received exhibitions from abroad and sent, out a number                   
 of Indian exhibitions to various countries. The Council organised an                       
 exhibition of                                                                              
 -74>                                                                                       
                                                                                            
 Czechoslovak Puppet Theatre as also an exhibition of Commonwealth Arts                     
 on the occasion of the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting,                           
                                                                                            
 In the Council's publication activity, Volume 4 of Indian Short Stories,                   
 an enlarged edition of Vision of India and a Hindi edition of the                          
 biography of Simon Bolivar were published. The quartdrly journals of the                   
 Council, namely Indian Horizons, Africa Quarterly, Rencontre avec L'                       
 Inde (French), Papeles de la India (Spanish), Thaqafatul Hind (Arabic),                    
 and Gagananchal (Hindi) were regularly published. The Council also                         
 brought out a special issue of Gagananchal on the occasion of the Viswa                    
 Hindi Sammelan, and a special number of Papels de la India on the                          
 occasion of the bicentennial anniversary Celebration of the Latin                          
 American soldier-statesman Simon Bolivar.                                                  
                                                                                            
 Under the Presentation Programme, books, art objects, Indian arte-facts,                   
 and musical instruments were sent to universities, institutions and                        
 cultural organisations of various countries. The notable objects of                        
 presentation were charkha, Indian masks and puppets and Subramaniam                        
 Bharati Calendar, which was specially printed by the Council.                              
                                                                                            
 The Library and the reading room in Azad Bhavan have been attracting                       
 scholars, reasearch students and readers in large numbers. The African                     
 Section of the Library maintained 117 files of press clippings on                          
 current affairs in Africa.                                                                 
                                                                                            
 The Azad Memorial Lecture was instituted in 1958 to honour and                             
 commemorate the memory of the late Maulana Abul Kalam Azad, the first                      
 Education Minister of the Government of India and the founder President                    
 of the Council. In 1983, it was delivered by Dr. Mohd. Hassan el-Zayyat,                   
 former Foreign Minister and the present President of the Indo-Egypt                        
 Friendship Association. The topic of his lecture was "India and Egypt:                     
 Modern Relations between two Ancient Nations".                                             
                                                                                            
 As a mark of solidarity with the freedom fighters, South Africa Freedom                    
 Day and Namibia Day functions were observed in the Council. The Council                    
 also organised a public meeting on the occasion of the bicentennial                        
 anniversary of Simon Bolivar.                                                              
                                                                                            
 Under the scheme of maintenance of Chairs Centres of Indian Studies                        
 abroad, the Council is looking after the deputation of Indian teachers                     
 to various institutions. The Council continued to maintain one dance                       
 teacher and one tabla teacher in Trinidad. and one teacher of                              
 instrumental music at the Mahatma Gandhi Institute in Mauritius. The                       
 Council has also been maintaining Cultural Centres in Fiji, Guyana and                     
 Suriname. These Centres have libraries of basic books on India in                          
 English and Hindi and Indian periodicals and newspapers. These Centres                     
 also maintain a collection of books, films, slides, records and tapes of                   
 Indian music, and conduct classes on Indian music, dance and yoga.                         
                                                                                            
 The Council continues to oversee the activities of the foreign cultural                    
 centres in India by administering the British libraries at Ahmedabad,                      
 Bangalore, Bhopal, Lucknow, Patna, Pune, Ranchi, Trivandrum and                            
 Hyderabad, and the House of Soviet Culture in Trivandrum, and by                           
 maintaining liaisoin with the Max Mueller Bhavans and Alliances                            
 Francaise in India.                                                                        
 -75>                                                                                       
                                                                                            
 PROTOCOL                                                                                   
                                                                      Top                   
 During 1983, Heads of Mission of the following 25 countries left India                     
 on the completion of their assignments: -Iceland (Resident in                              
 Reykjavik), France, USSR, Brazil, Sweden, Australia, Zaire, Laos,                          
 Romania, PLO, Jordan, Mauritius, Italy, Iraq, Canada, Peoples Democratic                   
 Republic of Yemen, Cyprus,Zambia, Netherlands, Thailand, Guyana,                           
 Kampuchea, Turkey, Egypt and Panama.                                                       
                                                                                            
 In the same period Heads of Mission of the following 30 countries                          
 presented their credentials to the President of India: Czechoslovakia,                     
 France, Sudan, Morocc, Saudi Arabia, Nepal, Uruguay, Kampuchea, Sweden,                    
 Peru, Austria, USSR, Zaire. New Zealand, Laos, Senegal, Philippines,                       
 Brazil, Italy. Jordan, Zambia, Canada, Iraq, Netherlands, Mauritius,                       
 Guyana, Cyprus, Thailand, Romania and Peoples Democratic Republic of                       
 Yemen.                                                                                     
                                                                                            
 The New Zealand Government closed its Mission in New Delhi in early                        
 1982. Later they decided to have concurrent accreditation. Their High                      
 Commissioner stationed at Willington presented his credentials on 19                       
 April, 1983 to the President.                                                              
                                                                                            
 Senegal had its resident Mission in New Delhi till July 1980 when it was                   
 closed down due to economic constraints. The Senegal Government decided                    
 to concurrently accredit their Ambassador stationed in Tokyo, who                          
 presented his credentials on 9 May 1983 to the President.                                  
                                                                                            
 The European Community opened its new Mission in New Delhi. Mr. Manfredo                   
 Macioti is the Head of the Delegation of the Commission of the European                    
 Communities for South Asia. He is of the rank of Ambassador and                            
 presented his credentials to our Foreign Minister on 8 June 1983.                          
 -76>                                                                                       
                                                                                            
 PASSPORT, EMIGRATION AND CONSULAR SERVICES                                                 
                                                                      Top                   
 The request for issue of fresh passports and other miscellaneous                           
 passport services exceeded the all-time high figure reached in 1982. The                   
 quantum of consular services rendered by our Missions abroad and this                      
 Ministry also showed an appreciable increase. Despite increase in the                      
 workload, all passport services were rendered expeditiously within a                       
 reasonable time-bound framework. Steps were also taken to improve the                      
 quality of services rendered to the passport applicants. Our Missions                      
 abroad also strove to render prompt and courteous consular services to                     
 Indian nationals abroad.                                                                   
                                                                                            
 Over 16 lakh applications for issue of fresh passports were received in                    
 Passport Offices in India during 1983, which is the highest figure                         
 recorded for any single year. the input of fresh applications increased                    
 by over five per cent compared to the previous year. While the increase                    
 in fresh applications was marginal, the increase in respect of                             
 miscellaneous passport services reflected an appreciable increase by as                    
 much as 19 per cent over the previous years, with around 9 lakh                            
 applications received during 1983 as against 7.60 lakh during 1982.                        
 Despite an overall increase in the workload, Passport Offices strove                       
 hard to ensure that output in terms of issue of passports and other                        
 miscellaneous services, was a little higher than the input of fresh                        
 applications. This led to a decline in the pendency of applications in                     
 the Passport Offices, which now stands at approximately 1.6 lakh                           
 applications at the end of 1983, which is reasonable given the average                     
 monthly input and time taken to process passport applications at various                   
 stages. The Passport Office in Bombay received the maximum number of                       
 applications, followed by Madras, Cochin, Delhi, Hyderabad and                             
 Jullundur. A statement showing the services rendered by each Passport                      
 Office in India is given at Appendix V.                                                    
                                                                                            
 With a view to improving the quality of passport services rendered, a                      
 number of steps were taken. The essential data with regard to the issue                    
 of passports has been computerised. This would further facilitate                          
 expeditious issue of passports to the applicants. It is also proposed to                   
 gradually introduce computerisation into other fields of passport work.                    
 It is proposed to establish computer terminal links in the Regional                        
 Passport Office, New Delhi, during 1984. Passport applicants have been                     
 provided with the facility of additional visa sheets, which will be                        
 attached to the passport booklets. With the provision of this facility,                    
 the old system of adding                                                                   
 -77>                                                                                       
 passport booklets, which was cumbersome, time-consuming and unaesthetic,                   
 has been discontinued. This will assist in meeting the requirements of                     
 additional pages to the passport booklets from the applicants.                             
                                                                                            
 In order to provide greater satisfaction to the passport applicants and                    
 to ensure that Passport Offices are within the reach of a greater number                   
 of applicants, two new Passport Offices were opened during 1983. The                       
 Passport Offices at Tiruchirapalli in Tamil Nadu and Bareilly in Uttar                     
 Pradesh were formally inaugurated on 23 July and 29 July 1983                              
 respectively. With the opening of these Offices, there are now 20                          
 Passport Offices and one Passport Liaison Office in India.                                 
                                                                                            
 All Passport Offices were given instructions toissue passport within a                     
 prescribed time span of six weeks from the date of receipt of                              
 applications. The normal time taken to issue passports varied from 4 to                    
 7 weeks in different Passport Offices. In cases of emergency, prompt                       
 services continued to be rendered as usual to the passport applicants                      
 and the passports were issued on the same day in many cases. During this                   
 year, 985 cases of complaints regarding delay in the issue of passports                    
 were received against Passport Offices in India. The delay was due to                      
 non-compliance of prescribed formalities by the passport applicants. In                    
 all cases, Passport Offices were asked to issue passports expeditiously                    
 after completion of necessary formalities.                                                 
                                                                                            
 The Emigration Act of 1922 has been replaced by the Emigration Act of                      
 1983. Consequently the work relating to Emigration Clearance Endorsement                   
 has been transferred to the Ministry of Labour and the same will be                        
 performed by the protectorates of Emigrants under the administrative                       
 control of the Ministry of Labour, wherever they are located. In other                     
 places the work relating to Emigration Suspension Endorsement would be                     
 performed by Passport Offices. The Passport Offices would, however,                        
 continue to perform the functions of determining the status of a                           
 passport applicant, by suitably endorsing the passports, with stamps                       
 such as Emigration Check Required' or 'Emigration Clearance not                            
 Required'.                                                                                 
                                                                                            
 The visa fees in respect of foreign nationals were reviewed. A new visa                    
 fees schedule has been introduced with effect from 15 December 1983. The                   
 Landing Permit System remained suspended during the year 1983, With a                      
 view to ensuring that there is no disruption of work, Consular Offices                     
 in our Missions abroad were provided with additional staff to cope with                    
 increase in visa work,                                                                     
                                                                                            
 During the period under review, 483 cases of deportation came to the                       
 notice of the Ministry. Indian Missions/Posts abroad repatriated 297                       
 persons who were in distress in foreign countries. Financial assistance                    
 was extended to Indian nationals wherever necessary. Cases of 196 Indian                   
 nationals arrested in various, countries were reported to the                              
 Government. All possible consular assistance was Given to them and where                   
 possible, their release and return to India were facilitated by the                        
 Missions concerned. 192 cases of deaths of foreign nationals in India                      
 were also handled.                                                                         
 -78>                                                                                       
 Five hundred ninety eight cases of death of Indian nationals abroad came                   
 to the notice of the Ministry and action was initiated to claim wage                       
 dues and death compensation for the heirs of the deceased through the                      
 Indian Missions. The procedure for payment of compensation was                             
 simplified by making arrangements with various State Governments in                        
 India for disbursement of the dues of the deceased remitted by the                         
 Indian Missions abroad through the respective District authorities.                        
                                                                                            
 During the period under review 1,72,581 documents submitted by the                         
 public for production to foreign authorities, were                                         
 attested/authenticated by the Consular Section. Despite increase in                        
 workload, such attestation services were rendered the same day.                            
                                                                                            
 The Consular Manual which contains guidelines for our Missions abroad                      
 for dealing with Consular cases was revised early this year. Advance                       
 mimeographed copies have already been circulated to all the Missions                       
 abroad.                                                                                    
 -79>                                                                                       
                                                                                            
 ADMINISTRATION AND ORGANISATION                                                            
                                                                      Top                   
 Shri P. V. Narasimha Rao continued as the Minister of External Affairs,                    
 and Shri A. A. Rahim as the Minister of State in the Ministry of                           
 External Affairs. There were changes at the level of Secretaries: Shri                     
 M. Rasgotra continued as Foreign Secretary; Shri Romesh Bhandari as                        
 Secretary (Economic Relations); and Shri K. Natwar Singh as Secretary                      
 (East) on the departure of Shri K. S. Bajpai on posting. At the level of                   
 Additional Secretaries, Shri J. R. Hiremth, Additional Secretary                           
 (Administration) left on posting in May 1983 and Shri. A. R. Deo,                          
 Additional Secretary (Americas and Africa) left on posting in September,                   
 Dr. J. S. Teja continued as Additional Secretary (UN & PPE) while Shri                     
 I. S. Chadha took over as Additional Secretary (ER) in May 1983 and Shri                   
 S. K. Bhutani as Additional Secretary (AD) in January 1984.                                
 The total strength of the IFS and IFS(B) cadres both at Headquarters and                   
 in Missions posts abroad was 3,704. This did not include 45 research                       
 personnel and 33 officers in the Interpreters Cadre, as also                               
 locally-recruited staff of 1,517 in our Missions Posts abroad. The total                   
 staff strength is given in Appendix VI.                                                    
                                                                                            
 To project India's image abroad, safeguard its national interests and                      
 implement national policies there are 135 Missions and Posts abroad                        
 manned by 794 diplomatic officers and 1209 non- diplomatic India-based                     
 officials, apart from the 1.517 locally recruited staff.                                   
                                                                                            
 The Cabinet approved a Cadre Review of the IFS in December 1983. The                       
 total strength of the cadre was raised from 566 posts to 568 posts for                     
 1984 and 589 Posts for 1985 to enable the IFS, which is in charge of all                   
 aspects of India's representation abroad, to shoulder its growing                          
 responsibilities. Details of the cadre review are given in Appendix VII.                   
                                                                                            
 Missions and Posts in areas which assumed priority from the viewpoint of                   
 our national interests were strengthened At the same time, action                          
 continued on streamlining several Missions, and especially our Missions                    
 in Washington and London, by accelerating the removal of transferable                      
 items of work from these two Missions to offices in India.                                 
 -80>                                                                                       
 A list detailing the number of officers who have qualified in various                      
 foreign languages is given at Appendix VIII                                                
                                                                                            
 The Cabinet approved the establishment of a Foreign Service Training                       
 Institute. The need for such an institute has long been felt. It would                     
 be responsible for the training of IFS probationers, provide in service                    
 training to IFS officers and also provide facilities to diplomatic                         
 officers from friendly countries. The Institute is expected to become                      
 functional in 1984.                                                                        
                                                                                            
 At the instructions of the Prime Minister. an Indian Missions Review                       
 Committee consisting of Shri Samar Sen as Chairman and S Shri P. K.                        
 Kaul, Abid Hussain, K. S. Bajpai as members and Shri J. R. Hiremath as                     
 member Secretary (on the departure of Shri Hiremath to Yugoslavia Shri                     
 Lalit Mansingh, Joint Secretary (Establishment) took over as                               
 member-Secretary) was appointed to examine the working of Indian                           
 Missions abroad. The Committee submitted a preliminary report in May                       
 1983 and the final report is expected shortly. The recommendations of                      
 the Committee would be examined in the Ministry as soon as the report is                   
 available.                                                                                 
                                                                                            
 The Ministry continued its endeavour to streamline the administration.                     
 The rationalisation and simplification of rules relating to personnel                      
 and establishment matters was undertaken. The financial powers of our                      
 Heads of Mission were reviewed to avoid delays in references to                            
 headquarters and to speed up the disposal of cases. The horne-leave and                    
 emergency passages schemes were modified. A three-year period of                           
 postings was introduced for all officials in all Missions. The supply of                   
 material and equipment from India to Missions and Posts abroad was                         
 considerably speeded up.                                                                   
                                                                                            
 The Foreign Service Inspectors inspected our Missions in Hong Kong,                        
 Seoul, tokyo, Pyongyang and Manila.                                                        
                                                                                            
 Proposals for the purchase of a Chancery building in Helsinki and                          
 Embassy Residences in Bogota, Athens and Seoul, the residence of the                       
 Assistant High Commissioner of India in Kandy and the residences of                        
 officials in Paris. London, San Francisco, Ottawa and Berne were                           
 finalised. The construction of the Chancery building in Jakarta was                        
 completed, while the construction of the Chancery building in Islamabad                    
 and the Chancery and Residence in Ankara were commenced. The                               
 construction of the Chancery in Lusaka continued to make satisfactory                      
 progress. Within India. plots ofland were acquired in Jahalpur,                            
 Bhubaneswar and Cochin for the construction of passport office                             
                                                                                            
 The Welfare Unit of the Ministry continued to look after the general                       
 welfare of all officials serving at headquarters and in the Indian                         
 Missions abroad. Assistance was rendered to a large number of cases in                     
 arranging admission of the children of officials serving in Missions                       
 abroad in educational institutions including Medical and Engineering                       
 Colleges. Financial assistance out of the staff benefit fund was                           
 provided                                                                                   
 -81>                                                                                       
 to the families of our officials in cases of prolonged illness and other                   
 unforeseen misfortunes.                                                                    
                                                                                            
 India's contribution to international organisations was Rs. 2.87.                          
 crores. Its economic and technical assistance extended to Third World                      
 countries amounted to Rs. 85.415 crores.                                                   
                                                                                            
 On account of inflationary conditions, the expenditure at headquarters                     
 has risen to Rs.11.12 crores while the total expenditure on Missions was                   
 about Rs. 60 crores. Details are given in Appendices IX and X.                             
                                                                                            
 The Ministry took care to implement government directives on the welfare                   
 of Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe employees. A special cell to look                   
 after their welfare continued to function. In 1983, of the 12 officers                     
 directly recruited for the Indian Foreign Service 2 belonged to the                        
 Scheduled Castes and 1 to the Scheduled Tribes. Details are given in                       
 Appendices XI and XII.                                                                     
                                                                                            
 The Ministry was able to shoulder the administrative requirements of the                   
 NonAligned Summit and the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting. With                   
 marginal assistance in terms of personnel from other departments and                       
 agencies of government, it was able to successfully handle the                             
 organisation of these conferences.                                                         
                                                                                            
 During the year under review, the Conference Cell, besides looking after                   
 the logistics of the NAM and CHOGM Conferences, handled logistical                         
 aspects of as many as 26 International Conferences /Seminars/Meetings                      
 hosted by diderent Ministries, including Ministry of External Affairs,                     
 in New Delhi.The list of these Conferences together with the other                         
 particulars is given at Appendix XIII. The assistance rendered by the                      
 Conference Cell in organising the logistics of all hese Conferences was                    
 provided on request from the Heads/Secretaries of the different                            
 Departments/Ministries to the Foreign Secretary.                                           
                                                                                            
 The creation of a permanent Conference Cell in this Ministry and the                       
 assistance given by it for organising various Conferences has been well                    
 received and the work done by it has been fully appreciated by all the                     
 nodal Departments/Ministries of the Government of India. In addition, by                   
 having a permanent Conference Cell in the Ministry, it has been possible                   
 to build up an infrastructure and expertise for handling these                             
 international conferences, and to simultaneously eliminate the necessity                   
 of setting up mini-conference cells in these Ministries/Departments on                     
 each and every occasion that an international meeting has to be                            
 organised by them. This has effected considerable savings to the                           
 Government Exchequer.                                                                      
 -82>                                                                                       
                                                                                            
 USE OF HINDI IN OFFICIAL WORK                                                              
                                                                      Top                   
 In compliance with the Government's policy regarding the progressive use                   
 of Hindi in official work, there has been a considerable advance in the                    
 implementation of the Official Language Act and the Rules framed                           
 thereunder, both at the Headquarters of the Ministry and its                               
 Missions/Posts abroad. Apart from the progressive use of Hindi, special                    
 efforts were made for the propagation of Hindi in foreign countries,                       
 particularly in countries having a sizable population of people of                         
 Indian origin.                                                                             
                                                                                            
 In the meetings of the Official Language Implementation Committee of the                   
 Ministry, special attention was paid to increasing the use of Hindi in                     
 official work. Official Language Implementation Committees have also                       
 been constituted in several Regional Passport Offices of the Ministry.                     
 The quarterly reports regarding the progressive use of Hindi as the                        
 Official Language were obtained regularly from the Passport Offices and                    
 the Missions abroad and reviewed in the Ministry.                                          
                                                                                            
 During the period under review, three new posts of Hindi Officer were                      
 created in our Missions at Georgetown, London and Paramaribo. Candidates                   
 have been selected for these posts and also for the posts of Hindi                         
 Officer in our Missions at Port Louis, Port-of-Spain and Suva. All these                   
 Hindi Officers would take up their posts in the above Missions shortly.                    
                                                                                            
 Under the scheme of Chairs and Centres of Indian Studies abroad, the                       
 Government have sent visiting Professors of Hindi to the University of                     
 Havana, Cuba, Humboldt University, GDR, University of Bucharest, Romania                   
 and University of Sofia, Bulgaria. Hindi is being taught through the                       
 Indian Cultural Centres in Fiji, Guyana and Suriname.The Indian Council                    
 for Cultural Relations has been maintaining three posts of Hindi                           
 lecturers in Port-of-Spain, Georgetown and Suriname on behalf of the                       
 Ministry of Education and Culture. Part-time Hindi teachers are also                       
 running Hindi classes in our High Commission in Sri Lanka. Hindi text                      
 books, childern's books, dictionaries and linguaphone records were                         
 supplied to our Missions for presentation to those who are learning                        
 Hindi. Under the Newspaper Exchange Programme with many countries, Hindi                   
 newspapers were exchanged on regular basis.                                                
                                                                                            
 Under the children's Hindi teaching programme of the Ministry, Hindi                       
 classes were conducted for the children of the Indian                                      
 Officer's/employees in 13 Missions.                                                        
                                                                                            
 -83>                                                                                       
                                                                                            
 The Indian Missions abroad extended their full cooperation in                              
 popularizing the Hindi Correspondence Courses being conducted by the                       
 Central Hindi Directorate in foreign countries. With the cooperation of                    
 our Missions, people of several countries of the world are learning                        
 Hindi through these correspondence courses. At the request of the Indian                   
 Missions located in Afghanistan, Mexico, Canada, Burma, Trinidad etc.,                     
 Hindi text books were sent for the persons learning Hindi there. A                         
 scheme has been prepared for sending a large number of books for the                       
 examinees in Guyana and Burma appearing in the examinations conducted by                   
 the Dakshin Bharat Hindi Prachar Sabha, Madras, the Rashtra Bhasha                         
 Prachar Samiti, Wardha, and the Hindi Sahitya Sammelan, Prayag. Under                      
 this scheme, text books costing Rs. one lakh are being sent for the                        
 students of Guyana during the current financial year. Hindi typewriters                    
 were sent as gift to the voluntary Hindi organisations of Mauritius,                       
 Fiji, Birmingham (UK),Netherlands and Karachi. Under the scheme of                         
 equipping our Missions abroad with Hindi typewriters, one such                             
 typewriter has been made available to all the Missions, except seven                       
 smaller Missions. Three of the remaining Missions will be supplled with                    
 Hindi typewriters during the current financial year.                                       
                                                                                            
 A programme is being worked out for supplying cassettes, linguaphone                       
 records,text books and dictionaries etc. for the Hindi learners abroad.                    
 We are requesting our Missions to intimate the headquarters about their                    
 requirements in this regard, so that persons interested in learning                        
 Hindi do not face any inconvenience.                                                       
                                                                                            
 In compliance with the suggestions made by the members of the                              
 Parliamentary Committee on Official language after their inspection of                     
 Indian Missions abroad, all the Missions now have their sign-boards,                       
 name-plates, rubber stamps etc. in bilingual form, both in Hindi and                       
 English. The compliance report has again been called for to ensure this.                   
 The President's messages on the occasions of Independence Day and                          
 Republic Day are being sent in Hindi to our Missions abroad. Heads of                      
 several of our Missions read them in Hindi and make their formal                           
 speeches in Hindi also.                                                                    
                                                                                            
 Under the scheme of bringing out the publications of the External                          
 Publicity Division in Hindi, Hindi versions of the Prime Minister's                        
 speeches made on the occasion of the Non-Aligned Summit Conference and                     
 the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting were published in Hindi                       
 also and distributed among journalists, Members of Parliament and                          
 delegates. Bilingual India News Letters were published by some of our                      
 Missions.                                                                                  
                                                                                            
 The most remarkable event during the year under review was the holding                     
 of the Third World Hindi Convention in New Delhi in the last week of                       
 October 1983. The Ministry and the Indian Missions abroad extended their                   
 full cooperation in its organisation. The Officers and staff of the                        
 Ministry extended their active support and were members of several                         
 organising committees of the Third World Hindi Convention. Apart from                      
 inviting the foreign delegates and providing them with travel                              
 facilities,                                                                                
 -84>                                                                                       
 the Indian Council for Cultural Relations bore the cost of the return                      
 air-fare for the delegates of neighbouring countries.                                      
                                                                                            
 The Ministry also participated in the exhibition organised on this                         
 occasion, and its stall "Videshon Men Hindi" attracted a large number of                   
 visitors. During the conference there was a great rush at the pavilion                     
 to see the magazines and books published by other countries and visitors                   
 from both home and abroad highly appreciated these efforts. After the                      
 conclusion of the conference, the Ministry and the Indian Council for                      
 Cultural Relations provided local hospitality and arranged tours for                       
 some of the delegates.                                                                     
                                                                                            
 The Meeting of the Sub-Committee of the Central Hindi Committee in the                     
 Ministry was held under the Chairmanship of the Minister of External                       
 Affairs in the first week of December 1983. Many important decisions                       
 were taken in this meeting, such as distribution of Hindi magazines                        
 abroad, extension of Hindi teaching in foreign countries, bringing out                     
 Hindi publications by the Ministry and the Indian Council for Cultural                     
 Relations, constitution of a Hindi Cell at the permanent Mission of                        
 India to the United Nations, publication of a diplomatic booklet, and                      
 creation of posts of Hindi Officers and Hindi Translators in the                           
 Passport Offices. In accordance with the decisions of the Sub-                             
 Committee, all the divisions and sections at the headquarters as also                      
 the Indian Missions abroad have been directed to fully implement the                       
 provisions of the official Language Rules. The check-points fixed for                      
 the implementation of the Official Language Rules have been tightened                      
 further.                                                                                   
                                                                                            
 As in previous years, the Ministry issued letters of credence and                          
 recall, Commissions of Appointment in respect of all Heads of Missions                     
 in Hindi, and also prepared Hindi texts of the Treaties/agreements etc.                    
 concluded with foreign Governments. Apart from this, the Hindi Section                     
 of the Ministry vetted the Hindi translations of treaties and agreements                   
 prepared by other Ministries of the Government of India.                                   
 -87>                                                                                       
                                                                                            
 APPENDIX I Treaties/Conventions/Agreements concluded or                                    
 renewed by India                                                                           
                                                                      Top                   
 Treaties/Conventions/Agreements concluded or renewed by India with other                   
 countries in 1983*                                                                         
 Sl. Title of Convention/ Date of Date of  Date on which                                    
 No. Treaty/Agreement Signature  ratification                                               
 entered into force                                                                         
                                                                                            
 1             2      3         4         5                                                 
                                                                                            
 MULTILATERAL                                                                               
                                                                                            
 European Economic Community (EEC)                                                          
                                                                                            
 1. Agreement between the                                                                   
    Government of India and                                                                 
    the Commission of the                                                                   
    European Communities on the                                                             
    Establishment and the                                                                   
    Privileges and Immunities                                                               
    of the Delegation of the                                                                
    Commission of the European                                                              
    Communities in India .  23-1-1982   13-1-1983                                           
                                                                                            
 Organisation of Petroleum                                                                  
 Exporting Countries (OPEC)                                                                 
                                                                                            
 2. Loan Agreement between India                                                            
    and the OPEC Fund for                                                                   
    International Development for                                                           
    Railway Modernization and                                                               
    Maintenance Project Loan No.                                                            
    323P. . . . .15-4-1983          4-7-1983                                                
                                                                                            
 South Asian Regional Cooperation                                                           
                                                                                            
 3. Declaration on South Asian                                                              
    Regional Cooperation. Done at                                                           
    New Delhi on 2-8-1983    2-8-1983   2-8-1983                                            
                                                                                            
 International Tin Agreement                                                                
                                                                                            
 4. Sixth International Tin                                                                 
    Agreement. Done at Geneva on                                                            
    26-6-1981 . .  21-4-1983    26-5-1983                                                   
 -88>                                                                                       
                                                                                            
 World Tourism Organisation                                                                 
                                                                                            
 5. Exchange of letters between                                                             
    the Government of India and                                                             
    the Secretary General of the                                                            
    World Tourism Organisation for                                                          
    the holding of the Fifth                                                                
    Session of the General Assembly                                                         
    of the World Tourism Organisation                                                       
    in New Delhi from 3 October                                                             
    14 October 1983    14-6-1983    28-9-1983                                               
                                                                                            
 United Nations Development                                                                 
 Programme (UNDP)                                                                           
                                                                                            
 6. Agreement between India and the                                                         
    United Nations Development                                                              
    Programme (UNDP) regarding                                                              
    Project No.IND/82/050/A/01/31-                                                          
    Computer Aided Management                                                               
    Programme       18-12-1980     20-6-1983                                                
                                                                                            
 7. Agreement between India and the                                                         
    United Nations Development                                                              
    Programme (UNDP) regarding                                                              
    Project No. IND/82/052/C/01/01-                                                         
    Facilities for Research and                                                             
    Testing in Rock Mechanics   27-7-1981  2-6-1983                                         
                                                                                            
 8. Agreement between India and the                                                         
    United Nations Development                                                              
    Programme (UNDP) regarding                                                              
    Project No. IND/83/031/A/01/37-                                                         
    Process and Product Development                                                         
    Centre for Small Scale Casting                                                          
    and Forging Industries at Agra. 20-7-1983 8-11-1983                                     
                                                                                            
 9. Agreement between India and the                                                         
    United Nations Development                                                              
    Programme (UNDP) regarding                                                              
    Project No. IND/83/020/A/01/12-                                                         
    Agricultural Education and                                                              
    Research for Accelerated                                                                
    Agricultural Development 23-10-1982   26-8-1983                                         
                                                                                            
 10. Agreement between India and                                                            
     the United Nations Develop-                                                            
     ment Programme (UNDP) regar-                                                           
     ding Project No. IND/83/021/A/                                                         
     01/37 Development of Techno-                                                           
     logy for Production of Bio-                                                            
     chemicals, Phytochemicals and                                                          
     Steroid Hormones . .8-11-1982     18-7-1983                                            
                                                                                            
 11. Agreement between India and the                                                        
     United Nations Development Pro-                                                        
     gramme (UNDP) regarding Project                                                        
     No. IND/82/058/A/01/01 Streng-                                                         
     thening the Institute of Water                                                         
     Studies, Madras, Tamil Nadu 11-11-1982    4-7-1983                                     
                                                                                            
 12. Agreement between India and the                                                        
     United Nations Development Pro-                                                        
     gramme (UNDP) regarding Project                                                        
     No. IND/82/026/A/01/01-Fea-                                                            
     sibility Studies of Mineral                                                            
     Prospects-Indian Bureau of Mines,                                                      
     Nagpur. .  30-11-1982              18-7-1983                                           
 -89>                                                                                       
                                                                                            
 13. Agreement between India and the                                                        
     United Nations Development Pro-                                                        
     gramme (UNDP) regarding Project                                                        
     No. IND/82/059/A/01/12-Investi-                                                        
     gation of Drainage on "Black                                                           
     Cotton" Soil under Irrigated                                                           
     Agriculture .   9-12-1982        3-11-1983                                             
                                                                                            
 14. Agreement between India and the                                                        
     United Nations Development Pro-                                                        
     gramme (UNDP) regarding Project                                                        
     No. IND/81/027/B/01/01 Mineral                                                         
     Exploration and Development in                                                         
     Kerala (Phase II)    1-1-1983    27-1-1983                                             
                                                                                            
 15. Agreement between India and the                                                        
     United Nations Development Pro-                                                        
     gramme (UNDP) regarding Project                                                        
     No. IND/82/040/A/01/37-Techno-                                                         
     Economic Feasibility Study for                                                         
     the Production of Synthetic Oil                                                        
     from Coal. .  .    3-1-1983      28-7-1983                                             
                                                                                            
 16. Agreement between India and the                                                        
     United Nations Development Pro-                                                        
     gramme (UNDP) regarding Project                                                        
     No. IND/81/026/A/01/13 Com-                                                            
     pressibility, Viscosity and                                                            
     Solidification Behaviour of Liq-                                                       
     uids at Ultrahigh Pressures. 15-1-1983  10-6-1983                                      
                                                                                            
 17. Agreement between India and the                                                        
     United Nations Development Pro-                                                        
     gramme (UNDP) regarding Project                                                        
     No. IND/83/038/A/01/99 Job                                                             
     Evaluation in Public Adminis-                                                          
     tration         . 10-2-1983      27-4-1983                                             
                                                                                            
 18. Agreement between India and the                                                        
     United Nations Development Pro-                                                        
     gramme (UNDP) regarding Project                                                        
     No. IND/80/038/D/01/01 Solar                                                           
     Thermal Energy Centre.  14-2-1983   9-6-1983                                           
                                                                                            
 19. Agreement between India and the                                                        
     United Nations Development Pro-                                                        
     gramme (UNDP) regarding Project                                                        
     No. IND/83/083/A/01/01 Advanced                                                        
     Techniques in Reservoir                                                                
     Engineering and Enhanced Oil                                                           
     and Gas Recovery    4-4-1983    6-12-1983                                              
                                                                                            
 20. Agreement between India and the                                                        
     United Nations Development Pro-                                                        
     gramme (UNDP) regarding Project                                                        
     No. IND/82/039/A/01/13 Study of                                                        
     Environmental Effect on Cultural                                                       
     Property.      28-4-1983           25-7-1983                                           
                                                                                            
 21. Agreement between India and the                                                        
     United Nations Development Pro-                                                        
     gramme (UNDP) regarding Project                                                        
     No. IND/82/023/A/01/01 Bene-                                                           
     fication of Minerals-Indian Bureau                                                     
     of Mines, Nagpur.  15-7-1983   2-8-1983                                                
 -90>                                                                                       
                                                                                            
 22. Agreement between India and the                                                        
     United Nations Development Pro-                                                        
     gramme (UNDP) regarding Project                                                        
     No. IND/83/004/A/01/99-                                                                
     Feasibility Study for Production                                                       
     of tubes, sections and profiles                                                        
     in Copper based alloys. 27-7-1983    27-10-1983                                        
                                                                                            
 23. Agreement between India and the                                                        
     United Nations Development Pro-                                                        
     gramme (UNDP) regarding Project                                                        
     No. IND/81/045/B/01/01 Three                                                           
     Dimensional Geophysical                                                                
     (Seismic) Surveys .22-10-1983      16-11-1983                                          
                                                                                            
 BILATERAL                                                                                  
                                                                                            
 Australia                                                                                  
                                                                                            
 24. Memorandum of Understanding                                                            
     Relating to the Indo-Aus-                                                              
     tralian Apple Technology                                                               
     Extension Project in Jammu                                                             
     & Kashmir.      20-9-1983        20-9-1983                                             
                                                                                            
 25. Agreement between the Govern-                                                          
     ment of the Republic of India and                                                      
     the Government of Australia                                                            
     for the Avoidance of Double                                                            
     Taxation of Income Derived                                                             
     from International Air Trans-                                                          
     port   .  . 31-5-1983       16-11-1983                                                 
                                                                                            
 Austria                                                                                    
                                                                                            
 26. Agreement between the Govern-                                                          
     ment of India and the Austrian                                                         
     Federal Government on Financial                                                        
     Assistance to India.   4-10-1983  4-10-1983                                            
                                                                                            
 Bangladesh                                                                                 
                                                                                            
 27. Protocol on Inland Water Transit                                                       
     and Trade between the Government                                                       
     of India and the Government of                                                         
     Bangladesh  . 8-11-1983   4-10-1983                                                    
                                                                                            
 Denmark                                                                                    
                                                                                            
 28. Exchange of letters between the                                                        
     Government of India the Royal                                                          
     Government of Denmark acting                                                           
     through the Danish International                                                       
     Development Authority (DANIDA)                                                         
     for rejuvenation of hand pumps                                                         
     in selected districts of Madhya                                                        
     Pradesh.   24-2-1983   24-2-1983                                                       
 -91>                                                                                       
                                                                                            
 29. Agreement between the Government                                                       
     of India and the Government of                                                         
     Denmark on a Danish Government                                                         
     Loan to India  .9-5-1983     9-5-1983                                                  
                                                                                            
 Finland                                                                                    
                                                                                            
 30. Cultural Agreement between the                                                         
     Government of the Republic of                                                          
     India and the Government of the                                                        
     Republic of Finland   10-6-1983       9-12-1983                                        
                                                                                            
 Indonesia                                                                                  
                                                                                            
 31. Agreement between the Government                                                       
     of the Republic of India and the                                                       
     Government of the Republic of                                                          
     Indonesia concerning Technical                                                         
     and Scientific Cooperation  23-9-1981 7-6-1983                                         
                                                                                            
 Japan                                                                                      
                                                                                            
 32. Exchange of Notes between the                                                          
     Government of India and the                                                            
     Government of Japan regarding                                                          
     Japanese Grant of Yen one                                                              
     billion five hundred million                                                           
     (Yen 1,500,000,000) for the                                                            
     Social Environment Improvement                                                         
     Project     1-2-1983     1-2-1983                                                      
                                                                                            
 33. Exchange of Notes between the                                                          
     Government of India and the                                                            
     Government of Japan concerning                                                         
     Japanese Grant of Yen two                                                              
     billion one hundred and thirty                                                         
     four million six hundred and                                                           
     fifty-three thousand (Yen-                                                             
     2,134,653,000) for Debt Relief   1-2-1983                                              
     1-2-1983                                                                               
                                                                                            
 34. Loan Agreement No. ID-P.21 for                                                         
     Oil and Natural Gas Commission                                                         
     Offshore Supply Vessel Project                                                         
     between India and the Overseas                                                         
     Economic Cooperation Fund                                                              
     (OECF) of Japan.   23-2-1983    8-4-1983                                               
                                                                                            
 35. Loan Agreement No. ID-P.22 for                                                         
     Calcutta Metro Railways (Phase-                                                        
     II) Construction Project bet-                                                          
     ween India and the Overseas                                                            
     Economic Cooperation Fund (OECF)                                                       
     of Japan.  23-2-1983        8-4-1983                                                   
                                                                                            
 Maldives                                                                                   
                                                                                            
 36. Cultural Cooperation Agreement                                                         
     between the Government of the                                                          
     Republic of India and the                                                              
     Government of the Republic of                                                          
     Maldives.    7-9-1983        7-9-1983                                                  
 -92>                                                                                       
                                                                                            
 Morocco                                                                                    
                                                                                            
 37. Cultural and Scientific Coope-                                                         
     ration Accord between the                                                              
     Government of the Republic of                                                          
     India and the Government of the                                                        
     Kingdom of Morocco.  12-1-1981  10-3-1983                                              
                                                                                            
 Nepal                                                                                      
                                                                                            
 38. Agreement between the Government                                                       
     of India and His Majesty's                                                             
     Government of Nepal for Tele-                                                          
     communication Service  19-9-1981      1-10-1983                                        
                                                                                            
 Nigeria                                                                                    
                                                                                            
 39. Cultural and Educational                                                               
     Agreement between the                                                                  
     Government of the Republic of                                                          
     India and the Government of                                                            
     the Federal Republic of                                                                
     Nigeria 14-9-1982     27-1-1983                                                        
                                                                                            
 Pakistan                                                                                   
                                                                                            
 40. Agreement for the Establishment                                                        
     of a Joint Commission between                                                          
     the Government of India and                                                            
     the Government of Pakistan . . .10-3-1983                                              
    25-5-1983     1-6-1983                                                                  
                                                                                            
 Saudi Arabia                                                                               
                                                                                            
 41. Economic and Technical                                                                 
     Cooperation Agreement                                                                  
     between the Government of the                                                          
     Republic of India and the                                                              
     Government of the Kingdom                                                              
     of Saudi Arabia  14-4-1981      30-3-1983                                              
                                                                                            
 Spain                                                                                      
                                                                                            
 42. Cultural Agreement between the                                                         
     Government of India and the                                                            
     Government of Spain   16-9-1982                                                        
     9-3-1983    11-5-1983                                                                  
                                                                                            
 Sweden                                                                                     
                                                                                            
 43. Agreement between the Government                                                       
     of India and the Government of                                                         
     Sweden on Development Coopera-                                                         
     tion for the period 1 October                                                          
     1983-30 June 1985 15-9-1983    15-9-1983                                               
 -93>                                                                                       
                                                                                            
 Uganda                                                                                     
                                                                                            
 44. Cultural Agreement between the                                                         
     Government of the Republic of                                                          
     India and the Government of the                                                        
     Republic of Uganda   24-11-1981                                                        
    28-4-1982   17-2-1983                                                                   
                                                                                            
 Union of Soviet Socialist Republics                                                        
                                                                                            
 45. Agreement between the Republic of                                                      
     India and the Union of Soviet                                                          
     Socialist Republics on Scientific                                                      
     and Technical Cooperation in the                                                       
     Utilisation of Atomic Energy for                                                       
     Peaceful Purposes  .  .  .  .  .22-1-1979                                              
     20-5-1982   12-1-1983                                                                  
                                                                                            
 46. Agreement between the Government                                                       
     of the Republic of India and the                                                       
     Government of the Union of                                                             
     Soviet Socialist Republics on                                                          
     Economic and Technical Co-                                                             
     operation in the Construction of                                                       
     the Second Stage of the Iron                                                           
     and Steel Works at Visakhapatnam  12-5-1983                                            
     12-5-1983                                                                              
                                                                                            
 47. Protocol of Discussions on the                                                         
     Development of Soviet-Indian                                                           
     Cooperation in Oil Exploration                                                         
     and Production  13-6-1983     13-6-1983                                                
                                                                                            
 United Kingdom                                                                             
                                                                                            
 48. Exchange of Notes between the                                                          
     Government of India and the                                                            
     Government of the United King-                                                         
     dom in respect of India Coal                                                           
     Project Grant, 1983  19-2-1983   19-2-1983                                             
                                                                                            
 49. Exchange of Notes between the                                                          
     Government of India and the                                                            
     Government of the United King-                                                         
     dom in respect of India Rail-                                                          
     way Sector Project Grant, 1983  19-2-1983                                              
     19-2-1983                                                                              
                                                                                            
 50. Exchange of Notes between the                                                          
     Government of India and the                                                            
     Government of the United King-                                                         
     dom in respect of India Local                                                          
     Costs Grant, 1982 23-2-1983     23-2-1983                                              
                                                                                            
 United Mexican States                                                                      
                                                                                            
 51. Agreement on Economic Co-                                                              
     operation between the Republic                                                         
     of India and the United Mexican                                                        
     States . 12-11-1982   10-6-1983  11-11-1983                                            
 -94>                                                                                       
                                                                                            
 United States of America                                                                   
                                                                                            
 52. Project Grant Agreement between                                                        
     India and the United States of                                                         
     America acting through the                                                             
     Agency for International                                                               
     Development (AID) for six                                                              
     million five hundred thousand                                                          
     US dollars ($6,500,000) for                                                            
     Agricultural Research-AID Pro-                                                         
     ject No. 386-0470 . 30-6-1983    30-6-1983                                             
                                                                                            
 53. Second Amendment to the Project                                                        
     Loan and Grant Agreement between                                                       
     India and the United States                                                            
     of America for Madhya Pradesh                                                          
     Social Forestry-AID Loan No.                                                           
     386-T-230-B. Project No.                                                               
     386-0475  .  . 27-7-1983        27-7-1983                                              
                                                                                            
 54. Project Agreement Amendment                                                            
     between India and the United                                                           
     States of America acting                                                               
     through the Agency for Inter-                                                          
     national Development (AID).                                                            
     Original Project Agreement                                                             
     regarding Development and                                                              
     Management Training signed on                                                          
     30-9-1982 .   27-7-1983    27-7-1983                                                   
                                                                                            
 55. Amendatory Agreement to Limited                                                        
     Scope Grant Project between                                                            
     India and the United States of                                                         
     America acting through the                                                             
     Agency for International                                                               
     Development (AID) regarding                                                            
     Rajasthan Medium Irrigation Pro-                                                       
     ject, Agreement signed on                                                              
     21-8-1980    30-7-1983     30-7-1983                                                   
                                                                                            
 56. Project Loan and Grant Agreement                                                       
     between India and the United                                                           
     States of America acting through                                                       
     the Agency for International                                                           
     Development (AID) for Madhya                                                           
     Pradesh Minor Irrigation, Aid                                                          
     Loan No. 386-T-253, Project                                                            
     No. 386-0483  30-7-1983   30-7-1983                                                    
                                                                                            
 57. Project Loan and Grant Agreement                                                       
     between India and the United                                                           
     States of America for Irri-                                                            
     gation Management and Training-                                                        
     AID Loan No. 386-T-236. Project                                                        
     No. 386-0484    30-7-1983      30-7-1983                                               
                                                                                            
 58. Project Loan and Grant Agreement                                                       
     between India and the United                                                           
     States of America acting through                                                       
     the Agency for International                                                           
     Development (AID) for Family                                                           
     Planning Communications and                                                            
     Marketing, Aid Loan No. 386-                                                           
     Q-237 Project No. 386-0485.   30-8-1983 30-8-1983                                      
                                                                                            
 59. Project Loan and Grant Agreement                                                       
     between India and the United States                                                    
     of America acting through the                                                          
     Agency for International Child                                                         
     Development Services (ICDS). Aid                                                       
     Loan No. 386-T-233. Project No.                                                        
     386-0476. 15-9-1983        15-9-1983                                                   
 -95>                                                                                       
 APPENDIX II Major International Conferences/ Meetings/                                     
 Seminars Major International Conferences/Meetings/Seminars                                 
                                                                                            
 Major International Conferences/Meetings/Seminars, etc. organized by                       
 Inter-                                                                                     
 Government Organizations at which Government of India was represented in                   
 1983-84                                                                                    
 Sl. No. Title of Conferences etc.  Venue               Date                                
                                                                                            
 1                2         3      4                                                        
                                                                                            
 1. Ist Session of UN Group of                                                              
 Experts for Preparation of the                                                             
 second study on the question of                                                            
 Nuclear Weapon Free Zones   New York                                                       
                                             14 to 18 March 1983                            
                                                                                            
 2. Meeting of the UN Contact                                                               
 Group on Cyprus       Nicosia                                                              
                                            15 to 19 March 1983                             
                                                                                            
 3. UN Experts Group Meeting on                                                             
 Military Uses of Research &                                                                
 Development  .   New York                                                                  
                                          21 to 25 March 1983                               
                                                                                            
 4. Ministerial Meeting of Non-                                                             
 Aligned Countries on Economic                                                              
 Issues .  .  .  . New Delhi                                                                
                                         29 to 30 March 1983                                
                                                                                            
 5. Preparatory Committee meeting                                                           
 of UN Conference on Peaceful Uses                                                          
 of Nuclear Energy    New York                                                              
                           28 March to 8 April 1983                                         
                                                                                            
 6. Legal Sub-Committee meeting                                                             
 on Outer Space  New York                                                                   
                                 21 March to 4 April 1983                                   
                                                                                            
 7. ILO Tripartite Technical                                                                
 Advisory Committee Meeting  Manila                                                         
                                4 to 8 April 1983                                           
                                                                                            
 8. Commonwealth Workshop on                                                                
 Consolidation of Land Holding  New Delhi                                                   
                                       4 to 11 April 1983                                   
                                                                                            
 9. Special Committee on the                                                                
 Charter of the United Nations                                                              
 and the Strengthening of Role                                                              
 of the Organisations  =.New York                                                           
                                    4 April to 6 May 1983.                                  
                                                                                            
 10. 6th Inter-Governmental                                                                 
 Committee for Migration "Seminar                                                           
 on Undocumented Migrants"  Geneva                                                          
                                  11 to 15 April 1983                                       
                                                                                            
 11. 3rd, 4th, 5th and 6th                                                                  
 Sessions of the UN Experts                                                                 
 Group for a UN Study on                                                                    
 Conventional Disarmament  .New York      11 to 22 April 1983                               
                                     8 to 29 July 1983                                      
                                    6 to 16 September                                       
                                      1983 23 January to                                    
                                    3 February 1984                                         
                                                                                            
 12. 10th Session of the Building                                                           
 Civil Engineering and Public                                                               
 Works Committee of ILO    Geneva                                                           
                                  12 to 21 April 1983                                       
                                                                                            
 13. ILO/UNDP 5th Joint Meeting                                                             
 to support Special Public                                                                  
 Works Programmes   Geneva                                                                  
                         13 to 15 April 1983                                                
 -96>                                                                                       
                                                                                            
 14. ILO Asian Regional Tripartite                                                          
 Seminar on Non-Discriminatory                                                              
 Employment Practices Bangkok                                                               
                                  18 to 22 April 1983                                       
                                                                                            
 15. 6th Session of the Liaison                                                             
 Committee of Afro-Asian Rural                                                              
 Reconstruction Organisation                                                                
 (AARRO) . New Delhi                                                                        
                                   21 April 1983                                            
                                                                                            
 16. International Conference in                                                            
 support of the struggle of                                                                 
 Namibian people for                                                                        
 Independence  Paris                                                                        
                                 25 to 29 April 1983                                        
                                                                                            
 17. Asian Regional Training                                                                
 Course of ILO on Management of                                                             
 Production and Sheltered                                                                   
 Workshops for the Disabled  Indonesia                                                      
                                     25 April to 6 May 1983                                 
                                                                                            
 18. Regional Training Course of                                                            
 ILO on Employment Services  Bangkok                                                        
                                 25 April to 20 May 1983                                    
                                                                                            
 19. CIRDAP Workshop on System of                                                           
 Price Support & Procurement of                                                             
 Selected Agricultural                                                                      
 Commodities  Kuala Lumpur                                                                  
                             3 to 7 May 1983                                                
                                                                                            
 20. Regional Preparatory                                                                   
 Conference on the Question of                                                              
 Palestine . . Kuala Lumpur                                                                 
                               3 to 7 May 1983                                              
                                                                                            
 21. UNESCO Project "Applied                                                                
 Information in Developing                                                                  
 Countries" College on Computer                                                             
 Science and the School on                                                                  
 "Algorithm Design for Computer                                                             
 System Design" at CISM Udine,Italy                                                         
                               8 May to 15 July 1983                                        
                                                                                            
 22. UNICEF Executive Board                                                                 
 Session       New York                                                                     
                                     9 to 17 May 1983                                       
                                                                                            
 23. United Nations Disarmament                                                             
 Commission meetings  . New York                                                            
                               9 May to 3 June 1983                                         
                                                                                            
 24. Annual Session of the                                                                  
 International Law Commission Geneva                                                        
                                     9 May to 30 June 1983                                  
                                                                                            
 25. 23rd Annual Session of the                                                             
 Asian-African Legal Consultative                                                           
 Committee  . Tokyo                                                                         
                                     15 to 20 May 1983                                      
                                                                                            
 26. Working Group Meeting of                                                               
 UNCITRAL on New International                                                              
 Economic Order    Vienna                                                                   
                     16 to 20 May 1983                                                      
                                                                                            
 27. 3rd Inter-Governmental                                                                 
 Consultation for Asia and the                                                              
 Pacific on follow-up                                                                       
 of WCARRD      Bangkok                                                                     
                    17 to 21 May 1983                                                       
                                                                                            
 28. International Lawyers                                                                  
 Conference . Moscow                                                                        
                    23 to 28 May 1983                                                       
                                                                                            
 29. 223rd Session of the                                                                   
 Governing Body of ILO .Geneva                                                              
                   23 to 28 May 1983                                                        
                                                                                            
 30. 16th Session of the United                                                             
 Nations Commission on                                                                      
 International Trade Law  Vienna                                                            
                   24 May to 3 June 1983                                                    
                                                                                            
 31. 9th Meeting of the                                                                     
 Coordinating Committee of Non-                                                             
 Aligned Countries' News Agency                                                             
 Pool     Nicosia                                                                           
                              1 to 2 June 1983                                              
                                                                                            
 -97>                                                                                       
                                                                                            
                                                                                            
 32. 69th Session of the                                                                    
 International Labour                                                                       
 Conference    Geneva                                                                       
                     1 to 22 June 1983                                                      
                                                                                            
 33. Sub-Committee of the                                                                   
 Executive Committee of CIRDAP                                                              
 meeting to consider permanent                                                              
 location of CIRDAP Headquarters Comilla/Dhaka                                              
                                       5 to 9 June 1983                                     
                                                                                            
 34. Planning and Consultation                                                              
 Meeting of National                                                                        
 Coordinators under the Programme                                                           
 of Small farmer Marketing                                                                  
 Improvement of the FAO    Bangkok                                                          
                         15 to 17 June 1983                                                 
                                                                                            
 35. Seminar on Refugee Law in                                                              
 South Asia            Colombo                                                              
                              20 to 22 June 1983                                            
                                                                                            
 36. 6th Regional Seminar on                                                                
 Development of Basic Community                                                             
 Services through Primary Health                                                            
 Care organised by ESCAP                                                                    
                             Seoul  12 July to 12 August 1983                               
                                                                                            
 37. Tripartite Workshop of ILO                                                             
 on Management of Welfare                                                                   
 Facilities for women workers in                                                            
 Asia    Manila                                                                             
                                    18 July to 5 August 1983                                
                                                                                            
 38. 2nd Session of UN Group of                                                             
 Experts for Preparation of the                                                             
 Second Study on the Question of                                                            
 Nuclear Weapon Free Zones  New York                                                        
                                           25 July to 5 August 1983                         
                                                                                            
 39. Regional Conference on World                                                           
 Disarmament Campaign   New Delhi                                                           
                                  22 to 26 August 1983                                      
                                                                                            
 40. CIRDAP Sub-Regional                                                                    
 Workshop on People's                                                                       
 Participation   Colombo                                                                    
                          29 August to 4 September 1983                                     
                                                                                            
 41. International Conference                                                               
 on the Question of Palestine Geneva                                                        
                               29 August to 7 September 1983                                
                                                                                            
 42. Resumed session of the                                                                 
 Committee for Programme &                                                                  
 Co-ordination   New York                                                                   
                        29 August to 7 September 1983                                       
                                                                                            
 43. 6th Session of the Working                                                             
 Group on International Contract                                                            
 Practices of the UNCITRAL  Vienna                                                          
                             29 August to 7 September 1983                                  
                                                                                            
 44. Non-Aligned Meeting of                                                                 
 Experts on the problems of Small                                                           
 Island Developing Countries St. George's  Grenada                                          
                                 12 to 16 September 1983                                    
                                                                                            
 45. Turin Centre Course of ILO                                                             
 on Training of Trainers for                                                                
 Supervisory Development Turin                                                              
                               12 September to 28 October 1983                              
                                                                                            
 46. ILO Course on Training                                                                 
 Methodology for Co-operative                                                               
 Management Training    Turin                                                               
                                  19 September to 9 December 1983                           
                                                                                            
 -98>                                                                                       
                                                                                            
 47. Turin Centre Course of ILO                                                             
 on Labour Relations in Public                                                              
 Enterprises   Turin                                                                        
                   19 September to 21  October 1983                                         
                                                                                            
 48. Turin Centre Course of ILO                                                             
 on Training of Trainers in                                                                 
 Energy Management and Energy                                                               
 Saving        Turin                                                                        
                        19 September to 25 November 1983                                    
                                                                                            
 49. 6th International                                                                      
 Pneumoconisiosis Conference Bochum                                                         
                                20 to 23 September 1983                                     
                                                                                            
 50. 11th Session of the Metal                                                              
 Trades Committee of ILO   Geneva                                                           
                                 20 to 29 September 1983                                    
                                                                                            
 51. ILO Seminar for Senior                                                                 
 Government Officials from                                                                  
 Asian Countries on Maritime                                                                
 Labour Standards     Bangkok                                                               
                              20 to 30 September 1983                                       
                                                                                            
 52. 1st Conference of Ministers                                                            
 of Education and Culture of                                                                
 Non-Aligned and other                                                                      
 Developing Countries   Pyongyang                                                           
                                24 to 28 September 1983                                     
                                                                                            
 53. Regional Workshop of ILO                                                               
 on Skill Testing for                                                                       
 Refrigeration and                                                                          
 Airconditioning Machines    Kuala Lumpur                                                   
                               27 to 29 September 1983                                      
                                                                                            
 54. International Workshop on                                                              
 Communication and Cooperartion                                                             
 of Rural/Agricultural                                                                      
 Development organised by AARRO  Seoul                                                      
                         12 to 20 October 1983                                              
                                                                                            
 55. Asian Regional Symposium                                                               
 of ILO on Codes of Practice for                                                            
 the Promotion of Sound Labour                                                              
 Relations       Bangkok                                                                    
                    17 to 21 October 1983                                                   
                                                                                            
 56. 1st Meeting of the                                                                     
 Non-Aligned Coordinator's                                                                  
 Group on Housing      Colombo                                                              
             25 to 27 October 1983                                                          
                                                                                            
 57. 37th Session of the Board                                                              
 of International Centre for                                                                
 Advanced Technical and                                                                     
 Vocational Training    Geneva                                                              
                    4 to 11 November 1983                                                   
                                                                                            
 58. 2nd Meeting of the Special                                                             
 Commission on the Law                                                                      
 Applicable to International                                                                
 Sales of Goods    The Hague                                                                
                       7 to 18 November 1983                                                
                                                                                            
 59. 224th Session of the                                                                   
 Governing Body of ILO    Geneva                                                            
                        7 to 18 November 1983                                               
                                                                                            
 60. Asian and Pacific Regional                                                             
 Workshop of ILO on Strategies                                                              
 for improving Employment                                                                   
 Conditions of Rural Women   Kuala Lumpur                                                   
       14 to 18 November 1983                                                               
                                                                                            
 61. Follow-up Seminar of ILO                                                               
 on Policies and Principles                                                                 
 in Working Conditions &                                                                    
 Environments      Colombo                                                                  
          14 to 18 November 1983                                                            
                                                                                            
 62. Convocation of the 18th                                                                
 Session of the Asian Advisory                                                              
 Committee         Geneva                                                                   
                              21 to 24 November 1983                                        
 -99>                                                                                       
                                                                                            
 63. ESCAP Meeting-cum-Study                                                                
 Tour on Inter-Country Action                                                               
 Research on Participatory                                                                  
 Rural Development     Colombo                                                              
                                  22 to 25 November 1983                                    
                                                                                            
 64. 2nd Special Meeting of the                                                             
 Governing Council of CIRDAP   Manila                                                       
                                         1 to 2 December 1983                               
                                                                                            
 65. High Level ILO Symposium on                                                            
 Appropriate Participative                                                                  
 Organisations in selected Asian                                                            
 Countries      Colombo                                                                     
                                          5 to 9 December 1983                              
                                                                                            
 66. 3rd Tripartite Techincal                                                               
 Meeting for Hotels, Restaurants                                                            
 and Similar Establishments   Geneva                                                        
                                     6 to 15 December 1983                                  
                                                                                            
 67. Asia and Pacific Regional                                                              
 Technical Consultations on                                                                 
 Institutional Credit for Small                                                             
 Enterprises Development   Singapore                                                        
                              7 to 9 December 1983                                          
                                                                                            
 68. FAO Expert Consultation on                                                             
 Organisation and Management                                                                
 Structure for Rural Development Rome                                                       
                              12 to 15 December 1983                                        
                                                                                            
 69. Turin Centre Regional                                                                  
 Fellowship Seminar of                                                                      
 ILO on Energy Management                                                                   
 and Training Needs                                                                         
 Assessment   Bangkok                                                                       
                             12 to 16 December 1983                                         
                                                                                            
 70. Meeting of CIRDAP                                                                      
 Executive Committee   Dhaka                                                                
                               14 to 15 December 1983                                       
                                                                                            
 71. 7th Session of the                                                                     
 Liaison Committee of AARRO  New Delhi                                                      
                             4 January 1984                                                 
                                                                                            
 72. 4th Tripartite Technical                                                               
 Meeting for Mines other than                                                               
 Coal Mines    Geneva                                                                       
                                11 to 19 January  1984                                      
                                                                                            
 73. IMO Legal Committee's                                                                  
 Informal Working Group meeting                                                             
 on the Comprehensive Revision                                                              
 of the 1969 Civil Liability   Paris                                                        
                   12 to 13 January 1984                                                    
                                                                                            
 74. Commonwealth Training                                                                  
 Workshop on Land Use Planning   Joydebpur (Bangladesh)                                     
             &   Ahmedabad        21 January to 4 February 1984                             
                                                                                            
                                                                                            
                                                                                            
                                                                                            
 75. Conference of Ministers                                                                
 of Information of Non-Aligned                                                              
 Countries       Jakarta                                                                    
                                   26 to 30 January  1984                                   
                                                                                            
 76. Non-Aligned Movement                                                                   
 International Sports Seminar Patiala                                                       
                                   5 to 18 March 1984                                       
                                                                                            
 77. 25th Session of the                                                                    
 Executive Committee of                                                                     
 AARRO     New Delhi                                                                        
                                       14 to 16 March  1984                                 
 -100>                                                                                      
 APPENDIX III Major International Conferences/ Meeting/Seminars                             
                                                                                            
 Major International Conferences/Meeting/Seminars Organised by                              
 non-Governmental                                                                           
 Organizations in which Indian experts participated in their personal                       
 capacity with                                                                              
 Government assistance in 1983-84                                                           
 SI.  Title of Conference etc.  Venue     Date                                              
 No.                                                                                        
                                                                                            
 1. International Civil Service                                                             
    Commission Meeting   Vienna                                                             
                                     7 to 25 March 1983                                     
                                                                                            
 2. Meeting of the Board of Directors                                                       
    & Executive Committee of the                                                            
    Institute of Electrical &                                                               
    Electronics Engineers Denver                                                            
                                        6 to 13 June 1983                                   
                                                                                            
 3. Meeting of the Board of Directors                                                       
    & Executive Committee of the                                                            
    Institute of Electrical &                                                               
    Electronics Engineers Vancouver                                                         
                                 12 to 15 August 1983                                       
                                                                                            
 4. Meeting of the UN Advisory Board                                                        
    on Disarmament Studies New York                                                         
                               6 to 9 September 1983                                        
                                                                                            
 5. Meetings of the Board of Directors                                                      
    & Executive Committee of the                                                            
    Institute of Electrical &                                                               
    Electronics Engineers  Minneapolis                                                      
                                   23 to 24 September 1983                                  
                                                                                            
 6. Expert Group Meeting on Social                                                          
    Development Manpower Planning   Bangkok                                                 
                                       18 to 24 October 1983                                
                                                                                            
 7. Meetings of the Board of Directors                                                      
    & Executive Committee of the                                                            
    Institute of Electrical & Electronics                                                   
    Engineers    Atlanta                                                                    
                                     18 to 21 November 1983                                 
                                                                                            
 8. International Civil Service                                                             
    Commission Meeting New York                                                             
                                         21 to 24 November 1983                             
                                                                                            
 9. Meeting of the UN Advisory                                                              
    Board on Disarmament Studies  New York                                                  
                                   10 to 20 December 1983                                   
 -101>                                                                                      
 APPENDIX IV Miscellaneous Major International Conferences                                  
                                                                                            
 Miscellaneous Major International Conferences etc. in 1983-84 at which                     
 Government of                                                                              
 India was represented or in which Indian experts participated with                         
 Government of                                                                              
 India's assistance in their personal capacity                                              
 SI. Title of Conference etc.  Venue                         Date                           
 No.                                                                                        
                                                                                            
 1         2          3               4                                                     
                                                                                            
 1. Asia and Pacific                                                                        
    Development Centre (APDC),                                                              
    Work-shop on Integration                                                                
    of Social Factors Kuala Lumpur                                                          
                                          31 May to 10 June 1983                            
                                                                                            
 2. Seminar on Methods &                                                                    
    Techniques of Land                                                                      
    Organisation in rural                                                                   
    areas arranged by                                                                       
    German Foundation for                                                                   
    Inter national Development Berlin (West)                                                
                               27 June to 16 July and Munich    1983                        
                                                                                            
 3. Seminar on Local                                                                        
    Administration and Regional                                                             
    Development organised by                                                                
    German Foundation for                                                                   
    International Development in                                                            
    Collaboration with APDC.   Kuala Lumpur                                                 
              18 to 30 July 1983                                                            
                                                                                            
 4. Conference on Critical issues                                                           
    of National Computerization                                                             
    Policy organised by East-West                                                           
    Communication Institute  Honolulu                                                       
                                          31 July to 6 August 1983                          
                                                                                            
 5. UN Inter-regional Seminar on                                                            
    Analysis of Current Trend in                                                            
    Integrated Rural Development  China                                                     
                                          16 to 31 August 1983                              
                                                                                            
 6. 2nd International Conference                                                            
    on Radio Spectrum Conservation                                                          
    Techniques and for briefing by                                                          
    various establishments of                                                               
    Ministry of Defence  UK                                                                 
                                            6 to 22 September 1983                          
                                                                                            
 7. 9th World Computer Congress                                                             
    of International Federation                                                             
    for Information Processing                                                              
    (IFIP) and Ex-Committee                                                                 
    Meeting of International                                                                
    Conference on Computer                                                                  
    Communication (ICCC)  Paris                                                             
                                         18 to 23 September 1983                            
                                                                                            
 8. 7th Commonwealth Law                                                                    
    Conference & inaugural                                                                  
    meeting of Commonwealth                                                                 
    Association of Parliamentary                                                            
    Counsel & Law Draftsmen   Hong Kong                                                     
                                         18 to 23 September  1983                           
                                                                                            
 9. Asia Electronics Symposium                                                              
    and 8th General Assembly                                                                
    of Asia Electronics Union                                                               
    and Industry   Bandung /Jakarta                                                         
                                               18 to 22 October 1983                        
                                                                                            
 10. Afro-Asian Conference on                                                               
     "Role of Play" in child                                                                
     Development  New Delhi                                                                 
                         14 to 18 November 1983                                             
                                                                                            
 11. 10th Conference of                                                                     
     Confederation of Asian and                                                             
     Pacific Accountants (CAPA)  New Delhi                                                  
                                    21 to 25 November 1983                                  
 -102>                                                                                      
 APPENDIX V Statement showing number of                                                     
 Passport/Miscellaneous services                                                            
                                                                                            
 Statement showing number of Passport/Miscellaneous services                                
 applications received and number of Passport issued/Miscellaneous                          
 services rendered                                                                          
 during the period January to December 1983                                                 
 SI.  Station           No. of        No. of     No. of       No. of                        
 No.                    Passport      Passports  application  Misc.                         
                        applications  issued     for Misc.    services                      
                        received                 services     rendered                      
                                                 received                                   
                                                                                            
 1. Ahmedabad . . . . . .   86,768       82,247    40,329        39,681                     
 2. Bangalore . . . . . .   71,457       69,901    16,503        16,226                     
 3. Bareily . . . . . . .   31,071       40,502     5,103         5,054                     
 4. Bhopal  . . . . . . .   18,690       19,564     7,872         7,178                     
 5. Bhubaneshwar. . . . .    4,419        4,234       751           708                     
 6. Bombay  . . . . . . . 2,66,432     2,61,341  3,29,421      3,24,216                     
    Calcutta. . . . . . .   40,149       38,393    19,903        22,666                     
    Chandigarh  . . . . .   94,122     1,02,087    27,479        28,020                     
 9. Cochin  . . . . . . . 1,45,233     1,49,789  1,50,476      1,49,134                     
 10. Delhi  . . . . . . . 1,22,817     1,18,193    67,324        06,108                     
 11. Gauhati. . . . . . .    2,632        2,416       674           652                     
 12. Hyderabad. . . . . . 1,17,809     1,19,907    32,526        32,369                     
 13. Jaipur . . . . . . .   75,202       75,496    15,283        14,773                     
 14. Jullundur. . . . . . 1,05,217     1,03,613    34,172        41.129                     
 15. Kozhikode. . . . . .   74,246       91,829    67,194        67,766                     
 16. Lucknow  . . . . . .   71,610       62,916    16,164        16,241                     
 17. Madras . . . . . . . 1,51,130     1,50,295    42,917        59,127                     
 18. Patna  . . . . . . .   25,705       23,232     3,648         3,413                     
 19. Srinagar . . . . . .   10,542        9,961     1,664         1,569                     
 20. Tiruchirapalli . . .   94,818     1,00,731    19,362        16,966                     
        TOTAL . . . . . . 16,10,069    16,26,647   8,98,765     9,12,996                    
 -103>                                                                                      
 APPENDIX VI Cadre Strength at Headquarters and 135 Missions                                
 and Posts Abroad                                                                           
                                                                                            
 Cadre Strength at Headquarters and 135 Missions and Posts Abroad during                    
 1983-84                                                                                    
 SI       Cadre/Post               Total No.      Posts at     Posts at                     
 No.                               of Posts       Head-        Missions                     
                                                  quarters     abroad                       
                                                                                            
 1        2                         3               4             5                         
                                                                                            
 IFS                                                                                        
 1. Grade I   . . . . . . . .    20+1*          3+1*            17                          
 2. Grade II  . . . . . . . .      21             3             18                          
 3. Grade III . . . . . . . .      83            20             63                          
 4. Grade IV  . . . . . . . .      85            16             69                          
 5. Sr. Scale . . . . . . . .     253            59            194                          
 6. Jr. Scale . . . . . . . .     101             9             92                          
 7. Training                                                                                
    Reserve                                                                                 
    (Jr. Scale)  . . . . . .       50            50             ..                          
 8. Training                                                                                
    Reserve     . . . . .. .       19            19             ..                          
 9. Leave Reserve. . . . . . .     19            19             ..                          
 10. Deputation                                                                             
     Reserve      . . . . . .      20            20             ..                          
                                                                                            
 IFS (B)                                                                                    
                                                                                            
 11. Grade I   . . . . . . . .    120            61             59                          
 12. Grade II/III. . . . . . .    324           172            152                          
 -104>                                                                                      
                                                                                            
 13. Grade IV   . . . . . . . .   915           417            498                          
 14. Grade V/VI    . . . . . .    689           492            197                          
 15. Grade II of                                                                            
     Cypher sub-Cadre  . .        199            81            118                          
 16. Selection Grade of                                                                     
     Stenographer's sub-Cadre      51            16             35                          
 17. Grade I of SSC. . . . . . .   95            31             64                          
 18. Grade II of SSC . . . . .    519           201            318                          
 19. Grade III of SSC. . . .      120            42             78                          
 20. Combined Research Cadre                                                                
     (including isolated Research                                                           
     Posts)      .  . . . . . .    45            39              6                          
 21. Interpreters'Cadre. . . . .   33             8             25                          
                                                                                            
                 TOTAL          3,782         1,779          2,003                          
                                                                                            
                                                                                            
 No. of Local Posts in Missions abroad 1,517                                                
                                                                                            
 NOTE. (i) The strength of IFS & IFS(B) cadres excludes officers in the                     
 combined                                                                                   
 Research Cadre and Interpreters' Cadre.                                                    
                                                                                            
 NOTE. (ii) Officers against posts from SI. No. 1 to 12, 16, 17, 20 and                     
 21 above                                                                                   
 hold diplomatic posts in Missions/Posts abroad.                                            
                                                                                            
 NOTE. (iii) Officers against posts from SI. No. 13 to 15, 18 and 19                        
 above hold                                                                                 
 non-diplomatic posts in Missions/Posts abroad.                                             
 -105>                                                                                      
 APPENDIX VII Cadre Strength of IFS                                                         
                                                                                            
 Cadre Strength of IFS, 1983-85                                                             
 Grades                           Prior to          Subsequent to                           
                                  Cadre             Cadre Review                            
                                  Review                                                    
                                 (1983)              1984         1985                      
                                                                                            
 1                                  2                 3                                     
 4                                                                                          
                                                                                            
 Grade I  . . . . . . . . .         20                20            21                      
 Grade II . . . . . . . . .         21                27            28                      
 Grade III  . . . . . . . .         81                97            95                      
 Grade IV . . . . . . . . .         68                72            80                      
 Senior Scale . . . . . . .        198               243           256                      
 Junior Scale . . . . . . .         70                33            33                      
 Training Reserves. . . . .         50                27                                    
 27                                                                                         
 Training/Deputation/Leave Reserve                                                          
 in all grades          . .         58                49                                    
 49                                                                                         
 -106>                                                                                      
 APPENDIX VIII Foreign Language Chart                                                       
                                                                                            
 Foreign Language Chart                                                                     
 Sl.    Language                     Total No. of                                           
 Officers                                                                                   
 No.                               Passed/Knows the                                         
                                          Language                                          
                                                                                            
 1. Arabic     .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  76                                             
 2. Burmese    .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .2                                             
 3. Chinese    .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  42                                             
 4. Czech      .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   1                                             
 5. Dutch      .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   2                                             
 6. French     .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 150                                             
 7. German     .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  76                                             
 8. Gorkhali   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  10                                             
 9. Hungarian  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .1                                             
 10. Bhasa (Bahasa)-Indonesia .  .  .  .  .  14                                             
 11. Italian   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .8                                             
 12. Japanese  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  26                                             
 13. Kiswahili .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  13                                             
 14. Malay-Bahasa .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .3                                             
 15. Persian   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  30                                             
 16. Polish    .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   3                                             
 17. Portuguese.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  17                                             
 18. Pushtu    .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .1                                             
 19. Romanian  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .1                                             
 20. Russian   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  76                                             
 21. Serbo-Croatian  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   6                                             
 22. Spanish   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  66                                             
 23. Swedish   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .3                                             
 24. Thai      .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .4                                             
 25. Tibetan   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .3                                             
 26. Turkish   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .3                                             
 27. Vietnames .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .3                                             
 -107>                                                                                      
 APPENDIX IX Revenue Expenditure of the Ministry                                            
                                                                                            
 Revenue Expenditure of the Ministry during the financial year 1983-84                      
 Estimate                                                                                   
                                                           1983-84                          
                                                                                            
                                                        (Rs. in                             
 Lakhs)                                                                                     
                                                                                            
 Headquarters  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   11,11.66                          
 Mission/Posts abroad.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   57,64.35                          
 Supply Wings, London & Washington  .  .  .  .  .  .  .    2,28.89                          
                                                                                            
 Other Items                                                                                
                                                                                            
 Contribution to UN, Commonwealth Secretariat and other                                     
 international institutions   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .                                     
 2,87.06                                                                                    
 Central Passport and Emigration Organisation.  .  .  .                                     
 6,21.37                                                                                    
 Other Misc. Items   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .                                     
 40,67.85                                                                                   
                                                                                            
 Aid                                                                                        
                                                                                            
 Aid to Bangladesh   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .                                     
 1,71.00                                                                                    
 Aid to Bhutan    .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .                                     
 56,88.50                                                                                   
 Aid to Nepal  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .                                     
 17,88.47                                                                                   
 Aid to other Developing Countries under ITEC Programme                                     
 6,00.00                                                                                    
 Aid to Sri Lanka .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .                                     
 2,93.60                                                                                    
                                                                                            
        TOTAL  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .                                     
 2,06,22.75                                                                                 
 -108>                                                                                      
 APPENDIX X Expenditure on Headquarters and Missions/Posts                                  
 abroad during                                                                              
                                                                                            
                                                                                            
 Expenditure on Headquarters and Missions/Posts abroad during 1983-84                       
 The expenditure during 1983-84 on the Headquarters of this Ministry is                     
 expected to be of the order of Rs. 1111.66 lakhs out of which Rs.223.94                    
 lakhs will be for publicity, Rs. 201.55 lakhs for travel expenses, Rs.                     
 382.50 lakhs for Establishment charges, Rs. 2.60 lakhs on account of                       
 subsidy to the Departmental Canteen and Rs. 301.07 lacks for                               
 Miscellaneous Expenses.                                                                    
                                                                                            
 The expenditure on Missions/Posts abroad including Supply Wings, London                    
 and Washington is likely to be Rs. 5993.24 lakhs. Out of this amount,                      
 Rs. 2290.32 lakhs will be Establishment charges including foreign and                      
 other compensatory allowances, Rs. 800.85 lakhs for cost of                                
 transfers/home leave passages and local tours and Rs.1646.14 lakhs for                     
 rent, rates and taxes including repairs and maintenance of buildings and                   
 Rs. 1255.93 lakhs for Miscellaneous Expenses. The annual average                           
 expenditure per Mission comes to Rs. 44.72 lakhs.                                          
                                                                                            
 The expenditure mentioned above on Headquarters and Missions/Posts                         
 abroad, including expenditure on publicity, works out to approximately                     
 34.45% of the total Revenue expenditure of this Ministry.                                  
 -109>                                                                                      
                                                                                            
 APPENDIX XI Statement showing the total number of employees                                
                                                                                            
 Statement showing the total number of employees (both permanent and                        
 temporary) in                                                                              
 the Ministry of External Affairs under various groups and representation                   
 of Scheduled                                                                               
 Castes and Scheduled Tribes therein (position as on 31-12-1983)                            
 Group          Total   Scheduled  Percentage Scheduled                                     
 Percentage                                                                                 
               number of       Casts  of total Tribes of                                    
 total                                                                                      
               employees               employees                                            
 employees                                                                                  
                                                                                            
 Group 'A' .  .  .   607        78      12.85%        32                                    
 5.27%                                                                                      
 Group 'B' .  .  .  1707       136       7.97%        22                                    
 1.29%                                                                                      
 Group 'C' .  .  .   586        84      14.33%        35                                    
 5.97%                                                                                      
 Group 'D'                                                                                  
 (excluding                                                                                 
 Sweepers)           457        66      14.44%         7                                    
 1.53%                                                                                      
 Group 'D'                                                                                  
 (Sweepers)   .  .    27        27        100%        ..                                    
 -110>                                                                                      
 APPENDIX XII Statement showing the number of appointments                                  
                                                                                            
 Statement showing the number of appointments (both by direct recruitment                   
 and by                                                                                     
 promotion) made in various groups of posts and resrved vacancies filled                    
 by Scheduled                                                                               
 Castes and Scheduled Tribes during the year 1983                                           
 Group     Total    Number of  Number of     Number of                                      
 vacancies                                                                                  
           number   vacancies  reserved  de-reserved due                                    
 to                                                                                         
           of     reserved  candidates non-availability                                     
 of                                                                                         
           Vacancies            appointed     reserved                                      
 candidates                                                                                 
         filled   Sche- Sche-   Sche-  Sche- Scheduled                                      
 Scheduled                                                                                  
                    duled   duled   duled  duled Castes                                     
 Tribes                                                                                     
                    Castes  Tribes  Castes Tribes                                           
                                                                                            
 Group 'A'   36      2       1       2       1      --                                      
 --                                                                                         
 Group 'B'  254     57      41      20       4      38                                      
 33                                                                                         
 Group 'C'  124     22      12      15       4       7                                      
 8                                                                                          
 Group 'D'   14      4       1       4       1      --                                      
 --                                                                                         
 -111>                                                                                      
 APPENDIX XIII International Conferences/Meetings                                           
                                                                                            
 International Conferences/Meetings hosted by the Ministries/Departments                    
 of the                                                                                     
 Government of India during 1983-84 for which logistical arrangements                       
 were made                                                                                  
 by the Conference Cell of the Ministry of External Affairs                                 
                                                                                            
 Sl.No.     Title of Conference/Meeting         Date                                        
                                                                                            
                                                                                            
 1                  2                                                                       
 3                                                                                          
                                                                                            
 1. Meeting of ten Foreign Ministers of                                                     
    Non-Aligned Countries hosted by Ministry                                                
    of External Affairs .                       30 April 1983                               
 2. Meeting of Study Group on Sports, Arts                                                  
    and Culture of South Asian Countries                                                    
    hosted by Ministry of External Affairs                                                  
                                     27 to 28 June 1983                                     
 3. Meeting of South Asian Regional Co-                                                     
    operation at Foreign Ministers level,                                                   
    hosted by Ministry of External Affairs                                                  
                                 28 July to 2 August 1983                                   
 4. Indo-Saudi Arabian Joint Commission,                                                    
    hosted by Ministry of Finance  .                                                        
                                        10 to 11 August 1983                                
 5. International Conference on Disarmament,                                                
    hosted by Ministry of External Affairs                                                  
                               22 to 26 August 1983                                         
 6. Congress of 12th World Energy Conference,                                               
    hosted by Institute of Engineering .                                                    
                                     14 to 23 September 1983                                
 7. World Tourism Organisation Conference,                                                  
    hosted by Ministry of Tourism and Civil                                                 
    Aviation   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .                                                
                                      3 to 14 October 1983                                  
 8. 39th Annual General Meeting of IATA,                                                    
    hosted by Ministry of Tourism and Civil                                                 
    Aviation   .   .   .   .                                                                
                                      24 to 26 October 1983                                 
 9. Indo-French Seminar, hosted by Ministry                                                 
    of External Affairs    .                                                                
                                         24 to 26 October 1983                              
 10. 10th Meeting of Heads of National                                                      
     Narcotics Law Enforcing Agencies Far                                                   
     East Region, hosted by Department of                                                   
     Revenues, Ministry of Finance                                                          
                             7 to 11 November 1983                                          
 11. "Afro-Asian Conference on Role of Play                                                 
     in Child Development", hosted by National                                              
     Institute of Public Cooperation and                                                    
     Child Development .                                                                    
                      14 to 18 November 1983                                                
 12. Official level Meeting of the NAM                                                      
     Committee on Palestine, hosted by                                                      
     Ministry of External Affairs  .                                                        
              30 to 31 October and 18 to 19 November 1983                                   
 13. International Meeting of Chartered                                                     
     Accountants, hosted by Institute of                                                    
     Costs and Works Accountants, Ministry                                                  
     of Law and Company Affairs and Institute                                               
     of Chartered Accountants                                                               
                                      21 to 23 November 1983                                
                                                                                            
 -112>                                                                                      
                                                                                            
 14. Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting,                                              
     hosted by Ministry of External Affairs                                                 
                                            22 to 30 November 1983                          
 15. Meeting of Group of Experts on                                                         
     International Conference on Money and                                                  
     Finance for Development, hosted by                                                     
     Ministry of External Affairs                                                           
                                    2 to 5 December 1983                                    
 16. Meeting of 8th Session of Indo-USSR joint                                              
     Commission, hosted by Ministry of                                                      
     External Affairs  .                                                                    
                                      5 to 12 December 1983                                 
 17. NAMEDIA-Media Conference of the Non-                                                   
     Aligned, hosted by Ministry of External                                                
     Affairs   .   .                                                                        
                                    9 to 12 December 1983                                   
 18. Technical Committee Meeting on Sports,                                                 
     Arts and Culture of SARC, hosted by                                                    
     Ministry of External Affairs                                                           
                                      13 to 14 January 1984                                 
 19. Meeting of Indo-Pak Sub-Commission,                                                    
     hosted by Ministry of External Affairs                                                 
                          19 to 21 and 18 to 23 January 1984                                
 20. All India Passport Officers' Conference                                                
     organised by Ministry of External Affairs                                              
                                                                                            
                                         23 to 24 January 1984                              
 21. 4th Consultation Meeting of UNIDO on                                                   
     Fertilizer Industry, hosted by Ministry                                                
     of Chemicals & Fertilizers                                                             
                                    23 to 27 January 1984                                   
 22. Meeting of NAM Committee on Money and                                                  
     Finance, hosted by Ministry of External                                                
     Affairs   .   .   .                                                                    
                             12 to 18 February 1984                                         
 23. 12th International Leprosy Congress,                                                   
     hosted by Ministry of Health and                                                       
     Directorate General of Health Services                                                 
                                                                                            
                                        22 to 25 February 1984                              
 24. SARC Meeting of the Standing Committee                                                 
     of the Foreign Secretaries hosted by                                                   
     Ministry of External Affairs  .   .   .                                                
                                                                                            
                              27 to 29 February 1984                                        
 25. 3rd International Conference of Appellate                                              
     Judges and Confernce of Commonwealth                                                   
     Chief Justices, hosted by Ministry of Law                                              
     and Justice   .                                                                        
                                 5 to 10 March 1984                                         
 26. ICRIER (International Economic Relations)                                              
     -Round Table Meeting on International                                                  
     Monetary and Financial System & Issues,                                                
     hosted by Ministry of External Affairs                                                 
                                                                                            
                                    19 to 21 March 1984                                     
                                                                                            
 -113>                                                                                      
                                                                                            
External website that   External website External website External website External website 
opens in a new window   that opens in a  that opens in a  that opens in a  that opens in a  
                        new window       new window       new window       new window       

    Address : Patiala House, Annexe - BNew Delhi                              
   -110001                                           Page last updated on: 09 
    Telephone: 23389073, 23382694, 23073685;                  December, 2013  
   Fax: 23386340, 23387700;Feedback :            Site designed and maintained 
   dirlibmea.gov.in                                  by: National Informatics 
    Officer In-charge:-                                         Centre (NIC), 
    (c)Content Owned by MEA Library Ministry of   DeitY, MoCIT, Government of 
   External Affairs, Government of India                               India. 
   Terms & Conditions | Privacy Policy |         Visitors:                    
   Copyright Policy | Hyperlinking Policy |      
   Accessibility Statement | Help                

   java script is required for this page
   MEAs App twitter Facebook Google plus YouTube flickr
   loading
