1963-64

Contents
Jan 01, 1963
REPORT
1963-64
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PART I
Administration
PAGE
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
(vi)
(vii)
(viii)
(ix)
(x)
(xi)
(xii)

Headquarters
Rationalisation of the methods of work and connected matters
Indian Foreign Service
Missions abroad
Inspectorate
Expenditure
Indian Frontier Administrative Service
Assam Rifles
North East Frontier Agency
Nagaland
Goa, Daman and Diu
Pondicherry, Karaikal, Yanam and Mahe

1
2
4
5
6
6
8
9
9
10
11
15

PART II
A.-States in Special Treaty Relations with India:(i)
(ii)
B.-India's
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
(vi)

Bhutan
Sikkim

17
18

Neighbours
Afghanistan
Burma
Ceylon
China (see under East Asia)
Nepal
Pakistan

19
20
20
21
21
24

C-South East Asia, Australia and New Zealand

32

D-East Asia

36

E-West Asia and Africa

45

F-Europe

52

G-The Americas:(i)
(ii)

North America
Central and South America

61
63

(ii)
PAGE
H-External Publicity A

66

I-Miscellaneous:(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
(vi)
(vii)

Central Passport and Emigration Organisation
Haj
Legal and Treaties Division.
Consular Division
Economic and Co-ordination Division
Diplomatic Missions and Consular Posts in India
Distinguished visitors from abroad

71
74
74
75
79
81
91

PART III
A-United Nations

85

B-International Conferences

92
Appendices

(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)

Indian Missions abroad
93
Indian Information Units abroad
98
Foreign Diplomatic Missions in India
99
Foreign Consular Offices in India
101
Treaties, Conventions and Agreements concluded or renewed by
India with other countries during 1963-64
105
International Organisations of which India is a member
106

(vi)
INDIA
BHUTAN
USA

AFGHANISTAN

Jan 01, 1963

Administration
PART I

BURMA

CHINA

NEPAL

PAKISTAN

AUSTRALIA

NEW ZEALAND

Administration
Organisation of the Ministry
(i) Headquarters.--The Ministry of External Affairs is responsible
for the conduct of India's relations with foreign countries. It also
deals with the country's representation at the United Nations Organisation and advises other Ministries and State Governments in their
relations with foreign Governments and institutions. Within India,
the Ministry is responsible for the administration of the North East
Frontier Agency, Pondicherry and Goa. The administration of the
Indian Emigration Act of 1923, the Reciprocity Act of 1943, the Port
Haj Committee Act of 1932, the Indian Merchant Shipping Act in
so far as it relates to pilgrim ships, the Indian Pilgrim Shipping
Rules of 1933, and the Protection of Pilgrims Act of 1887 (Bombay)
also forms the responsibility of the, Ministry of External Affairs.
The Ministry is in charge of a Minister of Cabinet rank. At
present, the Prime Minister is also the Minister for External Affairs.
He is assisted by a Minister of State, a Deputy Minister and two
Parliamentary Secretaries.
The Minister of State looks after the Eastern, the Western, the
Goa and Pondicherry, and the Administration Divisions, and matters
relating to Indian settlers abroad. The Deputy Minister deals with
all other Divisions except the China, the Pakistan, and the United
Nations and Conference Divisions, which are dealt with directly by
the Minister for External Affairs.
The Secretary-General is the principal official adviser to the
Minister for External Affairs on matters relating to foreign Policy
and is responsible for the supervision and co-ordination of the work
of the Ministry as a whole.
The Foreign Secretary is in charge of the Eastern, the Western,
the China and the United Nations and Conference Divisions.
The Commonwealth Secretary is in charge of the Southern and
the Pakistan Divisions.
The Special Secretary, in addition to being in general charge of
the administration of the Ministry and the Indian Missions and
Posts abroad, deals with the work of the Africa and West Asia
Division and the Goa and Pondicherry Division. In important
<pg1>
<pg2>
matters of policy relating to administration, the Special Secretary
works in close collaboration with the Foreign Secretary and the
Commonwealth Secretary.

The three Secretaries, the Secretary, Ministry of International
Trade, and the Joint Secretary (Administration), constitute the
Foreign Service Board which is responsible for all promotions, confirmations and postings of Officers upto Grade V of the Indian
Foreign Service Branch (A) and Grade I of the Indian Foreign
Service Branch (B). The Foreign Secretary is Chairman of the
Board.
For purposes of administration, the Ministry is divided into 16
Divisions. Seven Territorial Divisions deal exclusively with India's
relations with foreign countries, each Division dealing with a number of countries grouped on a geographical or 'territorial' basis. The
United Nations and Conference Division deals with all matters pertaining to the United Nations. Six 'specialist' Divisions-Protocol,
Passport and Emigration, External Publicity, Historical, Legal and
Treaties, and East Asia Research and Co-ordination-serve the
Ministry as a whole. The Administration Division deals with all
matters pertaining to administration, personnel and supplies and
services. The Economic and Co-ordination Division, under the guidance of the Secretary-General, is responsible for the co-ordination
of political and economic policies affecting India's international relations.
(ii) Rationalisation of the methods of work and connected
matters. During 1963-64, due to the increase of work relating to
China, the China Sub-Division in the Eastern Division was constituted as a separate Division with the necessary increase in staff.
A decision has also been taken to reconstitute the present External Publicity Division and Economic and Co-ordination Division
into two new Divisions, namely, Economic Affairs Division, and
Information and Co-ordination Division. It is also proposed to
sanction additional staff for these two growing Divisions of the
Ministry.
The standard filing system, which was introduced in some of the
Divisions of the Ministry in 1962-63, was further extended to other
Divisions during the year.
In conformity with the standard filing system, a standard indexing
system has also been evolved and was introduced in the Ministry
with effect from Nov 01, 1963.
<pg3>
With a view to minimise the work of administrative routine in
Indian Missions and Posts abroad, a review of periodical reports/
returns prescribed for them was made during 1963. A number of
returns were discontinued, and some others were rationalised/
simplified and their periodicity reduced.
The revised and simplified procedures in regard to a number of
house-keeping jobs, as drawn up by the Cabinet Secretariat (O & M

Division), have been introduced in the Ministry with slight variations/modifications to suit the special needs of the Ministry. The
general principle kept in view was the avoidance of non-contributory
levels and matching of performance levels with the requirements of
the job.
The Economy Board of the Ministry, first constituted in April
1958, continued to scrutinise all proposals for creation of posts involving fresh expenditure.
From June 1962 till June 1963, the Ministry had enhanced powers
for creation of posts, and new posts, where found unavoidable, were
sanctioned with Minister's approval after a work-study conducted
by the Ministry's Re-organisation Unit in each case.
The Special Re-organisation Committee set up in 1961 under the
Chairmanship of the Joint Secretary (Administration) to review the
staff position of Indian Missions/Posts abroad and to suggest improved working methods, continued its work throughout the year.
Upto the end of October 1963, the Committee had assessed the staff
position of Missions in Africa, West Asia. South-East Asia, the
Americas and Europe. According to its recommendations, an
estimated saving of about Rs. 14 lakhs per annum has been effected
for utilization elsewhere.
A similar review of the remaining few Missions (in Pakistan,
Nepal, Burma, Ceylon and the four Indo-China States) is expected
to be completed shortly.
The Committee also examined the need for some re-organisation
by transferring posts from one Mission to another where these could
be better utilised.
The Committee, among other things, recommended that unnecessary routine work should be reduced and the materials, concerning
administrative matters, publicity materials or trade questions, should
be thoroughly scrutinised at Headquarters before being sent to the
Missions. The intention is that no material should be sent out to
a Mission where this is not relevant to its immediate functions or
where such material cannot be effectively used by a Mission
<pg4>
The Committee also recommended greater use of time-saving
devices such as internal telephones, dictaphones, adding machines,
photo-copying machines, particularly in the larger Missions in the
West where staff salary levels are very high.
There was no change in the staff strength and functions of the
Vigilance Unit. During the year under review the Unit dealt with
77 cases of complaints, 40 disciplinary cases and 9 cases of appeals,
representations etc. Of these 54 cases of complaints, 23 disciplinary
cases and 9 cases of appeals, representations etc. were finally disposed

of.
A Purchase Unit in the Ministry of External Affairs was created
in August, 1962 to deal with the work of standardisation of furniture/
furnishings/cutlery/crockery/glassware and to make arrangements
for the supply of these aricles to our Missions abroad. It was felt
that this would result in considerable saving in foreign exchange,
give incentive to the Indian industries and will help in creating an
Indian atmosphere in the Indian Missions abroad.
The work concerning standardisation of furniture etc., is in progress.
(iii) Indian Foreign Service.-The permanent, strength of the
Indian Foreign Service Cadre continues to remain at 233 posts. In
addition, there are 15 Supernumerary and 97 temporary posts in
various grades of the Service. Excluding the 30 posts of Heads of
Missions and Posts abroad, representing 50 per cent. of the total
number of posts of Heads of Missions and Posts in Grades IN of the
Indian Foreign Service which can be filled by non-Indian Foreign
Service officers at the discretion of the Prime Minister, the net
permanent strength of the Indian Foreign Service for purposes of
recruitment is 203 plus 15 Supernumerary posts.
Apart from a 10 per cent. reservation for promotion of officers
of Grade I of the Indian Foreign Service Branch (B) and of the
Information Services, recruitment is made in the Junior Scale of
the Service exclusively through the annual open competitive examination conducted by the Union Public Service Commission. Sixteen
candidates, including four from the Scheduled Castes, were recruited
during 1963, on the basis of the results of the competitive examination held by the Union Public Service Commission in 1962. Two
officers of Grade I of the Indian Foreign Service (B) have also been
promoted to the Senior Scale of the Indian Foreign Service (A)
during this period. The total number of officers in the Indian
Foreign Service is 242 and it is proposed to recruit 15 more candidates in 1964.
<pg5>
A hostel having 100 flats for the Foreign Service Officers is under
construction at Curzon Road. The hostel is expected to be ready
by the middle of 1964.
An I.F.S. Pool of accommodation for the Foreign Service Officers,
comprising 359 residences of different types of accommodation in
various localities of New Delhi was created in October 1963.
Indian Foreign Service Branch (B).-The present permanent
strength of the Indian Foreign Service (B) is 1927. In addition there
are 603 temporary posts in various grades.
(iv) Missions abroad.-At the beginning of 1963, there were 129

Indian Missions and Posts abroad. These were 66 Embassies (17
concurrently accredited without separate establishments), 15 High
Commissions/Deputy Commissions (2 concurrently accredited without separate establishments), 7 Commissions, 5 Legations, 3 Trade
Commissions, 14 Consulates-General (3 concurrently accredited without separate establishments), 12 Consulates, 4 Vice-Consulates and 3
Special Missions.
During the year, 2 Honorary Consulates and 2 Trade Agencies
were established at the following places:-(i) Consulate of India,
Cleveland (U.S.A.); (ii) Consulate of India, Honolulu (U.S.A.);
(iii) Indian Trade Agency, Bahrain and (iv) Indian Trade Agency,
Dubai (Kuwait). It was also, decided to appoint an Honorary Consul
of India at Tripoli (Libya). Consequent upon Kuwait attaining
independence, the Consulate-General of India at Kuwait was redesignated as an Embassy, and the Indian Ambassador at Beirut continued
to be concurrently accredited to this country. Consequently upon
the formation of Federation of Malaysia, the Commission of India
at Singapore was redesignated as Deputy High Commission. The
level of diplomatic representation at Yemen was, raised from Legation to an Embassy and the Indian Ambassador at Cairo was concurrently appointed as Ambassador to Yemen. Earlier, Yemen was
being looked after by the Indian Ambassador at Jeddah. The Indian
Ambassador at Tananarive was concurrently. accredited as ConsulGeneral of India to the Reunion Island. The Indian Consulate at
Sourabaya and the Assistant High Commission of India at Rajshahi
were closed down. Consequent upon the British Colony of Kenya
gaining independence, the Commission of India at Nairobi was
redesignated as High Commission of India.
<pg6>
The complete list showing the location of Indian Missions and
Posts abroad is at Appendix I.
The various construction programmes in Indian Missions abroad
have progressed satisfactorily. The construction of the Embassy
building at Ankara and of the High Commissioner's residence at Lagos
are nearing completion. At Tokyo three more staff quarters have
been constructed; while at Kathmandu construction of a hospital with
10 beds and 8 staff quarters are in progress.
At Accra, the Government of India have purchased a residence
for the High Commissioner. The Government of India have also
acquired 5 acres of land at Kabul for construction of the Ambassador's
residence and the Chancery, and the preliminaries have been taken
in hand. The preliminaries in regard to the construction of the
Chancery, High Commissioner's residence and residences of other
officers and staff in the new capital of Pakistan-Islamabad-have
also been started.
The proposals for the construction of the High Commissioner's
residence at Nairobi and of an eighth floor on India House in London

are under active consideration of the Government of India.
(v) Inspectorate.-Pursuant to the recommendations of the EstiMates Committee of Parliament it has been decided to revive the
Foreign Service Inspectorate. Necessary preliminaries connected
with its formation have been completed. It has already been placed
in charge of a senior officer of the status of Additional Secretary.
(vi) Expenditure.-Under the Revised Estimates, the expenditure
of this Ministry in 1963-64 is expected to be Rs. 46.50 crores and falls
under seven Demand Heads as shown below:--------------------------------------------------------------------------In crores
of rupees
1. Tribal Areas (North East Frontier Agency)
2. Naga Hills-Tuensang Area
3. External Affairs
4. Pondicherry

14.34
4.04
9.80
0.04

5. Dadra and Nagar Haveli

0.16

6. Goa, Daman and Diu

5.31

7. other Revenue Expenditure of the Ministry of External Affairs 11.91
-----TOTAL
46.50
--------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg7>
The territories of Pondicherry and Goa were constituted as Union
Territories under the Government of Union Territories Act, 1963
with effect from 1 July 1963 and 20 December 1963 respectively.
Nagaland was formed as a State with effect from 1 December 1963.
The amounts shown above relate only to the period prior to these
constitutional changes.
The expenditure on 90 Missions and Posts abroad amounts to
Rs. 4.99 crores. This works out to an average of Rs,. 5.54 lakhs per
Mission. Of this, an average of Rs. 1.70 lakhs per Mission is spent
on the pay and allowances of the officers and Rs. 1.79 lakhs per
Mission on the pay and allowances of the staff, about Rs. 1 lakh on
office and residential accommodation and the balance on contingent
and other expenditure.
The sanctioned grant under "Standing Charges" and the anticipated requirements for the year 1963-64 are indicated below, along
with the corresponding figures of the Revised Estimates for the year
1962-63.

(Figures i
n Lakhs)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------Revised
Original
Revised
Estimates, Grant for
require1962-63
1963-64
ments
for
1963-64
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------Tribal Areas
176.96
172.94
186.67
External Affairs
425.09

397.40

394.49

Other Revenue Expenditure of the Ministry of External
Affairs
2.77
2.78
3.52
--------------------------------TOTAL
577.13
570.21
615.28
--------------------------------The board distribution of the figures is as follows:(i) Assam Rifles
140.38

129.23

124.83

(ii) Political and Administrative charges in Tribal Areas
22.20
22.95
22.27
(iii) Social and Developmental Services in
Tribal Areas and Miscellaneous Expenditure
25.53
25.16
24.02
(iv) Ministry of External Affairs (Headquarters)
121.40
(v) Missions and Posts abroad
282.90

111.14

265.72

114.35

259.68

(vi) Emigration and Passport Establishment
9.50
(vii) Special Diplomatic Expenditure
10.00
(viii) Other Miscellaneous Expenditure
1.29

9.09

9.09

10.00

10.00

1.45

1.37

(ix) Other Revenue Expenditure-Loss by Exchange and Expenditure on Pilgrimage
beyond India
2.77
2.78
3.52
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg8>
The anticipated increase of Rs. 45.07 lakhs in the Revised Estimates for 1963-64 (as compared to the sanctioned grants) is due to (1)
excess of Rs,. 13.73 lakhs in Tribal Areas on account of revision of
pay scales, increased expenditure on operational commitments
following Chinese aggression and conversion of temporary posts
into permanent ones, and (2) excess of Rs. 31.34 lakhs under External
Affairs is due to increased expenditure on Air freight on Diplomatic
bags, telegrams and publicity to counteract Chinese and Pakistan
propaganda and on "Loss by Exchange" on Local Transactions due
to revision of exchange rates.
The comparative figures of the Revised Estimates for 1962-63 and
1963-64 show that in the current year there will be an increase in
expenditure of Rs. 38.15 lakhs. The excess is mainly due to:(1) Increased expenditure on cost of passages owing to postponments of transfers in 1962-63 due to emergency.
(2) The conversion of temporary posts into permanent ones
in North East Frontier Agency, Missions abroad and
Headquarters and consequent transfer of expenditure from
Part II to Part I of the Budget Estimates.
(3) Revision of pay scales of the Assam Rifles and grant of
rations to the Assam Rifles personnel at the Army Scale.
The present permanent strength of officers and Establishments is
as under:--------------------------------------------------------------------------Officers
Establishments
----------------- ---------------1962- 1963- 1962- 196363
64
63
64

External Affairs

472

512

1750

1889

NorthEast Frontier Agency
77
105
1788 1931
--------------------------------------------------------------------------(vii) Indian Frontier Administrative Service.-There was no
increase in the permanent strength of the cadre. More officers were,
however, deputed to other areas and posts outside the North-East
Frontier region. The Service manned one post in the Laccadive
Islands, five in Ladakh and Kashmir and one each on the Himachal
Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh borders. It took over the important
assignments of Principal Administrative Officer and Development
Commissioner in Sikkim. Two officers were sent as First Secretaries
to the peripheral Missions at Kabul and Kathmandu. Six were
employed in the Central Secretariat, one as Principal of the Tribal
Research and Orientation Centre at Ranchi and one on a National
Defence College course.
<pg9>
Two more Indian Frontier Administrative Service officers were
promoted to the Supertime Scale following the creation of the posts
of Security Commissioner, North East Frontier Agency (NEFA), and
Secretary to the Governor for Nagaland. This raised the Supertime
total to 4.
Two officers were awarded the Padma Shri for distinguished
conduct during the emergency and the service, as a whole, won a
high reputation for its devotion to duty. A special feature was the
number of officers serving elsewhere, who volunteered to return to
the North East Frontier Agency during the Chinese aggression.
(viii) Assam Rifles.-Two more operational sector headquarters
of the Assam Rifles were established in Nagaland. Otherwise, the
structure of the force remained the same.
Its distinguished conduct during 1962 operations was recognised by
a number of gallantry awards including Vir Chakras. In the North
East Frontier Agency, the Assam Rifles returned to its traditional
locations and again took up the role of frontier security. Apart from
other concessions given during the emergency, a special compensatory/field area allowance for those employed on tasks in connection
with the Chinese aggression in the North East Frontier Agency and
in operations against the Naga hostiles was sanctioned. Army postal
concessions for personnel in Nagaland and the North East Frontier
Agency were also granted.
A battalion of the force took up its permanent duties in Sikkim.
A beginning was also made during the year with an ex-servicemen's re-settlement scheme, largely pioneered by the Assam Rifles in
the Noa Dihing basin of Tirap Frontier Division, NEFA.

(ix) North East Frontier Agency.-The Administration recovered
rapidly after the Chinese aggression and tackled vigorously both the
rehabilitation programmes in NEFA and the resumption of normal
planned development. A total of Rs. 9,54,000 was spent on rehabilitation measures. All evacuees returned to their homes and all
administrative centres in NEFA were re-established. The return of
the administration was welcomed by the people who co-operated in
handing over weapons recovered from the battle-fields.
NEFA received many visits from Members of Parliament, political
delegations, social workers and good-will missions.
As the Assam Rifles, the traditional frontier constabulary, were
now required entirely for border security duties, four battalions of
Armed Police were inducted for normal policing.
<pg10>
On 31 May 1963, Dafla tribesmen overpowered the small
administrative centre of Chayeng Taju and killed twelve officials
including policemen. Law and order was immediately re-established.
All the culprits and all the weapons taken by them were captured,
or surrendered, with the help of village elders, under the influence
of the Political Officer. The reasons for the raid were purely local
The annual draft plan outlay was Rs. 171.42 lakhs. Three more
health units were sanctioned raising the NEFA total to 95. 3,805
B.C.G. and 41,390 small-pox inoculations were carried out.
Three new Post Offices were opened raising the total number in
Agency to 31. One Middle School was raised to High School level,
6 Primary Schools to Middle Schools, and 21 new Primary Schools
were established. This raised the total of Schools in NEFA to 7
High Schools, 25 Middle Schools, 174 Primary Schools and 4 Kindergartens. 2 NEFA students were given stipends for Post-graduate
courses, 31 for Degree courses and 26 for pre-University courses. 7
students studied in Sainik Schools; and 8 National Cadet Corps units
and 29 Auxiliary Cadet Corps platoons were functioning.
Five new co-operative societies, a saw-mill and two new petrol
pumps were started. A number of retail depots with stock worth
Rs. 12.28 lakhs were opened in border areas.
A Nocte Timber Company was started in Tirap Frontier Division.
The NEFA annual forest revenue rose to Rs. 31,98,849. Two new
Forest Divisions were created.
(x) Nagaland.-The State of Nagaland was inaugurated by the
President at Kohima on 1 December 1963. A Caretaker Minister was
formed, with the members of the erstwhile Executive Council as
Ministers, to carry on the Government of Nagaland until the Legislative Assembly was elected in February 1964.

The Interim Body, after considering the law and order situation,
passed a resolution in May 1963, that an amnesty should be declared
to give the hostile Nagas an opportunity to surrender to the
Administration and settle down as peaceful citizens. With the
approval of the Government of India, a general amnesty was proclaimed for two months from 1 July 1963. The results were, however, not satisfactory. Only 247 hostile Nagas surrendered, the
majority of them without arms.
Following a resolution of the Interim Body to remodel 565
villages in the districts of Kohima and Mokokchung into 97 larger
villages, the Government of India approved the remodelling scheme
submitted by the Nagaland Administration. Work has started in ten
<pg11>
centres. which are to be developed fully as model villages. These
remodelled villages will provide the villagers with all amenities and
social services such as housing, education, water supply, medical
services etc. and, in addition, security and protection against harassment and attacks by hostile Nagas.
The Planning Commission has allotted Rs. 2.45 crores for
expenditure on planning schemes. The Nagaland Administration
have, in their current year's programme, given priority to agricultural
production, education and the development of roads. While the
estimated increase in food production in 1962-63 was 1,800 tons, the
target set for the current year is 2,000 tons. There has been considerable development in education. In the current year it is planned to
add 64 Lower Primary schools, 12 Middle Education schools and 3
High schools to the existing 565 Lower Primary schools, 118 Middle
Education schools and 28 Higher Education schools. At the end of
1962-63 there were also 2 colleges, 2 teachers' training institutes and
2 technical institutes. A considerable expansion and improvement
of the existing road system is being undertaken, and a State Transport Service has also been sanctioned and is being put into operation.
During the year, 16 Community Development Blocks were
functioning,
(xi) Goa, Daman and Diu.-Elections under the Government of
the Union Territories Act, 1963 were held on the basis of the adult
franchise on 9 December. Over 75 per cent of the voters exercised
their franchise out of an electorate of 3.5 lakhs (women voters outnumbering men voters by 1,000) for election to a 30-member Legislative Assembly. The results of the election were:Maharashtrawadi Gomantak

14

United Front of Goans
Congress
Independents

12
1
3

As a result of these elections, a Council of Ministers with Shri D.
B. Bandodkar, leader of the Maharashtrawadi Gomantak Party, as
Chief Minister with two other Ministers was sworn in on 20 December
1963, the second anniversary of the liberation of Goa. The VicePresident of India was present at the swearing-in ceremony.
Under the Act, the Union Territory also elected two representatives to the Lok Sabha. Sarvashri Peter Alvares and Mukunda
Padmanaba Shinkre were elected and took their seats in the Lok
Sabha just before the adjournment of the last session of Parliament.
<pg12>
In keeping with the policy of the Government of India to bring
about gradual integration of the territory with the rest of India only
those Central enactments have been enforced in the Union Territory
of Goa, Daman and Diu which were considered essential. For
instance, the Indian Penal and the Criminal Procedure Codes, the
Indian Stamp Act, the Indian Evidence Act, the Suppression of
Immoral Traffic in Women and Girls Act, have been extended to
the Union Territory. The Indian Income-tax Act was enforced from
1 April 1963. Certain concessions to be granted to the Union Territory under this Act are under examination of the Government.
Another important development was in the field of the Judiciary.
Since liberation the people of Goa have had no facility of appeal to a
higher Court from the judgments of the Court which existed in Goa
during Portuguese rule. A Judicial Commissioner's Court has now
been established by a Presidential Regulation and a Bill introduced
in the Lok Sabha during the last session of Parliament to declare
the Judicial Commissioner's Court as a High Court for certain purposes of the Constitution. This Bill will come up for discussion in
the present session of Parliament and if it is passed the people of
Goa will be able to refer their appeals against the Judicial Commissioner's Court to the Supreme Court.
After liberation, the Union Territory was brought within the
orbit of the Third Five Year Plan. For the year 1963-64, an outlay
of Rs. 252 lakhs was provided. A further sum of Rs. 245 lakhs has
been asked by the Goa Administration in the revised estimates. For
the year 1964-65, a sum of Rs. 665 lakhs is to be provided. Allocations
under important heads for 1963-64 and 1964-65 are as follows:--------------------------------------------------------------------------(Figures in Lakhs)
(Figures in Lakhs)
1963-64
1964-65
Rs.
Rs.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------Power

49.60

98.19

Roads

79.00

91.00

Co-operatives

6.40

10.53

Education
15.40
44.66
--------------------------------------------------------------------------Electric power which was practically non-existent outside a few
towns during the Portuguese period, has been brought to Goa from
Koyna (Maharashtra). Electric power from Sharavati (Mysore) will
be available early in 1964. In order to meet the immediate requirements for power in the private and public sectors, Rs. 12 lakhs in
<pg13>
foreign exchange has been authorised for the purchase of diesel
power plants. Great emphasis is being laid on the restoration and
development of transport and communications. All the bridges and
culverts destroyed by the retreating Portuguese forces have been
repaired and opened to traffic involving an expenditure of over
Rs. 51 lakhs. The Prime Minister who visited Goa in May 1963 laid
the foundation stone of a Rs. 2 crore-bridge over the Mondovi river
which, when completed, will connect Mapusa to Panjim.
Export of iron ore which had sharply fallen during 1962-63 has
shown an upward trend. It is expected that by the end of the
current year, Goa would have exported over 5-5 million tonnes.
Licence has been granted for the establishment of a pellatisation plant
of 3 million tonnes capacity at a cost of Rs 2.2 crores in collaboration with the Japanese. A pig iron plant of one million tonne
capacity in the private sector is in the process of negotiation. There
are indications that the capacity of this plant may be increased to 3
million tonnes. Licences have also been granted for 3 textile mills
with 62,000 spindles and two plants for manufacturing drugs and
chemicals. A fertiliser factory and a steel plant of 1.5 million tonne
capacity have been projected during the Fourth Five Year Plan.
Great progress has been achieved in the field of education. The
number of Primary Schools and Secondary Schools has risen from
259 to 619 and 78 to 139 respectively since liberation. One of the
technical schools has been converted into a Polytechnic. The Medical School has been upgraded to a Degree College and an Engineering
College is proposed to be started shortly. The amount spent on
education during 1962-63 was Rs. 30.50 lakhs and is expected to be
about Rs. 39.21 lakhs during the current financial year.
Repatriates from Mozambique.-About 2,300 Indians have had to
be repatriated to India from Mozambique as a result of retaliatory
action taken by the Portuguese authorities. There are still about 100
Indian nationals there.. Some of the important steps taken by the
Government of India to assist these repatriates are:(i) Indian repatriates from Mozambique have been granted
special customs facilities for the import of their personal

belongings and other possessions;
(ii) Those repatriates who are unable to maintain themselves
have been granted financial assistance. Grant of loans to
the repatriates has been sanctioned to set up co-operatives
and small scale industries;
(iii) The First Secretary of the Embassy of the United Arab
Republic in Lisbon visited Mozambique in July/August
<pg14>
1962 and again in June 1963 to afford necessary consular
assistance to Indian nationals still resident there and to
look into the question of the repatriation of the sale proceeds of the assets left by Indian nationals on an equitable
basis;
(iv) Following the severance of diplomatic relations with
Portugal by the Government of the United Arab Republic,
who were looking after India's interests there, the Government of Mexico have been entrusted with the responsibility
of looking after India's interests in Portugal and her
colonies.
During the year, the following important changes in senior
appointments in the Union Territory were made:
(i) Shri M. R. Sachdev was appointed Lieutenant Governor
vice Shri T. Sivasankar;
(ii) Shri P. J. Fernandes, an I.A.S. officer of the Mysore Cadre,
was appointed Chief Secretary vice Shri B. K. Sanyal of
the Foreign Service;
(iii) Shri A. B. Keny was appointed as Labour Commissioner
on deputation from Maharashtra Government;
(iv) The post of the Director of Publicity was upgraded to
Secretary, Information and Tourism, and Shri H. J. D'Penha
was appointed to the post;
(v) Shri S. Balakrishnan was appointed as Law Secretary.
Dadra and Nagar Haveli.-The former Portuguese enclaves of
Dadra and Nagar Haveli were constituted as Union Territory with
effect from 11 August 1961 under the Dadra and Nagar Haveli
(Administration) Act, 1961. This territory is being administered by
the President through an Administrator, assisted by a Secretary and
technical heads of the departments for Education, Health, Forest, etc.
This Union Territory is predominantly inhabited by Scheduled
Castes and Scheduled Tribes.

The Dadra and Nagar Haveli (Laws) Regulation 1963, was promulgated on 18 July 1963 whereby 215 Indian Acts have been
extended to the Union Territory. A Court of the District Judge and
a Court of the Civil Judge are proposed to be established according
to the Dadra and Nagar Haveli (Civil Courts and Miscellaneous
Provisions) Regulation, 1963, promulgated on 2 September 1963. A
draft Regulation has been finalised for conferring the same powers
and functions on the Village Panchayats in the Union Territory as
in the rest of India..
<pg15>
The Union Territory has been allotted, with effect from 1 April
1963, a Double Unit Tribal Development Block with a financial allocation of Rs. 44 lakhs.
The number of Primary Schools has risen from 38 to 60 since
integration. Two new High Schools have been opened.
The establishment of 21 small scale industries has been authorised
and a paper mill is proposed to be set up. An electrical transmission
line from Gujarat State is being extended to the Union Territory.
(xii) Pondicherry, Karaikal, Mahe and Yanam.-Consequent on
the de jure transfer of the erstwhile French Establishments of
Pondicherry, Karaikal, Mahe and Yanam on 16 August 1963, the
following Regulations have been promulgated by the President under
Article 240 of the Constitution:(1) The Mahe (Stay of Eviction Proceedings) Regulation 1963
and (2) The Taxation Laws (Extension to Union Territories) Regulation, 1963.
The Legislative Assembly of Pondicherry and a Council of
Ministers have been set up in the Union Territory of Pondicherry
with effect from 1 July 1963, as provided in the Government of Union
Territories Act 1963. The Council of Ministers consists of a Chief
Minister and five other Ministers. Two members have been elected
to represent Pondicherry in each of the two Houses of Parliament.
The post of the Chief Commissioner of Pondicherry has been upgraded to that of a Lieutenant Governor and is held by Shri S. L.
Silam since 14 October 1963.
The Pondicherry (Laws) Regulation, 1963 was promulgated by
the President on 18 July 1963 extending 160 Central enactments to
the Union Territory of Pondicherry. These enactments have been
enforced from 1 October 1963.
The Pondicherry Legislative Assembly passed the following Bills
on 2 December 1963:(1) The Pondicherry Contingency Fund Bill 1963; (2) The

Pondicherry Weights and Measures Enforcement (Amendment) Bill
1963; (3) The Pondicherry Stamp Duty (Amendment) Bill 1963; (4)
The Mahe Stay of Eviction Proceedings (Amendment) Bill 1963 and
162 M of EA-2
<pg16>
(5) The Appropriation (No. 1) Bill 1963.
The last-named Bill has already received the assent of the President while the remaining Bills are awaiting the assent of the President.
The Budget Estimates for the year 1963-64 provide for an
expenditure of Rs 3.76 crores out of which Rs. 1.09 crores are to be
earmarked for development schemes. The receipts being estimated
at Rs. 2.54 crores, the revenue gap will be met by the Central
Government through grants-in-aid to the Union Territory of Pondicherry.
INDIA
CHINA PAKISTAN USA BURMA NEPAL BAHRAIN KUWAIT LIBYA LEBANON MALAYSIA
REPUBLIC OF SINGAPORE YEMEN EGYPT SAUDI ARABIA BANGLADESH KENYA TURKEY
JAPAN GHANA AFGHANISTAN UNITED KINGDOM CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC OMAN RUSSIA
MOZAMBIQUE PORTUGAL MEXICO
Nov 01, 1963

A.-States in Special Treaty Relations with India
PART-II
A.-States in Special Treaty Relations with India
(i) Bhutan.-Bhutan, whose membership for the Colombo Plan
Council was sponsored by India, was admitted as a full member of
the Council at its 79th session held in Colombo on Mar 07, 1963. A
delegation from Bhutan attended the meetings of the Colombo Plan
Consultative Committee held in Colombo in July 1963 and in Bangkok
in November 1963.
The tempo of progress in the implementation of the Second Five
Year Plan of Bhutan (1961-66) slowed down somewhat during the
year. This was due to the emergency declared by the Government of
Bhutan, simultaneously with the emergency in India, in October

1962. As against the Plan outlay of Rs.. 17.47 crores, only Rs. 2.73
crores could be spent till the end of June 1963. The Government of Bhutan, however, hope to accelerate the tempo of development activities during the coming months and necessary provision
on this account is being made in the budget estimates for 1964-65.
The scheme of Geological Survey in Bhutan, which is expected to
cost Rs. 1 crore, has made good progress. The survey of gypsum,
copper dolomite and limestone deposits in certain selected areas has
been completed.
Construction work is in progress on the Samdrup-Jhonkher
(Darranga)-Tashigong Road which will be 120 miles long. It is
planned to complete this road by December 1966. Satisfactory progress has also been reported on the construction of the SarbhangHatisar Tongsa Road which will be 190 miles long and is likely to be
completed by December 1968. Widening of the Paro-Phuntsholing
Road is also in progress. Line-communications work has been completed on the route from Dewangiri to Tashigong in Eastern Bhutan.
The line-communications work along the Phuntsholing Paro Road is
in progress.
The Government of Bhutan propose to establish a Micro-Hydel
Directorate for investigating and executing the micro-hydel projects
envisaged for Tashigong, Deothang, Sarbhang and Phuntsholing.
Besides continuing the scholarships granted to Bhutanese students
for school studies and degree/diploma courses, 35 fresh scholarships
were given in 1963. The total expenditure on scholarships to
Bhutanese students during 1963-64 is estimated at Rs. 2.25 lakhs.
<pg17>
<pg18>
Arrangements for implementing Malaria Eradication and B.C.G.
Programmes in Bhutan are being finalised and technical teams are
expected to visit Bhutan shortly.
The possibilities of establishing cement, fertilizer and paper pulp
factories in Bhutan are being explored. The Central Workshop of
the Government of Bhutan at Phuntsholing started functioning in
March 1963.
The services of Shri N. K. Rustomji, formerly Adviser to the
Government of Assam, have been placed at the disposal of the
Government of Bhutan. Shri Rustomji took over charge on 28
September 1963 as Adviser to the Government of Bhutan.
The Prime Minister of Bhutan, Shri Jigmie P. Dorji, visited New
Delhi in January 1963 and in August 1963 and held discussions onmatters of mutual interest.
(ii) Sikkim.--Sikkim's Second Development Plan (1961-66)

entered its third year in 1963. As against the total outlay of
Rs. 813.30 lakhs provided for in the Plan, the total expenditure upto
July 1963 amounted to Rs. 231.63 lakhs. The rate of expenditure in the
current year is expected to increase appreciably. A budget provision
of Rs. 160 lakhs was made in 1963-64 as against Rs. 125 lakhs in
1962-63. The scheme of the Sikkim Industrial Corporation for the
manufacture of synthetic jewels, used in gramophone needles, and
house-metres, in collaboration with a Swiss firm, has been approved.
Progress has been reported on the Malaria Eradication Programme
and survey for an anti-T.B. Compaign was taken in hand. Dr. N. L.
Bordia, T.B. Adviser to the Government of India, visited Sikkim for
advising the Sikkim Darbar in this regard. Particular attention was
paid in the year under review to the construction of roads and a
special provision has been made for construction of village roads.
A programme for upgrading the existing Extra Branch Departmental
Post Offices at Naya Bazar, Namchi and Geyzing is under consideration. It is also proposed to improve telephone facilities at these,
places.
On the occasion of the marriage of Maharajkumar Palden Thondup
Namgyal in March 1963, the Government of India was represented
by the Commonwealth Secretary of the Ministry. Presents were
given on behalf of the President and the Prime Minister. The
Maharajkumar and Maharajkumarani Hope Namgyal visited New
Delhi in April 1963 as official guests.
Thirty-five fresh scholarships were awarded to Sikkimese students
for school studies and degree/diploma courses in 1963 bringing the
total number of Sikkimese students studying in India under the,
<pg19>
Government of India Scholarship Scheme to 127. The expenditure on
the Scheme during 1963-64 is estimated at Rs. 2.19 lakhs. Besides,
assistance was also extended through the Ministries of Education and
Scientific Research and Cultural Affairs for securing admission of
Sikkimese students in colleges in India, on special consideration
basis.
Shri R. N. Haldipur, IFAS, succeeded Shri Baleshwar Prasad, the
former Dewan of Sikkim. Shri Haldipur has been designated as
Principal Administrative Officer.
The Maharaja of Sikkim, Sir Tashi Namgyal, K.C.S.I., K.C.I.E.,
died in Calcutta on 2 December 1963, after a protracted illness
Military honours befitting his position were accorded to him at
Calcutta and at his funeral in Gangtok. The cremation ceremony of
the late Maharaja's body took place in Gangtok on 27 December, at
which the Government of India were represented by the Deputy
Defence Minister, Shri D. R. Chavan, and the Deputy Military Secretary to the President.
Maharajkumar Palden Thondup Namgyal, the heir-apparant,

succeeded him as the Maharaja of Sikkim, under a proclamation of
accession issued on 5 December 1963. The Government of India conveyed to the new Maharaja their felicitations and recognition of his
succession as the ruler of Sikkim.
The Political Officer, Shri I.J. Bahadur Singh, relinquished charge
of his post on 29 December 1963. His successor, Shri Avtar Singh,
I.F.S., is scheduled to take up his post towards the end of January
1964.
B. INDIA'S NEIGHBOURS
(i) Afghanistan.-Close and friendly relations between India
and Afghanistan continued to develop during the year. H. R. H.
Limar-e-Ala Marshal Sardar Shah Wali Khan of Afghanistan, accompanied by H. R. H. Princess Bilquis, the daughter of the King,
and her husband H. R. H. Sardar Abdul Wali, paid a goodwill visit
to India from 12 March to 1 April, 1963.
The President, Dr. Radhakrishnan, paid a State visit to Afghanistan from 11 to 16 May 1963. He received a spontaneous and
enthusiastic welcome from the people of Afghanistan. The Presi
dent had frank and cordial exchange of views with the King of
Afghanistan and other leaders on matters of mutual interest.
As a gesture of goodwill, the Government of India sent, in July
1963, a gift worth Rs. 10,000/- of glass containers for vaccine lymph
<pg20>
to assist the Afghan Government in its small-pox eradication pro,
gramme.
To strengthen the existing friendly relations and promote further
understanding and closer co-operation between the Governments,
and people of India and Afghanistan, a cultural agreement was
signed on 4 October 1963. Shri Humayun Kabir, the then Minister.
of Scientific Research and Cultural Affairs, who visited Afghanistan
from 28 September to 6 October 1963 signed it on behalf of the
Government of India.
As in the past, India participated in Afghan Jeshan (Independence
celebrations) held at Kabul in August 1963. The Indian contingent,
which was headed by Shri Satya Narayan Sinha, Education Minister
of Bihar, included musicians, artistes and a hockey team.
Indian teachers loaned to Afghanistan in the previous years continued to serve there.
An Afghan Parliamentary delegation headed by H. E. Dr. Abdul.
Zahir, President of the National Assembly of Afghanistan, visited,
India from 14 December to 31 December 1963, at the invitation of
the Speaker of the Lok Sabha, and the Chairman of the Rajya Sabha.

During their stay the members of the delegation called on the,
President, the Prime Minister and some Ministers of the Government of India. The delegation visited certain historical and other
places of interest.
An Afghan trade delegation visited India from 21 December to
28 December 1963. The delegation had discussions with the Ministry of International Trade.
(ii) Burma.-Relations with Burma continued to be friendly.
Following the visit, in November 1962, of the Minister of State,
Shrimati Lakshmi N. Menon, the Deputy Minister Shri Dinesh Singh
visited Burma in May 1963. This was followed by a visit by
Shri Manubhai Shah, the Minister of International Trade. The
visitors were warmly welcomed in Burma.
In May, 1963, when cholera broke out in an epidemic form in
certain parts of Burma, India was one of the first countries to rush
assistance to the Government of Burma. The Indian Red Cross
airlifted one lakh doses of cholera vaccine to Burma, half of which
were given as a gift.
(iii) Ceylon.-Relations with Ceylon continued to be close and
friendly. A large number of Ceylonese personnel of different categories were given facilities for training in India. A number of
Indian experts were made available to Ceylon. Visits of scholars,
<pg21>
writers, cultural troupes, sports teams, etc. to and from Ceylon were
encouraged.
The Indian Naval Ships 'Mysore', 'Betwa' and 'Beas' visited Ceylon
during the month of August 1963 on a goodwill mission. The
Indian Naval Ship 'Tir' also visited Colombo later, in October 1963.
The question of persons of Indian origin in Ceylon continued to
be discussed throughout the year. Apart from a number of communications at official levels, correspondence on this matter took
place between the Prime Ministers of Ceylon and of India. No
basis for agreement has yet been reached.
(iv) China.- (See under East Asia).
(v) Nepal.-The cordial and friendly relations existing between
India and Nepal were further strengthened during the year.
At the invitation of the Government of Nepal, the Home Minister
of India paid a four-day visit to Nepal from 2-to 5 March 1963. He
had friendly and frank talks with His Majesty the King, Dr. Tulsi
Giri, the Chairman of the Council of Ministers and the Home Minister of Nepal on a variety of subjects. The joint communique, issued

at the conclusion of the visit, noted that Nepal and India were bound
by unbreakable ties of geography, culture and tradition and had
vital interest in each other's well-being. Both sides expressed their
mutual satisfaction at the outcome of the talks.
At the invitation of the Nepalese Commander-in-Chief, the Chief
of the Indian Army Staff, General J. N. Chaudhuri, paid a visit to
Nepal from 4 to 9 June 1963. His programme included visits to
Nepalese Army Training Centres, the Royal Nepalese Army Headquarters and an address to the officers of the Royal Nepalese Army.
The Indian Army Chief's visit and the contacts made in Nepal helped to strengthen the ties of goodwill and friendship between the
armies of the two countries.
At the invitation of the President of India, Their Majesties the
King and Queen of Nepal paid a State visit to Delhi from 27 to 30
August 1963. Their Majestries, among others, were accompanied
by Dr. Tulsi Giri, Chairman of the Council (if Ministers, and Mrs.
Giri. Their Majesties received a warm and affectionate welcome
during their stay in New Delhi and attended several functions
organised in their honour. Later the Royal party spent a week in
Kashmir, before proceeding abroad. Their Majesties spent another
eight days in Bombay, Poona and Gwalior on their return from
abroad.
While in Delhi, His Majesty had friendly and informal exchange
of views with the President and the Prime Minister on matters of
<pg22>
mutual interest. On the conclusion of the visit, a joint communique
was issued, which inter-alia, stated that His Majesty and the President and Prime Minister agreed that frank exchanges of views helped to promote a better understanding and contribute further towards
cementing the good relations between the two countries.
At the request of the King of Nepal, the Government of India, in
addition to two other Aid Projects, agreed to construct the SonauliPokhara Road, linking U.P. with West-Central Nepal. The road
will be about 130 miles long and when completed the project may
cost over rupees five crores.
At the invitation of His Majesty the King of Nepal, the President
of India paid a four-day State visit to Nepal from 4 to 7 November
1963. The President was given a very warm and affectionate welcome by the Government and people of Nepal. The two Heads of
state re-affirmed that Nepal and India have a vital interest in each
other's well-being, independence and integrity.
Cultural contacts between the two countries continued to be
maintained. Eminent literateurs, scholars and poets of each country visited the other on important occasions. On the occasion of
His Majesty's birthday, besides some musicians, Dr. H. R. Bachan,

an eminent Hindi poet, was specially deputed to Kathmandu.
In connection with His Majesty's visit to India a group of
Nepalese artistes and dancers came to New Delhi and held a few
performances. A Nepalese paintings and handicrafts exhibition was
also held in New Delhi on the occasion.
A record number of Nepalese students sought admission to
various institutions in India for higher studies in Engineering,
Medicine and other fields, both on scholarship and self-financing
basis, and admission was arranged for almost all of them. The
usual facilities for the training of Nepalese military personnel in
various Defence Establishments in India continued to be provided.
Important consultations took place in July, August and October
1963 between the representatives of the Governments of India and
Nepal in the matter of trade and commerce, with particular reference to the Indo-Nepal Treaty of Trade and Transit of 1960. As a
result of these consultations, the Government of India agreed to:-(1) provide transit facilities for Nepal's trade with Pakistan,
(2) to abolish the Bond System which required Nepalese Importers/
Exporters to execute bonds to ensure the transportation of their
goods without loss or diversion while in transit across Indian territory. This is to be substituted by a simpler procedure of transpor<pg23>
tation at railway risk, which would safeguard the interests of the
Government of India as well as of the Nepalese Importers/Exporters.
The Nepalese Government in turn took prompt action to rectify
cases of their Tariff discriminating against India and assured that
they would immediately rectify any further case of discrimination
brought to attention.
The periodic consultations have proved useful from the point of
view of both the countries, and will continue to take place in the
future also.
The Government of India continued giving increased aid to Nepal
in order to help develop its economic resources. The aid was increased by Rs. 300 lakhs bringing the total Indian aid during the
Third Plan period to Rs. 2,100 lakhs. During the current year agreements were entered into with Nepal for the construction of the
following projects: -(a) Tribhuvan Adarash Vidalaya (Rs. 3.5 lakhs),
(b) Irrigation and Water Supply Schemes (Rs. 40 lakhs), (c) Construction of a Hangar at Gaucher Airport (Rs. 4.6 lakhs) and (d)
Kathmandu-Trisuli Road (Rs. 33.5 lakhs). In addition, the Government of India agreed to extend further aid for the construction of
Sonauli-Pokhara Road (Rs. 241 lakhs during the current Plan period),
a new bridge over the Bagmati river (Rs. 19 lakhs) and the construction of Kathmandu-Balaju Road (Rs. 1.15 lakhs).

His Majesty, the King of Nepal, inaugurated the Indian-aided
Patan Industrial Estate in November 1963 and Her Majesty the Queen
of Nepal declared open the Fruit Preservation Laboratory in December, 1963.
Shri O. V. Alagesan, Minister for Irrigation and Power, visited
the Trisuli Hydel Project, which is being executed by Indian experts
with Indian aid, in June 1963.
Shri R. S. Mehta, Director, Central Public Health Engineering
Institute, Nagpur, accompanied by Shri C. S. G. Rao, Scientific Assistant, visited Kathmandu in March 1963 to advise the Government of
Nepal on the improvement of the drinking water supply in Kathmandu.
Three Productivity experts from the National Productivity
Council of India visited Nepal for conducting two seminars and a
course of training in productivity.
Shri P. C. Bhasin, Deputy Bridge Officer, Ministry of Transport,
visited Nepal in September 1963 to collect data and to select a suitable site for the Bridge over the Bagmati river.
<pg24>
A senior architect of the CPWD visited Nepal for preparing thedesigns of some of the important buildings undertaken under the
Indian Aid.
A veterinary expert of the Government of India visited Nepal
to advise the Government of Nepal on the setting up of a BiologicalProducts Laboratory.
A delegation of Indian Industrialists, sponsored by the Federation
of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry, visited Nepal to
explore the possibilities of setting up some industries in Nepal with
Indian capital.
Dr. P. Koteswaran, Director of Aviation Services, Government of
India, visited Kathmandu in connection with the setting up of a
meteorological office at Gaucher airport.
Dr. Pushkar Nath, Director, Central Potato Research Institute,visited Nepal to help Nepal in formulating plans for the development of potato industry.
India provided training in India to 162 nominees of Nepal under
the Technical Co-operation Scheme of the Colombo Plan.
Besides giving aid for Nepal's economic development the Government of India also provided opportunities for an increasing number of Nepalese to visit India and see for themselves the progress
being made in this country.

The Treasurer of the Tribhuvan University, Kathmandu, visited
a few Universities in India to study the various problems connected:
with University administration. Seven nominees of Tribhuvan
University were deputed to various All India Conferences to participate in their annual sessions.
A co-operative delegation sponsored by the Government of Nepal
attended the Fourth Indian Co-operative Congress and visited other
Co-operative Organisations in India. A team of Nepalese entrepreneurs sponsored by His Majesty's Government visited selected
industrial centres in India in December 1963.
(vi) Pakistan. (a) Indus Waters Treaty.-Two meetings of the
Permanent Indus Commission were held during the period from 1
April to 31 December 1963. In this period, three parts of the First
General Tour of Inspection of development works and sites on the
Indus System of Rivers in India and Pakistan and one special tour
of inspection of the Betar Nallah in Jammu and Kashmir State were
undertaken by the Commission.
<pg25>
The fourth annual instalment of the fixed Indian contribution
towards the cost of replacement works in Pakistan equal to pound Sterling
6,206,000 was paid to the World Bank for the Indus Basin Development Fund on 1 November 1963.
(b) Minister-level talks between India and Pakistan.-Talks at
Minister-level on "Kashmir and other related matters" began in
December 1962 in terms of the joint communique issued by the
Prime Minister of India and the President of Pakistan on 29 November 1962. These talks dragged on, at monthly intervals, until May
1963. Although the scope of these talks did extend "to other related
matters", the Pakistan delegation successfully resisted every effort
to bring any problem other than Kashmir into these discussions.
It had been agreed to, at the beginning of these billateral discussions, that there should be a moratorium on Press propaganda'
and a standstill on exchange of protests on this subject, during these
talks. Even before the talks had ended in failure, the moratorium
was being constantly infringed by the Pakistan Press.
(c) Demarcation of Boundaries.-Throughout 1963, efforts continued to be made to proceed with the demarcation of our Eastern
borders with Pakistan and to resolve the existing border disputes,
in order to create permanent conditions of paece and stability. The
Directors of Land Records and Surveys of both the countries continued to meet and chalk out programmes for the demarcation of the
borders between East Pakistan and Assam, Tripura and, West Bengal.
These meetings were fruitful in respect of Berubari and Hilly areas,
on the West Bengal border, where demarcation has been in progress.
The Central Surveys of the two countries also amicably completed

the initial ground survey of an undemarcated sector in Assam, viz.Mizo Hills/Chittagong Hill Tracts Sector. Unfortunately, the
Directors of Land Records and Surveys of the two countries could
not agree in regard to demarcation of the Tripura/East Pakistan
border, and the "disputed area" on the Karimganj border of Assam,
south of the Patharia forest.
The two major disputes on our eastern borders are over the upper,
and the lower reaches of the Fenny River in Tripura, and over the,
five villages, south of the Patharia forest in Assam. Pakistan persisted in violating the status quo agreements, in both these disputed
areas. The East Pakistan Rifles patrolled these areas and harassed
residents, even resorting to sustained firing. Except for returning
fire in self-defence, wherever necessary, great restraint was exercised by the Indian authorities in the face of these provocations.
<pg26>
Pakistan was pressed through diplomatic channels, to abandon
her militant posture and to agree to joint inspections being held to
mitigate the prevailing tension and seek a settlement. India offered
a programme of "crush demarcation" by the Central Survey authorities in the dispute over the five villages on the Karimganj border;
simultaneously a proposal was made for a high level meeting to
reaffirm the status quo, pending demarcation.
On the Western borders with Pakistan, there was some progress
with the authentication of the strip maps of the Rajasthan-West
Pakistan boundary, whereby a length of 646 miles of our Western
borders has been demarcated and settled.
On the Punjab-West Pakistan border, demarcated two years
earlier, a joint decision was taken to replace those pillars, along
the riverine boundary, which had been washed away by rains and
floods by a more durable type of riverine pillars. This work is
under progress.
(d) "Hate India" Campaign.-The year 1963 brought no improvement in the general hostility of Pakistan towards India; if anything, the situation deteriorated during the year. The Pakistani
Press and Radio continued to be most unfriendly; hardly had the
bilateral talks ended, when a virulent "Hate India" campaign was
mounted in both the wings of Pakistan.
(e) Pakistan-China alliance.-The year 1963 also saw the Pakistan-China alliance take shape and form. It would be futile to deny
that China has begun to cast deep shadows over Indo-Pakistan relations, to the extent of coming to a possible rapprochement over
individual issues. Thus, Pakistan offered gratis to China the services
of her Foreign Secretary, Mr. S. K. Dehlavi, who embarked upon
a tour of some European States to minimise the Chinese threat to
India and dissuade them from helping India.

(f) Undesirable activities of Officials of Pakistan High Commission at New Delhi.-In the last quarter of 1963, began another unfortunate phase in the relations between the two countries. In September, when some officials of the Pakistan High Commission at New
Delhi were apprehended by the local police while indulging in undesirable activities and their recall was demanded, Pakistan retaliated by asking for the recall of Indian officials of equivalent rank
working in our Mission at Karachi. In November, a Second Secretary of the Pakistan Mission and two others were also apprehended
and therefore asked to leave India, which in turn brought retaliation from the Pakistan Government on our High Commission at
Karachi.
<pg27>
(g) Closure of Assistant High Commission at Rajshahi.-The
penultimate phase of these unfortunate developments began when
Pakistan took to attacking our entire offices in East Pakistan.
Beginning with the demand for the closure of our libraries and;
reading rooms in Dacca and Rajshahi, on flimsy technical grounds,
in October 1963, Pakistan ended the year by demanding the closure
of our Assistant High Commission at Rajshahi. The function of
this office being chiefly to issue visas to Pakistani nationals visiting
India, its closure obviously indicates Pakistan's desire for snapping
contacts between the peoples of East Pakistan and India.
Despite these unfortunate developments, India continued to seek
avenues for peaceful solution to Indo-Pakistani problems and to
ignore, as far as possible, the "Hate India" campaign that had been
mounted in Pakistan. Renewed call was made by the Prime Minister for a "No War Declaration" between India and Pakistan and for
simultaneous efforts to solve Indo-Pakistan differences through peaceful methods. The Prime Minister's appeal was disregarded and the
year ended with Indo-Pakistani relations in a far worse condition,
than during 1962.
In a speech made in Bombay on 26 December, the Prime Minister reiterated India's desire to live in peace and friendship with
Pakistan and, this context, repeated the offer of a "No War Pact"
with Pakistan.
(h) Kashmir.- Joint talks on Kashmir and other related matters
were undertaken at Minister-level between the representatives of
India and Pakistan under a joint statement issued by the President
of Pakistan and the Prime Minister of India. These began towards
the end of December 1962 and continued till the middle of May 1963.
The talks, despite every effort made by Sardar Swaran Singh to,
arrive at an equitable and honourable settlement, ended in failure.
From the beginning, the Government of Pakistan various steps
which came in the way of a settlement-the so-called agreement
with China on Kashmir's border with Sinkiang and an unprecedented campaign of vilification against India, in Pakistan as also in the

capitals of Europe, in violation of a joint appeal by the two Ministers for moderation in mutual criticism. Under the Sino-Pakistani
Agreement, Pakistan gave away about 2,000 square miles of Indian
territory to China, with which it has no border.
After wasting considerable time over a futile discussion of plebiscite. the Pakistan delegation shifted to the consideration of a
political settlement, only to put forward astonishingly absurd proposals. Pakistan claimed, for example, the catchment areas and
<pg28>
the watersheds of the three Western rivers, the Chenab, the Jhelum
and the Indus in Jammu and Kashmir on the non-existent ground
that these rivers had been allotted to Pakistan under the Indus
Waters Treaty. Again, Jammu and Kashmir was claimed in order
to protect Pakistan's Grand Trunk Road and her railway line to
ensure Pakistan's "defence in depth". Finally, introducing a vicious
communal approach, Pakistan claimed Kashmir on the basis of its
Muslim majority. These ridiculous proposals showed clearly that
Pakistan was not interested in an honourable and equitable settlement but only in anti-Indian propaganda to prevent the supply of
Western arms aid to India in its defence against China.
Pakistan's growing collusion with China against India was no
longer in doubt. Pakistan's Foreign Minister, Mr. Bhutto, declared
in the Pakistan National Assembly, that the security and integrity
of Pakistan involved the security and integrity of the largest State
in Asia. The reference was obviously to China. On another occasion he stated that even if the Kashmir issue was settled amicably,
Pakistan would not go to the defence of India against China. This
showed why Pakistan had rejected India's offer of a No-war Agreement and the Prime Minister's assurance that arms received from
friendly countries for India's defence against China would not be
used against Pakistan. It is significant that when India was attacked by China in October 1962, Pakistan was one of the very few
countries which offered no sympathy or support to India. On the
other hand, a Pakistani public man in a key position, assured the
late Mr. John Strachey, the Labour M.P., that if China attacked
India again, "he and his friends would not miss their opportunity
this time", but would immediately attack India.
It became increasingly clear that unless Pakistan gave up its irrational animus against India and its actively pro-Chinese attitude,
no settlement of differences between India and Pakistan could be
brought about. The suggestion for using the good offices of a mutually acceptable person, even though acceptable to India, thus became
unrealistic.
The Government of India lodged protests with the Government
of Pakistan against the unlawful signing of the Agreement on
Kashmir's border with Sinkiang and subsequently against the demarcation of this border. The Government of India also lodged

suitable protests with the Security Council.
To bolster up its "Hate India" campaign, the Pakistan Government engineered incidents along the cease-fire line, notably at
Chaknot to the east of Keran, and in the Betar Nallah in Poonch,
<pg29>
to show that the arms supplied to India by friendly countries were
being used by the Indian Army against Pakistan. India was also
falsely charged with concentrating troops along the cease-fire line.
The wind was taken out of this malicious campaign partly by the
Pakistan admission that the village of Chaknot was on the Indian
side of the cease-fire line, and partly by the construction by India
of a diversionary channel from the Betar Nallah on its own side
of the cease-fire line and well away from the demilitarised zone.
India lodged complaints with the United Nations Observers against
Pakistan firing on Indian workmen engaged in constructing the
channel in the Betar Nallah area and against the increased military
activity in the Kel area in the vicinity of the village of Chaknot.
The Government of India publicly announced that it had not concentrated troops along the cease-fire line or set up any armed post
in the village of Chaknot or on the ridge overlooking the village,
much less building any mule track to it. The United Nations Military Observers, after their investigations, established that there was
no concentration of Indian troops in the Chaknot area and that, on
the contrary, Pakistan troops had, in fact, reinforced the area southeast of Kel. Accordingly, the Chief Military Observer gave an
award of violation by Pakistan and an award of no violation by
India in regard to Chaknot. These facts not only vindicated the
Government of India's position fully but also demonstrated the extent to which the Pakistan authorities could make political capital
out of non-existing situations in their crusade of hatred against
India.
The number of breaches of the cease-fire Agreement by Pakistani armed forces or their agents, which had shown a welcome
decline during the first half of 1963-presumably because the joint
talks were in progress-renewed their upward trend after the talks
broke down. As against 95 such violations in the first six months
of 1963, the number rose to 267 in the second half of the year.
(i) Migrants' Property in East Pakistan.-Movable Property
Despite the provisions in the Prime Ministers' Agreement of 1950
that a migrant from East Pakistan is to be accorded every facility
to remove as much of his personal effects and household goods as
he may wish to carry with him to India, complaints from migrants
continued to be received that they were not afforded necessary
facilities by the Pakistan authorities. These were taken up with
the Government of Pakistan but without any success.
Immovable Property.-Under the Prime Minister's Agreement of
1950, the ownership of the immovable properties of the migrants in

<pg30>
East Pakistan continues to vest in them. The Government of Pakistan, however, do not allow them to receive rents and other benefits
accruing from their immovable properties in East Pakistan. Under
the Pakistan Exchange Control Regulations income of this nature
is required to be deposited in non-resident blocked accounts, opened
only with the prior permission of the State Bank of Pakistan. Remittances from these accounts to India are not permitted. This,
attitude on the part of the Government of Pakistan is not in conformity with the international practice as rent from property, by
its very nature, is a "current" and not a "capital" item. The
humanitarian aspect of this problem has also been brought to the
notice of the Pakistan authorities in the sense that non-remittance
of these small amounts has been causing serious hardships to a
large number of displaced persons. It has also been pointed out
that amounts involved in individual cases are small and even collectively are not expected to effect any considerable drain on the
foreign exchange resources of Pakistan. The Government of Pakis-tan, however, have not accepted our contention that rent is a
"current" item. The deadlock on this issue, therefore, continues.
As far as the practice in India is concerned, migrant Pakistan nationals are allowed facilities for rent remittance to Pakistan.
(j) Minorities in Pakistan.-There was further deterioration in
the condition of the minority community in Pakistan, particulary
since the deportation of illegal Pakistani entrants from the States.
of Assam and Tripura. These deportees, with the connivance of
the local Government authorities, were forcibly taking over the
properties of the minority community in East Pakistan, thus compelling them to leave their hearth and home. About 45,700 refugees
crossed over to India during the period from 1 January to 31 October 1963. Of these, 33,057 persons entered the State of Tripura,
alone. The situation had so aggravated that it necessitated discussions at Cabinet level, about the rehabilitation of refugees. In
spite of the Government of India's stringent policy on the grant of
migration certificates to the minority community in Pakistan there
was no decrease in the volume of the migrant traffic. During the
year 1963, about 15,000 persons entered the States of West Bengal,
Assam and Tripura, while the figure for the same period for the
previous year was 13,894.
(k) Payment of Pensions, Provident Fund and Gratuities.-In
terms of the Indo-Pakistan Financial Agreement of July 1959, the
Indian Missions in Pakistan and the Pakistan Missions in India are,
required to make payment of pensions, provident fund and gratuities to persons who had migrated to either country between 1 July
1955 and 31 December 1960 (inclusive).
<pg31>
The Indian Missions in Pakistan commenced payments in July

1961 and, out of 1,126 cases, payments were being made in 569 cases.
Payment to 187 pensioners whose claims had been verified was expected to start soon. As regards the Pakistan Missions in India,
though, they were required to implement the Agreement similarly,
our information was that, out of 537 cases, payments were being
made in 43 cases only in spite of the fact that they were concerned
with payments to a smaller number of persons.
Pakistan is also deducting a higher rate of Income-tax from the
pensions both taxable and non-taxable. It was suggested to the
Government of Pakistan that normal rate of income-tax should be
levied, on the payments of pensions made by both the countries
under the Agreement of July 1959, but the Government of Pakistan
have not so far accepted this view and have suggested that the
claimants concerned in both the countries be advised to claim
refunds. While the Income-tax authorities in India have been
liberal in granting refund/exemption to the pensioners in Pakistan,
no such exemption has been granted to the pensioners in India.
The question of levy of income-tax on pensions is still under correspondence between the Finance Ministers of India and Pakistan.
As a measure of relief the Government of West Bengal were
paying provisional pension to old pensioners in India till the conclusion of the Agreement of July 1959 referred to above. On the other
hand no such interim relief was granted by the Pakistan Government.
(l) Shrines, Holy places and Pilgrimages.-The second meeting
of the Indo-Pakistani Joint Committee on Shrines and Holy Places
and Pilgrimages, which was due to be held in March 1958, has not
yet been convened due to Pakistan's intransigence. In spite of
repeated reminders the Government of Pakistan have not so far
even responded to the invitation extended to them in February 1962,
after they had suggested holding the meeing in July 1961.
During the period 1 January to 31 December 1963, 20 officially
sponsored pilgrim parties from Pakistan, comprising 2,401 persons,
visited Shrines in India, while, during the same period 15 officially
sponsored pilgrim parties from India, comprising 6,176 persons,
visited shrines in West Pakistan.
(m) India-Pakistan Passport and Visa Scheme.-According to
the statistics furnished by the various State Governments in India,
1,24,315 India-Pakistan Passports were issued to Indian nationals for
visit to Pakistan during the period January 1962 to March 1963.
162 M of EA-3.
<pg32>
During the period January 1963 to September 1963, 2,66,421
Pakistani nationals visited India on visas granted by our Missions
in Pakistan-1,61,053 from East Pakistan and 1,05,368 from West

Pakistan.
(n) Cyclone Relief Assistance to East Pakistan.-East Pakistan
was hit by a cyclone at the end of May 1963 which caused widespread
devastation. The Government of India immediately, despatched
cyclone relief assistance, in the form of medicines and clothing to
the extent of Rs. 50,000/-, to East Pakistan which was followed by
a further consignment of medicines totalling Rs. 10,000/- for subsequent flood relief operations in East Pakistan.
Furthermore, at the East Pakistan Government's urgent requests
the Government of India allotted five hundred tons of corrugated
iron sheets and also agreed to offer facilities at the Calcutta port
for the receipt of Pakistan's foreign general cargo due to the temporary dislocation of Chittagong port caused by the cyclone. The
Government of Pakistan, however, later declined our offer of 500
tons of corrugated iron sheets in spite of their own grave shortages
and did not also take advantage of our offer of port facilities at
Calcutta.
C. SOUTH-EAST ASIA, AUSTRALIA AND NEW ZEALAND
A conference of the Heads of Missions in South-East Asian
countries was held in New Delhi in May 1963 to consider the political developments in the countries of this area, the situation since
the Chinese aggression against India and the Pakistani moves to
get closer to China.
(i) Australia.-The Australian Government's expression of
sympathy for India in the context of the Chinese aggression was
followed by material assistance. This was very much facilitated by
an exchange of visits between the two countries, beginning with
the visit to India of Sir Garfield Barwick, the Australian Minister
for External Affairs, during last year. In April, Shri T. T.
Krishnamachari, Minister of Economic and Defence Co-ordination,
and Shri S. S. Khera, Cabinet Secretary, visited Australia and had
useful discussions. These were continued with the visit to India of
Mr. Allen Fairhall, Minister of Supply of Australia, in May and
later of senior officers from the Australian Department of Supply.
In September a Defence Production Team from India visited
Australia.
Australia participated in the joint air exercises.
<pg33>
The Maharaja of Mysore and Shri Tenzing Norgay visited
Australia. The latter participated in a Mountaineering Training
Camp organised by the Audi Education Board of Tasmania. There
were visits to India of a Trade Goodwill and Development Mission
from Western Australia in March and of Mr. R. J. Heffron, Premier
of New South Wales, in August.

(ii) Indonesia.-Dr. Subandrio, Foreign Minister of Indonesia,
accompanied by the Assistant Foreign Minister for Political Affairs,
the Assistant Foreign Minister for Economic Affairs and senior
officials visited India in February 1963. Later Shri Dinesh Singh,
Deputy Minister, paid a visit to Djakarta and had useful discussions
with President Soekarno and other Indonesian leaders. During this
visit, President Soekarno conveyed his acceptance of the invitation
to visit India.
Air Vice Marshal Omar Dani, Air Minister and Chief of Air
Staff of Indonesia, accompanied by Mrs. Omar Dani and Indonesian
Air Force officials visited India. Dr. Sushila Nayar, Health Minister
and Dr. V. K. R. V. Rao, Member, Planning Commission, visited
Indonesia.
India participated in the Asian-African Journalists' conference
held in Djakarta in April. Four women delegates of the All-India
Women's Conference visited Indonesia, in response to an invitation
from the Kongress Wanita Indonesia.
President Soekarno participated in the birth anniversary celebrations of Mahatma Gandhi held at the Indian Embassy in Djakarta.
Sugar, textiles and medicines were sent from India to the victims
of the volcanic eruption in Bali in Indonesia.
Some scientific instruments manufactured in India were presented to the Padjadjaran University of Bandung.
(iii) International Commission for Supervision and Control in
Laos.-India continued to exercise her responsibilities as Chairman,
of the International Commission for Supervision and Control in
Laos, as laid down in the Protocol of the 1962 Geneva Conference
on the settlement of the Laotian Question. In April 1963, when
hostilities broke out in Laos, the Commission, asked by the Prime
Minister of Laos to station teams at various points in the areas of
conflict, despatched a team to the Plain of Jars, Headquarters of
the Neutralist Forces. This team continues to be there. The Commission continued to exercise its responsibilities to maintain peace
in Laos and to bring about a resumption of co-operative contacts
among the Laotian parties concerned.
<pg34>
International Commission for Supervision and Control in Vietnam
and Cambodia.-The International Commissions in Vietnam and
Cambodia continue to exercise their responsibilities to maintain
peace in the area.
(iv) Indo-China.-South Vietnam.-During the year under report,
a consignment of Indian textiles worth Rs. 25,000/- was presented
to the Government of the Republic of Vietnam as a relief contribution to the sufferers of an accidental fire in Saigon.

Shrimati Lakshmi N. Menon, Minister of State, visited Saigon,
Vientiane and Hanoi in March 1963. The Commonwealth Secretary
visited Phnon Penh, Hanoi, Vientiane and Saigon in July-August
1963. Their visits considerably helped to explain the Government
of India's role on the Commissions in Indo-China and the Indian,
stand on the Sino-Indian border dispute.
(v) Malaysia.-The formation of Malaysia, consisting of the
Federation of Malaya, Singapore, Sabah and Sarawak, was welcomed by the Government of India. Shrimati Lakshmi N. Menon,
Minister of State, represented the Governmnt of India in the Malaysia celebrations held in Kuala Lumpur in September. Earlier
in the year Shri S. S. Khera Cabinet Secretary, and Shri Dinesh
Singh, Deputy Minister, paid visits to Kuala Lumpur, The latter
met a number of people including the Prime Minister and other
Ministers of the Federation Government. Sardar Hukam Singh,
Speaker, Shri S. V. Krishnamoorthy Rao, Deputy Speaker, Lok
Sabha, Shri U. M. Trivedi and Kumari Shanta Vasisht, M.P's visited
Malaysia in connection with the Ninth Parliamentary Conference
held in Kuala Lumpur.
Four teams from Malaysia, consisting of State Assembly men,
local councillors, trade unionists and educationists, visited India
on study tours. Their Highnesses the Sultan and Sultanah of Kedah
and party and Dato Abdul Jamil, Secretary to the Malaysian
Treasury, paid visits to India.
Two Air Wing Cadets of the National Cadet Corps participated
in the Annual Camp of the Malayan Air Training Corps held in
Singapore. Two Indian qaris participated in the annual Koran
reading contest held in Kuala Lumpur during the Ramzan month.
The Kalakshetra Troupe led by Shrimati Rukmini Devi participated
in the South East Asia Cultural Festival held in Singapore and,
thereafter toured Malaya.
A cultural delegation from Malaya visited India for a month.
<pg35>
A gift consignment of one million ML of anticholera vaccine was
despatched from India to Kuala Lumpur in connection with an outbreak of cholera. A pair of lions, a pair of Royal Bengal tigers and
other animals and birds were presented to Malaya in connection
with the establishment of a National Zoological Park.
As in previous years, a number of Malayan personnel were
trained in India and several Malayan students were admitted to
medical and other colleges in India.
(vi) New Zealand.-Shri T. T. Krishnamachari, Minister of Economic and Defence Co-ordination, and the Maharaja of Mysore made
brief visits to New Zealand.

In view of the closer relations between India and New Zealand,
the Government of India appointed a full time High Commissioner
resident in Wellington.
The Government of New Zealand made a free gift of butter fat
and woollen blankets to India.
(vii) Philippines.-Shri Humayun Kabir, the then Minister of
Education and Scientific Research and Cultural Affairs, paid a visit
to the Philippines. Shri B. P. Sinha, Chief Justice of India, attended the conference of the Chief Justices of the South-East Asian
countries held in the Philippines. Shrimati Lakshmi N. Menon,
Minister of State, visited Manila in connection with the ECAFE
conference held in March.
A cultural delegation from the fields of painting, music, literature, sculpture and philosophy-the first of its kind from the
Philippines-visited India towards the end of the last year. Delegates from India participated in the first Asian Writers Conference
held in Manila.
(viii) Thailand.-Mr. Thanat Khoman, Foreign Minister of Thailand, visited India. A joint communique was issued on the occasion and it was agreed that consultations between the two Governments on matters affecting the mutual interests of their countries
should be held whenever desirable. On behalf of the Thai Government the Minister presented to the Government of India a
token amount of rice for the relief of refugees.
Shrimati Lakshmi N. Menon, Minister of State, Shri Dinesh
Singh, Deputy Minister and Shri Y. D. Gundevia, the then Commonwealth Secretary paid visits to Bangkok and had useful discussions with the Thai leaders.
<pg36>
The Indian Naval ships, Mysore, Rajput and Rana, under the
command of Rear-Admiral Chatterjee, the then Flag Officer Commanding, Indian fleet, paid a goodwill visit to Thailand.
Facilities were provided for training of various Thai officials in
the field of Malaria Eradication, Public Administration, Community
Development, Salt Research, and Family Planning.
Saplings from the Maha Bodhi Tree, Budhgaya, were presented
to the people of Chengrai and Roiet Districts in Thailand.
D. EAST ASIA
(i) China.-After consideration in Parliament of the Colombo,
Conference proposals and the clarifications offered thereon by the
representatives of the Colombo Powers who visited Delhi, India-

accepted the Colombo proposals in toto and without reservations as.
a preliminary stage for the consolidation of the cease-fire. This was.,
consistent with the policy of the Government of India that, in the
improved atmosphere subsequent to the acceptance of the Colombo
proposals by both parties, India and China could take up throughnegotiations the question of their differences on the boundary
question.
However, China has not accepted the Colombo proposals in the
same manner as India had done. In a letter dated 19 January 1963,
to the Prime Minister of Ceylon, Mrs. Bandaranaike, Premier Chou
En-lai while stating that China had accepted the Colombo proposals
in principle, maintained two important reservations. In brief, these
two Chinese reservations are:-(a) In the Eastern Sector, Indian
forces should keep to their existing military positions and not move
up to the McMahon Line. (According to the Colombo proposals,
the McMahon Line would be the Cease-fire line-the line to the
south of which Indian forces could station themselves and to the
north of which Chinese forces could station themselves except for
the two areas of dispute, the Thagla Ridge area and Longju, where
the Colombo proposals have suggested that neither side should send
their military forces or civilian personnel); (b) The Chinese have
objected to the establishment of Indian civil posts in the Western
Sector as envisaged under paragraph 2(c) of the Colombo proposals: "Pending a final solution of the border dispute, the area
vacated by the Chinese military withdrawals will be a demilitarised
zone to be administered by civilian posts of both sides to be agreed
upon, without prejudice to the rights of the previous presence of
both India and China in that area".
<pg37>
The Chinese Government have not so far agreed to drop these
reservations which are in direct contradiction to substantiveprovisions of the Colombo proposals.
On 2 March 1963, the Chinese Government sent a note to the
Government of India announcing the completion of their "withdrawal" from the area seized before their Cease-fire Declaration of
21 November 1962 and claimed that Chinese forces had withdrawn
20 kilometres behind the Chinese version of the so-called "line of
actual control" as of 7 November 1959. Simultaneously, the Chinese
Government announced the setting up of 26 "civil posts" on the
Chinese side of the so-called "line of actual control". Of these 26
"civil posts", 6 are in Indian territory in Ladakh. By setting lip
these posts in the Western Sector, the Chinese Government violated
the Colombo proposals which made the setting up of "civil posts"
in the demilitarized zone in the Western Sector the subject-matter
of discussions by officials of both sides.
On 3 March 1963, Premier Chou En-lai wrote a letter to the Prime
Minister informing him of the Chinese Government's action. Replying to this letter on 5 March 1963, the Prime Minister urged the

Chinese Government to accept the Colombo proposals without
reservations just as the Government of India had done, so as to
move on to the second stage of talks and discussions between
officials of the two sides. In his letter, the Prime Minister also
stated, "I am prepared, when the time comes, provided there is
approval of Parliament, even to refer the basic dispute of the claims
on the frontier to an international body like the International Court
of Justice at The Hague."
Replying to this letter on 20 April 1963, Premier Chou En-lai
stated that in his view the task of the Colombo Conference was to
"mediate" and not to "arbitrate". The Chinese Government was
therefore not prepared to accept the proposals in toto but nevertheless called for a conference between the two countries.
The Chinese Government, while claiming to accept the Colombo
proposals in principle, have consistently opposed these proposals by
maintaining their so-called reservations. If the crisis of confidence
created by Chinese aggression and massive attacks was to end, it
would be necessary for the Chinese Government to accept these
proposals in the same spirit in which the Government of India had
done.
On 3 April 1963, the Government of India sent a note to the
Chinese Government outlining 5 steps which could lead to the
ultimate solution of the conflict. These were: -"(i) The Government
of China should accept, without reservations, the Colombo proposals
<pg38>
just as the Government of India had done, (ii) The acceptance by
both sides of the Colombo proposals can be followed up by a meeting
of the officials to arrive at settlement of various matters left by the
Colombo Powers for direct agreement between the parties and to
decide the details regarding implementation of the Colombo proposals on the ground. (iii) The officials of both sides concerned can
then take action to implement these proposals on the ground so that
agreed cease-fire arrangements are established on the ground.
(iv) Thereafter, in the improved atmosphere India and China can
take up the question of their differences on the boundary question
and try to reach a mutually acceptance settlement in one or more
than one stage. If a settlement is reached, this can be implemented
in detail on the ground. (v) If a settlement is not reached in these
direct talks and discussions between the two parties, both sides can
consider adoption of further measures to settle the differences peacefully in accordance with international practices followed in such
cases. Both India and China can agree to make a reference, on the
differences regarding the boundary to the International Court of
Justice at The Hague and agree to abide by the Court's decision.
If this method of peaceful settlement is, for any reason, not acceptable to the Government of China, both parties can agree to some
sort of international arbitration by a person or a group of persons,
nominated in the manner agreed to by both Governments, who can

go into the question objectively and impartially and give their
award, the award being binding on both Governments".
Since the Chinese Government did not reply to this note even
after the lapse of 5 months, the Government of India sent another
note on 6 September 1963, reiterating the above.
Finally, the Chinese Government replied to this note on
9 October 1963. This note indicated that the Chinese Government
were in no way interested in discussions on the basis of the Colombo
proposals. The Chinese Government categorically refused to submit
the dispute either to the International Court of Justice or to international arbitration. The Government of India sent a further note
dated 16 October 1963, expressing the hope that eventually wiser
counsels would prevail and the Chinese Government would revert
to the paths of peace.
President Nkrumah of Ghana addressed the other Colombo
Powers in September 1963 for a further Conference to be held at
Foreign Ministers' level with India and China represented by
official observers, for breaking the deadlock created by the Chinese
Government's non-acceptance of the Colombo proposals.
<pg39>
In their reply the Government of India pointed out that, having
already accepted the Colombo proposals in toto and without reservations, they did not see in what way another conference of the
Colombo countries could deal more effectively with the Chinese
intransigence and refusal to accept the Colombo proposals. The
Government of India also drew attention to the constructive proposals made by them in their note of 3 April 1963 and the arrogant
tone of the Chinese reply thereto dated 9 October 1963, which
indicated that the Chinese Government had no intention of taking
any measures which could lead to peaceful settlement of the differences. They also pointed out that, in the circumstances, the holding
of a second conference of Colombo Conference countries was a
matter for the Colombo Conference countries themselves to decide.
The Prime Minister made a statement on Chinese troop concentrations in the Lok Sabha on 16 August 1963. He said that, while
professing to solve the dispute by peaceful means, the Chinese had
further augmented their forces all along the India-China border.
The numerous "civil post" set up by the Chinese had become military
in character. The strength of Chinese troops on the border was also
greater than that which existed prior to the Chinese aggression in
October-November 1962. While increasing their own troop dispositions all along the India-China border, the Chinese Government
had been making baseless allegations about intrusions by Indian
troops into Chinese territory and violations of Chinese airspace by
Indian aircraft. The policy of the Government of India, in deference
to the Colombo proposals, was that Indian military personnel would
not cross the so-called "line of actual control" all along the India-

China border.
On 13 August 1963, the Prime Minister laid White Paper No. IX
on the floor of both Houses of Parliament, containing the notes,
memorandum and letters exchanged between the Government of
India and China for the period January-July 1963.
On 4 March 1963, the Governments of China and Pakistan
announced that, on 2 March 1963, the two Governments had "reached
an agreement in principle regarding the alignment of the boundary
between China's Sinkiang and the contiguous areas the defence of
which is under the actual control of Pakistan". Under this agreement, a Joint Boundary Demarcation Commission was stated to
have been entrusted with the responsibility of implementing this
"agreement" on the ground by the erection of boundary pillars. The
Government of India immediately protested to both the Governments that there was no common boundary between China and
Pakistan and that the Government of India would not recognise
<pg40>
any illegal arragenments involving Indian territory between parties
that had, no legal or constitutional locus standi in the matter. The
Chinese objective clearly was to come to terms on the question of
the ownership of Kashmir and involve itself in its neighbour's dispute. The Government of China- took this deliberate step to
exacerbate relations between the Governments of India and Pakistan.
Further, the Governments of China and Pakistan agreed to
despatch representatives to take action in respect of demarcating
the so-called boundary on the ground. The Government of India
protested against this on 30 September 1963 and pointed out that
contrary to the Chinese Government's earlier statement, that the
"agreement" was only provisional in character, the announcement
that boundary demarcation teams of both sides had reached agreement on ground survey, aerial photography and erection of boundary
markers along the border showed that, there was nothing provisional about the illegal "agreement" as these arrangements are
normally made for the permanent demarcation of an international
frontier.
By 9 June 1963, 3,942 persons captured by Chinese forces on
Indian territory during the armed conflict of October-November
1962, were repatriated to India.
Following the massive Chinese aggression on India in OctoberNovember 1962, the Government of India were constrained to adopt
certain measures to safeguard the internal security of the country.
Amongst the security measures taken was the internment of
persons of Chinese origin resident in the sentitive border areas and
persons of Chinese origin who were known to be security risks.
A Central Internment Camp was set up at Deoli (Rajasthan) to

accommodate these internees. In setting up the Camp, the Government of India complied with all the provisions of the Geneva Convention relating to the protection of civilian persons on the outbreak
of armed hostilities. Both the Governments of India and China are
signatories to this Convention. In keeping with the obligations
under the Convention, the Government of India afforded facilities
for two visits by representatives of the International Committee of
the Red Cross to the Internment Camp. The reports made by these
representatives testified to the fact that civilian internees of Chinese
origin were treated fully in keeping with international conventions. This, however, did not prevent the Chinese Government
from launching a scurrilous propaganda compaign against the Government of India for alleged bad treatment accorded to the
internees.
<pg41>
In contrast to the observance of the Geneva Convention by the
Government of India, the Chinese Government rejected the requests
made by the International Committee of Red Cross to be permitted
to inspect the POW camps in China where Indian prisoners were
held. Furthermore, the Chinese authorities violated the Geneva Convention by not extending facilities to Indian authorities to carry out
the last rites, according to normal customary and religious practices,
of Indian soldiers who had died during the hostilities in OctoberNovember 1962.
In December 1962, the Chinese Government requested to be
allowed to send ships for the repatriation of Chinese internees in
India. The Government of India agreed to permit Chinese ships
to come to a port in India for the repatriation of such of those
internees and members of their families in the internment camp
And other members of their families living in places elsewhere in
India who wanted to leave for China by these ships. The policy
of the Government of India was that no person of Chinese origin
who was not desirous of going to China should be forced to leave
the country. Thus the freely expressed will of the internees was
respected in the matter.
The Government of India offered full facilities for the repatriation of 2,395 persons consisting of internees, their families and dependants to leave for China. These facilities included the provision
of free rail transport and all amenities for the journey from Deoli,
West Bengal or Assam to Madras, the port of repatriation. The
Government of India also afforded facilities to Chinese ships to dock
at Madras port and facilities for Chinese Embassy officials to be
present at the time of repatriation. The repatriation was completed in three batches between March-June 1963 from Madras.
Tibetan refugees.-These are, at present, nearly 37,000 Tibetan
refugees in India. Majority of them are being settled on a semipermanent basis as agriculturists. 3,000 of them have already been
settled on land at Bylakuppe in Mysore district. 2,000 are in the

process of settlement in the North East Frontier Agency.
Two more Agricultural Settlements have recently been started;
one in Mainpat Plateau in the Sarguja district of Madhya Pradesh,
and the other at Chandragiri in the Ganjam district of Orissa. 700
refugees have already arrived in each of these Settlements and have
started cultivating the land allotted to them. Each of these Settlements will ultimately absorb 2,500 refugees.
Residential schools, with a special syllabus designed to meet the
needs of the Tibetan children, have been opened at Simla,
<pg42>
Mussoorie, Darjeeling, Dalhousie and Pachmari for their education.
2,000 children are receiving education in these institutions. Temporary schools have also been opened in all the Tibetan refugee camps.
It is proposed to open one more school shortly.
20 Homes for orphan children have been set up at Mussoorie. Each
Home has 20 to 25 orphans who are looked after by foster parents.
These children attend the Central residential schools at Mussoorie
as day-scholars.
In keeping with the wishes of the Dalai Lama, 3,000 refugee
lamas are provided with facilities to; pursue and practise their religious studies in Buxa and Dalhousie.
A separate Home has been opend for the aged and sick refugees
where they are looked after and their special needs are attended
to. Other refugees who are unemployed are provided free rations
and other facilities. Various voluntary agencies are helping the
Tibetan refugees with donations both in cash and kind.
(ii) Japan.-During the year, Indo-Japanese relations were very
cordial and friendly. The cultural, educational and social ties between India and Japan were strengthened in many ways.
Three Scholarships to Japanese students for study and research
in Indian Universities were granted by the Government of India,
during the year 1963.
Under the scholarship programme, two research scholarships to
Indian students for study and research in Japan were granted by
the Japanese Government.
A Medical Mission from the University of Osaka, Japan, consisting of eight members, visited India during August 1963. Its purpose was to study local diseases and health conditions in India, at
first hand, with the aim of sharing in the efforts being made to
wipe out diseases from Asia and, at the same time, to cultivate
international friendship among members of the medical profession.
The Mission visited Agra, Allahabad, Banaras and Calcutta, where

it was given full facilities to visit various health institutions and
organisations.
A Youth Goodwill Mission consisting of 19 members, sponsored
by the Japanese Prime Minister's Office, paid a visit to India during
October 1963. The Mission visited Calcutta, Bombay, New Delhi,
Agra, Bangalore and Madras.
<pg43>
At the Conference of the International Society for Music Education
of Youth and Adults, held in Tokyo in July 1963, India was represented by the Director, Development Centre for Musical Instruments, All India Handicraft Board, Madras.
Some delegates from India also attended the Fourth Congress
for Cultivating Human Spirit held in Tokyo in September 1963.
An Indian shooting team and an Indian boxing team visited
Japan, in October 1963, to participate in the pre-Olympic games.
In August 1963, an Indian Parliamentary delegation, consisting
of 6 members and the Secretary, Lok Sabha, headed by Sardar
Hukam Singh, Speaker of the Lok Sabha, paid a brief unofficial
visit to Japan during the delegation's return journey from the
United States. During their stay in Tokyo the members made contact with members of the Japanese Diet.
A Japanese Parliamentary delegation, consisting of 6 members,
transitted through India from 26 to 28 September 1963.
The Secretary, Revenue and Expenditure in the Ministry of
Finance, represented India at the conference of the Japanese Tax
Association held in Tokyo in April 1963.
Shri S. K. Patil, the former Minister for Food and Agriculture,
made a brief half in Japan in June 1963 on his return journey from
the United States, He had discussions on matters of mutual interest
with the Foreign Minister and the Agricultural Minister of Japan.
The then Foreign Secretary, Shri M. J, Desai, visited Japan from
1 to 6 July 1963. During his stay in Tokyo, he held discussions
with officials of the Japanese Government and other prominent
personalities on matters of mutual interest.
At the Conference on Air Laws, held in Tokyo in August/September 1963, India was represented by the Director of Regulations
and Information of the Ministry of Transport and Communications.
An Indian delegation of two officials participated at the Asia
Electronic Conference held in Tokyo in October 1963.
General Hiroshi Kan Ohmori, Chief of Staff, Ground Self Defence
Force of Japan, paid a visit to India as a guest of the Government

of India, from 21 to 23 April 1963 on his return journey from Europe.
In October 1963, Commandant Kiichi Saeki of the, Japanese
National Defence College also visited India. During his stay in the
capital, he, among other things, also visited the National Defence
College, New Delhi.
<pg44>
(iii) Korea.-An Economic Research Mission, consisting of three
members under the leadership of Mr. Jae Suk Chung, Director of
Overall Planning Bureau, Seoul, visited India in April 1963, to study
and observe the achievements of India's first, second and third Five
Year Plans. During the Mission's stay in India, the members had
discussions with officials of the Planning Commission, the Ministry
of Finance and the Ministry of International Trade.
In September 1963, Mr. Seh Jun Soon, Vice-Minister of the
Cabinet Administration of the Republic of Korea, visited India to
study the organisational set-up and functions of the Planning Commission. He had discussions in this regard with Prof. M. S. Thacker,
member of the Planning Commission.
Shri D. K. Srinivaschar, Joint Secretary, Ministry of International
Trade, visited the Republic of Korea in September-October, 1963,
during his trip to other South-East Asian and Far Eastern countries,
to explore the possibilities of increasing trade between India and
South Korea.
In the cultural and educational field the Government of India
and the Government of the Republic of Korea agreed for the mutual
exchange of one professor and five post-graduate students each, for
study and research in India and Korean Universities respectively.
The Democratic People's Republic of Korea.-At the conclusion
of the State visit of the President of the Presidium of the Supreme
People's Assembly of the Democratic People's Assembly of the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea to the People's Republic of
China, a joint statement issued made of a few partisan and factually
incorrect references about India in the context of the Sino-Indian
boundary question. The Democratic People's Republic of Korea
supported China's so-called consistent stand for a peaceful settlement
of the Sino-Indian boundary question through negotiations and
"warmly praised the unprecedented measures taken on China's
initiative of cease-fire etc.". The statement went further and described India's stand as "wrong" and accused India of continuing "to
poison Sino-Indian relations".
In a protest note dated 20 July 1963, the Government of India
pointed out to the Government of the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea that this was an unfriendly act amounting to interference
in the internal affairs of the Government of India.
(iv) The People's Republic of Mongolia.-Upto the end of 1962,

the Indian Charge d'Affaires in Peking had been concurrently accredited to the People's Republic of Mongolia. This was changed in
<pg45>
December 1962 and the Indian Ambassador to the Soviet Union was
appointed concurrently as Ambassador of India to Mongolia with
residence at Moscow. Accordingly, Shri T. N. Kaul, Ambassador,
presented his letter of credence at Ulan Bator on 15 February 1963.
The Ambassador paid another visit to Ulan Bator in July 1963 to
participate in the celebrations of the 42nd anniversary of the Mongolian People's Republic. On this occasion the Rector. of the Ulan
Bator University presented to the Ambassador some books on India
in the Mongolian language.
The new Mongolian Ambassador, Mr. Sumadyn Tsedendamba,
presented his credentials to the President on 19 September 1963.
A Radio-Telephone service from India to Ulan Bator via Moscow
was established on 9 September 1963.
In order to strengthen further the relations between India and
Mongolia, certain proposals in the cultural field are being finalised in
the cultural exchange programme. The proposals include exchange
of visits of sportsmen, scholars, historians and scientists, organisation
of exhibitions in art and culture and also reciprocally marking each
other's national days.
E. WEST ASIA AND AFRICA
Following the appeal of Prime Minister Nehru to the nations of
the world after the Chinese aggression, the Arab and African countries generally voiced their sympathy for India. Two countries of
the region, the UAR and Ghana, joined with some Asian countries
to formulate the Colombo proposals for resolving the deadlock
arising out of the Chinese aggression.
In view of the Chinese aggression the Government of India stepped up their diplomatic activity in the countries of West Asia and
Africa. The Law Minister, Shri A. K. Sen, and the then SecretaryGeneral of this Ministry undertook a diplomatic mission to the
U.A.R. and Ghana amongst other countries to explain the implications of the aggression.
The highlight of the year was the State visit of the President,
Dr. Radhakrishnan, to Afghanistan and Iran in May. The spontaneous ovations and the warm welcome received by the President
from the peoples of Iran and Afghanistan went to emphasise the long
standing ties of friendship between India and these countries. The
<pg46>

Vice-President, Dr. Zakir Hussain, also paid a goodwill visit to
Ethiopia, Sudan, the U.A.R. and Aden on the invitation of their
respective Governments.
Towards the end of 1963, Shrimati Indira Gandhi, accompanied
by the Deputy Minister, made a goodwill tour of Ethiopia, Kenya,
Northern Rhodesia, Tanganyika and Zanzibar on invitation from
their respective Governments.
Another important development was, the call for the convening
of a second conference of non-aligned countries made in the joint
communique issued at the conclusion of the Ceylonese Prime
Minister's visit to the U.A.R. in December. This was welcomed by
the Government of India.
WEST ASIA
(i) Aden.-The South Arabian Federation which was set up
during the year included the colony of Aden, where a large number
of Indians are settled. The integration of the Indian population in
the body-politic of Aden remains to be achieved.
At the invitation of the Government of India, Mr. M. A. Abdo,
Minister for Local Government in Aden, visited India. This was the
first visit from an elected Minister of the Adeni Government.
(ii) Iran.-The State visit of President Radhakrishnan to Iran
from 16 to 21 May 1963, led to a better understanding of each
other's problems and interests and crystallized the friendship born
out of traditional ties between the two nations, despite divergence
of policies and commitments. Iran condemned the Chinese violation
of Indian territory and expressed her sympathy and support to the
Government and people of India.
(iii) Iraq.-Following the overthrow of General Kassim's regime
in February 1963, a progressive Government was formed under the
leadership of President Aref. Iraq and India have since moved closer. India has expanded the field of mutual cooperation and technical
assistance with Iraq. A large number of Indian pilgrims continued
to visit the holy places of Iraq on Ziarat.
(iv) Jordan.-Jordanian support and sympathy, extended to India
at the time of the Chinese aggression, evoked a warm and appreciative
response among the Indian people and paved the way for closer ties
between the two countries. The State visit of His Majesty, King
<pg47>
Hussain of Jordan, which took place from 3 to 16 December 1963,
helped in further cementing the bonds of friendship between the
two countries.
(v) Kuwait.-The Government of India extended diplomatic re-

cognition to the State of Kuwait and raised their diplomatic representation there to the level of an Embassy. Shri I. S. Chopra was appointed India's first Ambassador to Kuwait. During 1963, possibilities of Indo-Kuwaiti cooperation in technical and commercial fields
were explored to advantage. As in the past years, His Highness the
Amir of Kuwait paid a private visit to India. Their Excellencies
Abdul Rahman Atiqi and Abdul Razak Rizzuki paid official visits
to India during the year. The Kuwaiti Government gave their support to the Indian cause at the time of the Chinese aggression.
(vi) Lebanon.-The Chinese aggression provoked a great deal of
sympathy and support for India in her hour of crisis amongst the
Lebanese people. Prime Minister Rashid Karame's State visit to
India helped to further closer ties and foster better understanding between the two Democracies.
(vii) Saudit Arabia.-India appreciated the spontaneous support
extended by Saudi Arabia, on the issue of the Chinese aggression.
Saudi Arabia continued to attract large members of Indian pilgrims.
During the year about 16,000 Hajees went to Mecca and Medina, the
holy places in Saudi Arabia.
(viii) Syria.-After the March Revolution, the Government of
India recognised the new Syrian regime. There have been no
significant developments in respect of Indo-Syrian relations.
(ix) Yemen.-India's relations with Yemen found a new basis
following the change of Government there to which India was
prompt in giving recognition. On the request from the Yemeni
Government, India has undertaken to provide technical and economic
assistance in various spheres. Yemeni Government also supported
and appreciated the correctness of the Indian stand in respect of
Sino-Indian differences.
5. AFRICA
(i) U.A.R.-The close and cordial ties existing between India and
the U.A.R. were strengthened at the time of the Chinese aggression,
when President Nasser took the lead in initiating practical steps for
easing the deadlock between India and China. Prime Minister Ali
Sabri represented the U.A.R. at the Colombo Powers' Conferences.
162 M of EA-4.
<pg48>
Throughout 1963, there was close contact between the Prime Minister of India and the President of the U.A.R. specially with regard
to issues connected with non-alignment, disarmament, banning of
nuclear tests and world peace in general. In other fields also, there
was fruitful collaboration. India continued to loan technical personnel to the U.A.R. A Trade Delegation and a Delegation of Indian
Scientists sponsored by the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research visited the U.A.R. Shri Humayun Kabir, the then Minister of

Scientific Research and Cultural Affairs; and Sardar Swaran Singh,
Minister for Food and Agriculture, both visited Cairo during the
year. Exchange of scholars, deputation of Instructors, exchange of
books on cultural, scientific and technical subjects etc., also took
place.
India looked after the interests of the U.A.R. in France beginning
with 1956, until the normalisation of relations between the U.A.R.
and France in April 1963.
(ii) Libya.-The Libyan Government requested for assistance in
the form of technical personnel for implementing their Five Year
Plan. Indian Professors and Doctors were sent on deputation there
as in previous years. Libya has condemned the use of violence in
settlement of border disputes.
(iii) Tunisia.-President Bourguiba extended unequivocal support
and sympathy to India when she suffered the Chinese attack. He
en sent a personal emissary, Mr. Taib Slim, to New Delhi to convey this support to the Prime Minister as a mark of solidarity between the two non-aligned nations. At the time of Premier Chou
En-lai's visit to Tunis President Bourguiba was openly critical of the
use of force in the settlement of border disputes between countries.
(iv) Morocco.-No significant development took place in respect
of Indo-Moroccan relations during the period under review.
(v) Algeria.-Relations between India and Algeria began on a cordial footing. India was represented by the then Secretary-General of
this Ministry at the Algerian Independence Day celebrations held on
5 July 1963.
Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, the Algerian Ambassador in the U.A.R. paid
an official visit to India in October 1963.
(vi) Ghana.-There were no significant developments in IndoGhanaian relations. The visit of Shrimati Vijayalakshmi Pandit to
Accra provided an occasion for discussing matters of mutual interest
and for strengthening the existing ties.
<pg49>
Dr. K. N. Raj, Director, Delhi School of Economics, participated in
the discussions of Ghana's Seven-Year Plan on invitation from the
Ghana Government.
(vii) Nigeria.-Relations between Nigeria and India remained very
cordial and friendly. Nigeria gave unstinted support and sympathy
to the Indian cause when the Chinese committed aggression on our
northern borders. Indian assistance in the technical field was considerably extended by loan of the services of trained personnel from
India. Cooperation was also extended in the military field.

When Nigeria became a Republic on 1 October 1963, the President and the Prime Minister sent special messages of greetings.
As relief to the flood victims in Western Nigeria, the Government
of India sent handloom clothes, bush-shirts and medicines worth
about Rs. 10,000 to Nigeria.
It has been decided to present scientific instruments and apparatus
worth about one lakh rupees to different Universities in Nigeria.
Shrimati Vijayalakshmi Pandit visited Lagos from 7 to 9 September 1963 and discussed with the Nigerian Government problems
and subjects of mutual interest
(viii) The Congo.-In view of the still precarious law and order
situation the Secretary-General requested the United Nations to
appropriate sufficient funds to continue the United Nations operations
in the Congo until 30 June 1964. India supported this request and
has also agreed to the retention of her service personnel there, who
number 223.
India also continued to contribute to the United Nations her share
of expenditure on the Congo operations. India's share from 1 July
1963 to 31 December 1963 was assessed at $ 334,415 (Rs. 16,92,452).
India's share of the expenditure for the period 1 January 1964 to
30 June 1964 is expected to be $ 170,460 (Rs. 8,11,714) approximately, which will be payable in Indian rupees.
(ix) East and Central Africa.-Political events in this region
attracted keen interest in India. The presence of a substantial number of people of Indian origin and their future integration in the bodypolitic of the country of their adoption was of direct concern to India.
The emancipation of the East African territories was completed with
the attainment of East African territories was completed with the
attainment of independence by Kenya and Zanzibar in December
1963. Shrimati Indira Gandhi, accompanied by Shri Dinesh Singh,
<pg50>
Deputy Minister, and Shri K. R. P. Singh, Director in the Ministry
of External Affairs, represented the Government of India at the
independence celebrations of Kenya and Zanzibar and later paid
goodwill visits to Northern Rhodesia, Nyasaland and Ethiopia.
During the visit of the Indian Delegation, the African leaders and
people gave ample evidence of their friendship towards India. There
was also general support for India's cause against Chinese aggression.
The Commission of India at Nairobi was raised to the status of
High Commission with effect from 12 December 1963, the date Kenya
attained independence.
India continued to accord full facilities and assistance to the Governments of East African territories in the matter of recruitment of

trained and technical personnel from India.
(x) Ethiopia.-India's policy of peace and non-alignment found
a ready response in Ethiopia. Following the Chinese aggression,
Ethiopia extended full support to India's cause. The convening by
the Emperor Haile Selassie of the Conference of 32 African Heads of
States and Government and the enshrining of the policy of non-alignment in the African Charter were events of great significance which
received endorsement in India.
A formal agreement between the Government of India and Ethiopia
was signed for the deputation of Indian Army officers to the Imperial
Ethiopian Government to assist in the training of Ethiopian Army
cadets. Cooperation in the technical and educational fields continued
as before and the flourishing textile mill called the Indo-Ethiopian
Textiles remained a manifestation of this cooperation.
(xi) Somalia.-The Prime Minister of Somalia, accompanied by
the Somali Minister of Information and other officials, visited India
from 12 to 15 August 1963. A joint communique was issued
after the visit, in which the Government of India agreed to meet,
to the extent possible, the requirement of the Somali Republic in
respect of doctors, teachers and technicians.
(xii) Sudan.-The only significant event of the year with regard
to Sudan was Vice-President, Dr. Zakir Hussain's official visit paid in
March-April 1963. Otherwise, Indo-Sudanese relations were maintained on the same level as before.
(xii) South Africa.-The South African Government continued
to specify group areas, under the Group, Areas Act, for the different
racial groups in every one of the urban areas of South Africa. The
areas which have recently been proclaimed group areas are: (1)
Page view the suburb of Johannesburg and Nylstroom, a town in the
<pg51>
Eastern Transval affecting respectively 5,000 and 217 Indians living
in these two areas.
As the Government of South Africa continued to ignore repeated
requests, recommendations, admonitions and condemnations of the
world organisations, 34 Member-States of the United Nations, including India, moved a Resolution in the Seventeenth Session of the
General Assembly in 1962, deploring the failure of the South African
Government to comply with its earlier Resolution and deprecating
that Government's racial policies and measures. The Resolution
which was adopted by an overwhelming majority requested Member
States to take certain diplomatic and economic steps against the Government of South Africa to bring about the abandonment of the
racial policies of that Government (1761 XVII). Operative paragraph 4 of the Resolution requested Member States to take the following measures:-(a) Breaking off diplomatic relations with the
Government of the Republic of South Africa or refraining from

establishing such relations; (b) Closing their ports to all vessels flying the South African flag; (c) Enacting legislation prohibiting
their ships from entering South African ports; (d) Boycotting all
South African goods and refraining from exporting goods, including
all arms and ammunition, to South Africa; (e) Refusing landing
and passage facilities to all aircraft belonging to the Government
and companies registered under the laws of South Africa.
In pursuance of the above resolution of the United Nations
General Assembly, the Government of India have taken all the
measures enumerated therein.
As in previous years, the Government of India have offered
scholarships to students from the Republic of South Africa under the
General Scholarships Scheme. A few South African students have
also been given admission into the Medical Colleges in various States
against seats reserved for Government of India's nominees.
5. A Conference of the Heads of Indian Missions in Africa and
West Asia was held in Delhi between 8 and 13 November 1963.
The Conference discussed various subjects concerning India's
interests in and relations with the countries of these areas.
It was agreed that every effort should be made to develop India's
political, economic and cultural relations, to improve publicity, to
build up wider trade connections and to take vigorous action to
counteract Chinese and Pakistani anti-Indian activities in these
areas. The Conference also agreed that India's representation in
Africa should be strengthened and considered the question of streamlining administrative and financial procedures to increase the efficiency of Indian Missions. A considerable part of the discussions
<pg52>
developed around questions concerning trade economic and technical
cooperation with Africa and West Asia, and how best India could
meet the demands of the newly emerging countries for technical and
trained personnel.
F. EUROPE
(i) Austria.- Dr. Bruno Kriesky, the Austrian Foreign Minister,
accompanied by Dr. Ludwig Steiner, Under Secretary of State for
Foreign Affairs, visited India in November 1963. The visit enhanced
the interest of the Austrian Government in strengthening economic
ties with India, as well as brought about a better appreciation of
India's democratic system and the problems faced by her on account
of the Chinese aggression.
(ii) Belgium.-Events in the Congo had imposed certain strains
on Indo-Belgian relations. However, during the period under review,
there was a clearing of the mist and relations were restored to normalcy. The Belgian Government expressed sympathy with India

and assured her of her active assistance in the face of the Chinese
attack.
There was enhanced cultural activity between the two countries.
Shrimati Nirmala Ramachandran from Madras, visited Brussels in
April 1963 and performed Bharat Natyam dances. Later Pandit Ravi
Shankar, the celebrated sitar player performed in Brussels. These
performances were very well received. The visit of the Indian
Hockey team to Belgium received a good deal of publicity.
In May 1963, Shri Manubhai Shah, Minister of International
Trade, visited Brussels. The Embassy arranged a press conference
and lecture at the University of Brussels.
M. Raymond Scheyven, member of the Belgian Parliament, visited India about the middle of July 1963. Professors Doucy and
Feldhem of Brussels University came on a goodwill visit to India, at
the invitation of the Indian Council of Cultural Relations.
Mr. Robert Desprechins was appointed as India's Honorary Consul at Ghent with effect from 1 April 1963.
(iii) Bulgaria.-The Bulgarian Minister of Education and Culture,
Mr. Gancho Ganev, paid a visit to India in September 1963, when the
first Cultural Agreement between the two countries was signed.
The Bulgarian first Deputy Prime Minister, Mr. Zhivko Zhivkov,
accompanied by the Deputy Minister of Foreign Trade, visited India
from 5 to 9 September 1963.
<pg53>
(iv) Cyprus.-Dr. Fazil Kutchak, Vice-President of Cyprus, came
on an official visit in March 1963. On his return, he praised India's
efforts to meet the challenge posed by Chinese aggression.
The Sixth Session of the Executive Committee of the Afro-Asian
Solidarity Organisation was held in Nicosia (Cyprus) during September 1963. Delegates from various Afro-Asian countries condemned
the theory of inevitability of war and supported the policy of peaceful co-existence between different nations. The Chinese delegates
were isolated in this Conference over the issues of peace and war.
(v) Denmark.-In May 1963 letters were exchanged between the
Chairman of the Indian Atomic Energy Commission and the Chairman of the Danish Atomic Energy Commission comprising an agreement between India and Denmark for collaboration in the peaceful
uses of nuclear energy.
On 30 May 1963, the Foreign Minister of Denmark and the
Ambassador of India in Copenhagen signed an agreement by which
Denmark extended to India a loan of 15 million Kroners (roughly
Rs. 1 crore) for the purchase of industrial equipment in Denmark.

The Scouts and Girl Guides of Denmark worked on holidays in
order to donate wages thus earned, for charitable work in India. Last
year they donated Kroners 300,000 for similar purposes.
The Danish heir apparent Crown Princess Margrethe came on a
private visit to India in November 1963.
The Ambassador of India in Copenhagen presented a set of books
on India to the State University Library of Aarheus. A set of books
on Indian History, Political and Economic Development, and Culture, was also presented to the Library of the Danish Parliament in
August 1963.
In June 1963, Denmark was the venue of a number of international conferences like the International Girl Guides Conference,
the Fourth International Congress of the World Federation for Physical Therapy, the Ninth World Congress of the International Society
for the Rehabilitation of the Disabled, the Second International
Seminar on Special Education and the Session of the Technical
Assistance Committee of the United Nations Economic and Social
Council. India was represented at all these conferences.
(vi) European Parliamentary Delegation.-A European Parliamentary delegation led by His Excellency Mr. Gaetano Martino,
President of the Europe Parliament, visited India in December 1963,
at the invitation of the Chairman of the Rajya Sabha and the Speaker of the Lok Sabha. The delegation included important personalities from Italy, France, Federal Republic of Germany, Netherlands
and Belgium.
<pg54>
(vii) Finland.-Relations with Finland, remained cordial during
the period. A 20-million dollar credit agreement between India and
METEX of Finland was negotiated in May 1963, for financing various
projects in India.
(viii) France.-The friendly and cordial relations between India
and France led to greater interest and exchanges between the two
countries in cultural and economic fields. In response to an invitation extended by the Prime. Minister of India, ex-Premier Mendes
France, accompanied by his wife, came to India for a three-week's
visit. Ex-Premier Edgar Faure and Madame Faure also visited India
at the invitation of the Prime Minister.
Shri Manubhai Shah, Minister of International Trade, visited
Paris from 9 to 11 May 1963. During his stay, he had useful talks on
economic and trade matters.
During the period under review, several scholarships/fellowships
were offered by the French Government in the fields of Science,
Humanities and the Fine Arts. In addition, as in other years, a

number of trainees were, sent to France for training under the IndoFrench Technical Co-operation Agreement.
The Institute of Indology of the University of Lyons where, until
recently, only Sanskrit language was taught, has been expanded,
with additional facilities for the teaching of Indian philosophy,
Indian Civilisation and aspects of Modern India. An Institute of
Indology has also been established at the University of Strasbourg.
An exhibition of Indian art, under the patronage of the French
Minister for Culture, was held for three weeks at the "Centre Cultural
Franco-India", an association for the promotion of friendship and
understanding between France and India. The exhibition consisted
of old and precious jewelleries, ornaments, statues, paintings, and
miniatures. Four Indian artistes in France took part in the "Biennale
de Paris" exhibition. M. Andre Malraux inaugurated the exhibition.
An Indian Hockey Team was in France from 28 September to 8
October 1963. It participated in the pre-Olympic World Hockey
Tournament organised under the auspices of the International
Hockey Federation. The Indian team attracted a great deal of
interest and applause from the French press and public.
An exhibition of French graphic art and tapestries was held in
Bombay, New Delhi and Madras. It contained one of the largest
selections of foreign art treasures ever exhibited in India. It
attracted a large number of visitors. The President visited the exhibition in New Delhi.
<pg55>
(ix) The Federal Republic of Germany.-The relations between
India and the Federal German Republic remained friendly and cordial.
Participation by the Federal German Republic in India's economic
development was considerable. Including the expected assistance for
1963-64, the contribution of Federal German credits to India totals
DM 3029.56 (Rs. 360.63 crores).
There was a useful exchange of visits between the two countries.
Shri C. Subramanian. India's Minister for Steel and Heavy Industries, visited the Federal Republic of Germany for a week, in April
1963, at the invitation of the then German Economic Minister, Dr.
Erhard. During his stay in Germany, he signed the Inter-Governmental Agreement for the expansion of Rourkela Steel Plant for
which the German Government made available a sum of DM 400 million. In May, 1963, Shri Humayun Kabir, the then Minister for
Scientific Research and Cultural Affairs, paid a five-day visit to the
Federal Republic and West Berlin. While in Germany he called on
the Federal President and the Federal Minister of Atomic Energy.
The Minister for International Trade, Shri Manubhai Shah. visited
Germany from 22 to 26 May 1963. He visited Frankfurt, Bonn,
Hamburg and Berlin. He met in Bonn Dr. Erhard, the then Minister of Economics, Dr. Water Scheel, the Minister for Economic Co-

operation and Development, and Professor Muller-armack, State
Secretary in the Ministry of Economics. The economic and trade
relations between the two countries figured in the discussions. In
Berlin, he met leading figures in the fields of Banking and Finance.
Shrimati Lakshmi N. Menon. Minister of State in the Ministry of
External Affairs, paid a brief visit in July 1963. During her stay,
she called on the Federal President. Dr. Luebke and the Federal
Foreign Minister, Dr. Schroeder, and also visited Berlin. Views
were exchanged on economic and political matters of mutual interest.
Shri R. K. Nehru, the then Secretary-General in the Ministry of
External Affairs, paid a visit to the Federal Republic from 17 to 20
July 1963. While in Bonn, he met the Federal President and the
State Secretary in the German Foreign Office.
On the occasion of the inaugural flight of 'Lufthansa' from Frankfurt to New Delhi, the Vice-President of the Parliament of the Federal Republic of Germany (Bundestag), Dr. Thomas Dehler, and some
other State Secretaries of the Federal Ministries paid a brief visit
to India in September, 1963. During his stay in India, Dr. Dehler
called on the Prime Minister, Minister of State in the Ministry of
External Affairs, and the Speaker of the Lok Sabha.
Dr. Walter Scheel, West German Minister for Economic Co-operation and Development, paid a two-week's visit to India in November
<pg56>
1963. He was accompanied by senior German officials, who held
important discussions for the finalisation of the German Credit
Agreement.
The Ambassador of the Federal German Embassy in India presented to the President of India, on behalf of the German President
a purse of DM 10,000 to be utilized for the eradication of leprosy in
India. This sympathetic gesture was suitably acknowledged by the
President of India.
(x) Greece.-Their Majesties the King of Greece and the Queen
of the Hellenes came to India in February 1963 on a State visit. In
his statement on 3 February 1963, the King paid a tribute to India
in the following words: "We in Greece follow with admiration the
stand of the Indian people who, as one man, resist the unjust and
unprovoked aggression against them. Our indignation was an the
more deep as this aggression was launched against a people whose
very credo, as our own, is peace. We have faith in your victory,
since besides having justice on your side, the Indian motherland is
defended by gallant, proud and free citizens and soldiers".
(xi) Hungary.-A Hungarian Parliamentary delegation made a
goodwill visit to India from 25 November to 4 December 1963.
(xii) Ireland.-Permission has been granted to the Republic of
Ireland during the period under review for the opening of an Irish

Embassy in New Delhi.
(xiii) Italy.-The Italian Government and people expressed their
support and sympathy for India after the Chinese aggression.
The Vaiont Dam disaster evoked much sympathy in India and the
Government sent relief supplies to Italy by a special IAF plane.
(xiv) Netherlands.-The Dutch Press expressed support and
sympathy for India in the context of the Chinese attack on India's
northern borders. China was viewed as an unreliable country and
Pakistan came under criticism for its attempts to pressurise India
by deliberately cultivating Chinese friendship.
Shrimati Lakshmi N. Menon, Minister of State, paid a five-day
visit to Netherlands in June/July, 1963, where she was received by
the Queen and the Crown Princess of Netherlands, and called on the
Prime Minister, Foreign Minister and President of the First Chamber
of the Netherlands. The talks revealed that there was much
sympathy and concern for India over the developments on her northern frontiers.
Her Majesty Queen Juliana, accompanied by H.R.H. the Prince
of Netherlands, and H.R.H. Princess Beatrice stopped for a day in
<pg57>
Calcutta on 14/15 October. During their stay they were treated as
guests of the Government of India.
During the period under review, several scholarships/fellowships
were offered to Indian nationals, for technical training and social
studies in Holland.
India's Ambassador in the Netherlands, Shri R. K. Tandon, left
The Hauge on 29 July 1963, to take over as India's representative in
Nairobi. Shri R. R. Sinha took over as the new Ambassador of India
in The Hague.
(xv) Norway.-The IV supplement to the Agreement between
the United Nations, the Government of Norway and the Government
of India concerning economic development was signed on behalf of
the Government of India and the World Health Organisation on 28
June 1963. The Agreement provides for a project for public health
development in India. The Government of Norway will contribute
Norwegian Kr. 26,000,000 to the project.
With the object of promoting cultural relations between India
and Norway, the Government of India offered, under the Reciprocal
Scholarships Scheme, one scholarship open to a Norwegian national
for the academic year 1963-64.
(xvi) The Soviet Union.-The Soviet Union, during the year,

reaffirmed and reiterated her policy of friendship and co-operation
with India. On 21 September 1963, the Soviet Government made an
official statement criticising the Chinese Government for resorting
to war-like operations against India for settling the border dispute.
The Soviet press also criticised the Chinese Government for not
accepting the Six Nations Colombo Proposals for settling the dispute
with India in a peaceful and constructive manner.
The constructive policies followed by the leaders in the Soviet
Union, the United States and the United Kingdom towards the relaxation of international tension resulted in the signing of the Partial
Test Ban Treaty in Moscow in August 1963, which was hailed, by an
overwhelming majority of nations, as the first step towards disarmament and the control of nuclear weapons. India was the first country after the three main signatories to sign this Treaty.
The World Congress of Women was held in Moscow in June 1963,
which was attended by delegates from about 120 countries. A 30member non-official delegation of Indian women, including Mrs.
Khandwala, Mrs. Aruna Asaf Ali, Mrs. Renu Chakravarty, Mrs. S.
Joshi and others participated in this Congress. The speeches made
by the Indian delegates were marked by moderation and a constructive approach to problems of world peace. In contrast, the vitupera<pg58>
tion and aggressiveness of the Chinese women delegates resulted
only in their isolation. The Congress, by an overwhelming majority,
succeeded in endorsing the policy of peaceful, co-existence and
rejected the Chinese thesis on the inevitability of war.
An Indian Exhibition was held in Moscow, during the months of
July and August 1963, to present India's achievements, in various
fields of national development. It presented a compact picture of
emerging India to the Soviet people. Shri Manubhai Shah, Minister for International Trade, and Shrimati Indira Gandhi visited the
Exhibition. Premier Khruschev and other highranking officials of
the Soviet Government visited the Exhibition. The Prime Minister
of Hungary, Janos Kadar, who was in Moscow, also paid a visit.
There was useful exchange of visitors between India and the
Soviet Union. The following significant visits were exchanged: (i)
Shri Humayun Kabir, the then Minister of Scientific Research and
Cultural Affairs, visited Moscow in May 1963 to sign the Indo-Soviet
Cultural Affairs Plan for the year 1963-64; (ii) Shri Manubhai Shah,
Minister for International Trade, visited the Soviet Union in June
1963 to sign a five-year Trade Agreement; he also visited Moscow in
August 1963 to inaugurate the Indian Trade Fair; (iii) Shrimati
Indira Gandhi paid a goodwill visit to the Soviet Union in August
1963; (iv) Dr. Sushila Nayar, Minister of Health, made an official
tour to the Soviet Union and visited medical institutions and hospitals in October 1963; (v) The first woman cosmonaut Valentina
Tereshkova, along with Soviet cosmonauts, A. G. Nikolaev and

Valery Bykovsky came to India on a goodwill visit as the guests of
the Government in November 1963; (vi) A delegation led by Shri
S. Boothalingam, the then Secretary, Ministry of Defence and Economic Co-ordination, visited the Soviet Union.
(xvii) Spain.-Though, at times, the Spanish press, during the
period under report, revealed an unfriendly approach towards India,
the anti-Indian bias generally seemed to abate. The antagonism
mainly arose out of the fundamentally different attitudes of Spain
and India towards colonial issues. The Spanish press and radio remained vigorous supporters of Portugal on the Angolan question.
However, in August 1963, the Spanish Government announced that
her possessions in Equatorial Africa-Fernando Po and Rio Muniwould receive a measure of autonomy.
The Spanish press has shown growing concern over the mounting
military might of China and the possible threat that it poses to world
peace.
<pg59>
The Government of Spain have offered a scholarship for utilisation by an Indian student for the academic year 1963-64 on a recipro
cal basis.
The Embassy of India in Madrid arranged two 'Sitar' concerts by
Pandit Ravi Shankar. These were greatly appreciated by the
Spansh people.
(xviii) Sweden.-Swedish opinion is veering around to the view
that in the ensuing Sino-Soviet rift, it would be harmful to allow
China to be isolated. Business circles in Sweden are inclined to take
advantage of the void caused by the withdrawal of Soviet and East
European trade from China. A Swedish Trade delegation representing the Stockholm Chamber of Commerce visited China in October.
This was preceded by the visit of a Chinese Military delegation to
Sweden.
General sympathy for India, however, still prevailed. Intensive
Pakistani propaganda against India was let loose in Sweden but the
Swedish press showed considerable restraint and the Government's
attitude remained neutral.
To strengthen the existing friendship and to promote further
understanding and closer co-operation between the two countries, an
agreement was signed between India and Sweden to set up a School
of Paper Technology in Saharanpur. About 180 to 200 technicians
will be trained each year in this school. Under the agreement, the
Swedes will be responsible for equipment as well as for training personnel from Sweden. Sweden has agreed to give 8,000 tons of paper
as a gift to India for printing school books.
The Indian Ambassador to Sweden, Shri Khub Chand, presented

a set of books to the library of the Swedish Parliament.
At the instance of India, the Swedish Government has agreed to
abolish duty on Indian tea.
(xix) Switzerland.-On the basis of a bilateral technical co-operation programme the Federal Council of Switzerland decided to grant
a sum of Swiss Francs 1,640,000 (Rs. 17,876 lakhs) covering the first
phase of three years for the realisation of an agricultural development project in Kerala.
As a result of the Swiss Government's desire to assist India, an
agreement of co-operation for improving the animal-breed and agriculture in Kerala State was signed oil. 12 July 1963.
The Swiss Government offered, under the General Scholarships
Scheme, four scholarships for Chemistry, Physics, Chemical Engineering and Geology which have been utilised.
<pg60>
(xx) The United Kingdom.-As in the past, close ties between
India and Britain continued in the economic, political and educational fields. These ties were further cemented by the visit to
Britain of the President, Dr. S. Radhakrishnan, at the invitation of
the Queen of England.
During May 1963, a delegation of British Labour Party Members
visited India at the invitation of the Government of India. This
afforded an opportunity to the Labour Party to come in close touch
with the Indian people and their defence as well as socioeconomic
problems.
Admiral of the Fleet, Earl Mountbatten of Burma, visited India
between 29 April and 3 May 1963. Rt. Hon. Duncan Sandys, British
Secretary of State for Commonwealth Relations, also visited India
during May 1963, and had talks with the Prime Minister, and other
Ministers on various matters of common interest, including Kashmir
and the Chinese aggression.
A British delegation to the annual Commonwealth Parliamentary
Conference visited India between 16 and 19 October 1963 on their way
to Malaysia.
At the invitation of the Government of India, Lord Denning,
Master of Rolls of the United Kingdom, accompanied by Lady Denning, visited India between 13 and 24 December 1963.
Efforts to resolve the problem in respect of the India Office
Library in London, continued during the period under review.
(xxi) Vatican.-The Second Vatican Council, the first session of
which started from 11 October and lasted upto end of December 1962,

held its second session from 8 September 1963 to the end of December 1963. His Eminence Most Reverend Valarian Cardinal Gracias,
Archbishop of Bombay, and 77 other Archbishops and Bishops from
India went to Rome to participate in the second session of the Vatican
Council.
The President of India has invited His Holiness the Pope Paul VI
to visit India in 1964.
(xxii) Yugoslavia.-Friendly relations between India and Yugoslavia resulted in increased and purposeful exchanges between the
leaders of the two countries on problems of world peace, co-existence
and non-alignment. In particular, the Yugoslav Government condemned Chinese aggression against India and supported the idea of
a peaceful solution of the border problem in accordance with the
Colombo proposals. The Yugoslav Government also supported the
idea of holding a Conference of non-aligned countries.
<pg61>
Immediately after the earth-quake disaster in the Yugoslav City
of Skoplje, India rushed urgently-needed medical supplies, tea and
coffee to Yugoslavia by a special Air Force plane and later sent other
supplies by sea.
A delegation of four members from India participated in the 52Inter-Parliamentary Union Congress held in Belgrade in the month
of September 1963. The leader of Indian delegation, Shri P. Govinda
Menon, MP, explained India's policy of non-alignment and peaceful
co-existence and emphatically refuted Pakistan delegation's charges
against India on the Kashmir issue and on our defence preparations.
At the instance of the delegation, the draft report for 1962, which
contained erroneous references to India's border dispute with China
and the Kashmir question, were amended suitably.
G. THE AMERICAS
NORTH AMERICA.
(i) The United States of America.-In the beginning of 1963, the
late President Kennedy, in his State of the Union Message to the
Congress, referred to China's "arrogant invasion of India," and said
that the developing and non-aligned countries were reassured by the
prompt United States assistance to India. United States military
assistance to meet the Chinese threat, which was provided at India's
request, was indeed timely. In addition, the United States remains
one of the foremost contributors of economic aid to India for her
development programmes.
The President of India made a State visit to the United States
from 2 to 11 June 1963. During this visit, he had an opportunity of
meeting the late President Kennedy and other leaders in the United
States. There was a useful exchange of views about relations bet-

ween India and the United States as well as on important world problems. In these discussions, the friendship and understanding between the two countries was re-affirmed. The United States reiterated warm sympathy for India's determination to improve the living
standards of its people within the framework of a liberal parliamentary democracy as well as to preserve its territorial integrity and
renewed offer of effective assistance for this purpose. The dedication
of the peoples of the two countries to the cause of peace and freedom
in the world was also re-affirmed.
On 23 November 1963, India was shocked and grieved to learn of
the assassination of President Kennedy. In this sad and untimely
death, India lost a genuine friend and the world a great champion of
peace and amity. India mourned this loss, together with other nations
<pg62>
of the world, and resolved to carry on unceasingly the task of achieving lasting world peace, as a homage to the memory of the late President Kennedy.
India welcomed the declaration made by President Lyndon B.
Johnson, after his installation, that he would continue the policies of
his predecessor in the great and difficult task of reducing tensions and
actively working for the maintenance of world peace as well as contributing to the economic development of the less developed countries of the world.
The policy of the Government of the United States regarding
China was revealed in a speech delivered by Mr. Roger Hillsman,
Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs, at the Commonwealth Club, San Francisco, on 13 December 1963. Unlike the
feeling apparent in some West European countries, the United States
Administration, although fully conscious of the ideological differences
between the Soviet Union and China, does not seem to be attracted by
the view that China, in spite of its present intransigence and belligerent policies, should be cultivated to perpetuate the differences. On
the other hand, it was felt that such exploitation of Sino-Soviet differences might hinder the progress of relaxation of East-West tensions.
(ii) Canada.-After the Chinese aggression in October 1962,
Canada sent prompt assistance to meet this threat. Canada's relations with India have been consistently friendly and Canada made
notable contribution towards India's economic development.
However, an important factor governing Canadian policy arose out
of her need for wheat exports. Canada, fearing chaos in the world
wheat market, as a result of the rejection by the farmers in the
United States of President Kennedy's tight production control, was
anxious to reduce her wheat surpluses by massive sales to China.
In 1961, the Diefenbaker Government engineered the biggest wheat
deal in Canadian history by a long term contract that guaranteed
Canadian wheat and barley sales amounting to Canadian $362 mil-

lions to, China, till the end of 1963. The Government of Mr. Pearson
also endorsed this policy of encouraging trade with China. China,
in turn, has been able to press Canada to buy more Chinese products
including textiles at concessional tariffs to help off-set the drain on
Chinese foreign exchange reserves through the massive purchase of
wheat from Canada.
An Agreement was signed on 14 November 1963, between the
Governments of Canada and India, for the participation and co-operation in the construction of the Rajasthan Atomic Power Station.
<pg63>
CENTRAL AND SOUTH AMERICA
(i) Argentina.-Dr. Illia, the newly elected President of Argentina,
expressed his country's concern at India's difficulties in view of the
Chinese attack. He referred to, Prime Minister Nehru as a most outstanding leader of the modern world and was full of praise for his
life-long devotion to the cause of his country and also for his contribution towards peace in general. These views reflect the friendly
relations between Argentina and India.
On 8 January 1963, the Committee for Aid to India held a benefit
festival in the theatre at the Botanical Garden, under the auspices
of the Indo-Argentine Cultural Institute, which was attended inter
alia by some members of the diplomatic corps and the Mayor of
Buenos Aires.
On 31 January, 1963, a successful cultural show devoted to India,
including a performance of Bharat Natyam, was held at the Hermitage Hotel, Mar del Plata, under the auspices of the local branch of
the Society for Assistance to Lepers.
In April 1963, the first of a series of lectures on subjects relating
to India was held at the University of Buenos Aires under the auspices of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization.
On 27 June 1963, at a formal function held at the University of
Buenos Aires, the Press Attache, Embassy of India in Buenos Aires,
handed over to the Rector of the University a collection of 344 books
as a gift to the University library.
One of the two scholarships available to Argentina under the Reciprocal Scholarships Scheme of the Government of India has been
availed of by an Argentine professional dancer to study Indian classical dances in Madras and Delhi.
(ii) Bolivia.-There was general appreciation in Bolivia of India's
foreign policy of non-alignment. It was heartening to note that Bolivia severed diplomatic relations with South Africa. Dr. Roberto
Jordan Pando, Bolivian Minister of Planning and Co-ordination, has

been invited to visit India. He will also visit some of India's Community Development Projects.
(iii) Brazil.-Shri V. H. Coelho, Ambassador of India, presented
his letter of credence on 1 February 1963, to the President of Brazil.
In the brief meeting that followed the presentation of credentials,
President Goulart expressed his support and sympathy for India in
the face of the Chinese attack. He added that the two countries had
much in common in their past history and were now facing similar
162 M of EA-5.
<pg64>
social and economic problems. He expressed confidence that India
would march ahead overcoming her present difficulties.
In August 1963, the Governor of Mysore, accompanied by his staff,
visited Brazil for 5 days, in the course of his tour of the South American countries. During his stay, he delivered lectures at the Catholic University of Rio-de-Janeiro and also appeared on the television.
The Governor and his party were guests of the Governor of Guanavara, Brazil.
The Ramakrishna Mission of Brazil arranged a public lecture
commemorating the birth centenary of Swami Vivekananda in August
1963. The Vice-Chancellor of the University of Brazil, Dr. Pedro
Calmon, an eminent intellectual and a former Education Minister,
presided over the meeting which was held in the University.
On 23 August 1963, the Governor of Guanavara named one of the
new primary schools being built in the state as the Tagore School.
These events received wide coverage in the Brazilian press.
(iv) Chile.-A Friends of India Society was formed in February
1963 with the Indian Ambassador as one of the Honorary Presidents.
In October 1963, in cooperation with the Chilean Ministry of Education, the Indian Embassy organized a photographic exhibition in
which much interest was evinced by the Chilean people.
(v) Colombia.-The Colombia Government assured India of its
sympathy and support on the issue of Chinese aggression.
(vi) Cuba.-In October 1963, as a result of a hurricane in Cuba,
heavy loss of life and property was caused. The President and the
Prime Minister of India sent messages of sympathy to the President
and the Prime Minister of Cuba respectively.
The Government of India sent relief supplies, consisting of clothes,
coffee, shoes and medicines, for distribution to the victims of the
hurricane disaster through the Embassy of Cuba in New Delhi.

(vii) Mexico.-On 21 February 1963, the Mexican Congress passed
a unanimous resolution supporting an appeal by a Committee of
Indian Parliamentarians for a just and peaceful solution of the
conflict between India and China.
A delegation of seven members led by Shri Bharat Ram, President of the Indian Chambers of Commerce, participated in the Congress of the International Chambers of Commerce held in Mexico
City from 20 to 27 April 1963.
A Mexican trade delegation visited India from 11 to 13 April
1963.
<pg65>
An Indian delegation headed by Dr. P. T. Raju participated in
the 13th International Congress of Philosophy which was held in
Mexico City in September 1963.
India figured in an exhibition held in the Social Security Institute
from 9-19 September 1963. The Indian Embassy provided Indian
films, textiles, posters and records and, from all accounts, the exhibition was an outstanding success.
On 5 September 1963, the Indian Ambassador distributed prizes
comprising Indian handicrafts and books to the winners of the
essay competition organized in collaboration with the National University of Mexico.
(viii) Panama.-When the Chinese invaded India in OctoberNovember 1962, the President of Panama declared that "the policy
of peace which India has followed since her independence, makes
this aggression all the more reprehensible, and the citizens of the
free world trust that justice and not brute force will triumph in
favour of India. Both the Government, I have the honour to, preside
over, and the people of Panama, give all their moral support to the
people and to the Government of India, with the hope that the just
and worthy peace deserved by the Indian nation would be soon restored".
(ix) Paraguay.-The Indian Ambassador in Buenos Aires, Shri
Tara Singh Bal, who is con-currently accredited to Paraguay, led the
Special Indian Mission at the installation ceremony of the new
President General Alfredo Stroessner in August 1963. According to
him, both the Government of Paraguay and the people expressed
warm friendship for India. At present Paraguay does not have a
resident representative in Delhi.
(x) Peru.-The Government of Peru gave their full moral support and sympathy to India at the time of the Chinese aggression
The Peruvian newspapers strongly condemned China for her heinous
action.

(xi) Venezuela.-Shri V. H. Coelho, Ambassador of India, resident in Brazil, was concurrently accredited to Venezuela and he
presented his: letters of credence to the President of Venezuela on
8 April 1963.
The Venezuela Senate and Congress passed a resolution in November 1962, condemning the Chinese aggression and assuring support
for India in her determination to resist this attack.
(xii) West Indies.-Relations with Jamaica, Trinidad and Tobago
and British Guiana continued to be cordial.
<pg66>
Mr. Gerard Montano, Minister for Works in the Trinidad Government, was an important visitor from the Carribeans in the month
of October 1963.
H. EXTERNAL PUBLICITY
(i) General.-Major steps were taken during the year to reorganise external publicity. An eminent Indian journalist was called
in to review the entire problem. The External Publicity Division
is being placed under the overall charge of a senior official of the
rank of Joint Secretary. The Division's name is being changed to,
Information Division of the External Affairs Ministry. The Joint
Secretary incharge of the Division would be in a position to act as.
a high-powered spokesman of the Ministry thus providing more authentic news and information relating to the conduct of the country's
external affairs.
The Conferences of Heads of Indian Missions in South-East
Asia and of Heads of Indian Missions in Africa and West Asia were
occasions for review of publicity problems in detail for these particular regions. The publicity needs of these regions, particularly in
the light of the Chinese threat and propaganda and of Sino-Pakistan
collusion, were closely examined and action initiated to meet thenew challenges.
Several important steps were taken at Headquarters to enlarge
the publicity output and provide to Indian Missions more direct
material on matters of vital interest to India. Some of these were:(a) The monthly 'March of India' was converted into a political fortnightly under the name 'Indian and Foreign Review'. The journal
continues to be published by the Publications Division of the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, and though not necessarily reflecting the views of Government as such, is nevertheless a fair
pointer to India's thinking on international affairs. An abbreviated
French version of the journal is brought out from Pondicherry for
distribution in French-speaking countries. (b) A larger printing
press was installed in the External Publicity Division to speed up
the printing of publicity material and to enhance the number of
pamphlets produced by the Division. (c) Steps were taken to equip

Information Posts abroad with teleprinters for picking up the two,
daily news transmissions from Headquarters. The replacement of
Morse Operators by automatic teleprinters would enable more
volume of news material to be sent to Missions with lesser labour
and ultimately at lower cost. It is expected that in due course teleprinters will also be provided to Missions which at present have no
Information Posts. (d) Though the problems posed by anti-Indian
<pg67>
propaganda emanating from Peking and Karachi, singly and in collaboration, strained to the full resources available for external publicity, the overall objective of interpreting India as a whole was constantly kept in view. India's social, economic and cultural developments were publicised in various ways. A great deal of publicity
material relating to these subjects was created and distributed
abroad. Indian Missions maintained close relations with Indian
students within their respective areas in order to enable the students to play their role as the country's unofficial ambassadors
abroad. (e) A new system of reportage from Indian Missions abroad
was instituted, on a fortnightly basis, divorcing statistical information from press analysis in order to, enable rapid evaluation of
foreign press trends. (f) Daily briefings were instituted for the
foreign and Indian press so as to. keep the press continuously briefed
on important events as well as to counter adverse propaganda.
(ii) Books and Publications.-Though small and often lacking in
facilities of well-established libraries, reading rooms and libraries
attached to Indian Missions abroad continued to serve the important
purpose of making literature available to people interested in keeping abreast of developments in India. Altogether, 4,758 copies of
190 new books were added to the libraries of Indian Missions during
the period under review. Books in Hindi, Urdu and Sanskrit were
also supplied to some of the libraries where such books were in
demand. 6,716 books and selected publications were supplied to
Missions for purposes of presentation and distribution to interested
individuals and institutions abroad. In addition, a very large number of newspapers and periodicals as well as publications of various
Ministries were sent abroad both for libraries and for purposes of
distribution.
(iii) Production.-Forty pamphlets on different subjects and one
special edition of a folder on India in three Indian languages were
produced during the period under review.
In addition, the Monthly Foreign Affairs Record was published
regularly. The annual index for 1962 of material published in the
journal was brought out.
Indian Missions abroad continued to produce cyclostyled and
printed bulletins in English and, wherever possible, in local languages. Though production of pamphlets in French, Spanish and Arabic
continued to be done abroad, a beginning was made during the year
to make Pondicherry the centre for production of material in

French. In addition to the abbreviated French version of the fortnightly Indian and Foreign Review, a few pamphlets in French were
produced in Pondicherry for distribution abroad. Subject to
<pg68>
acceptance of the quality of translations and production, this arrangement is proposed to be continued as it would save considerable
foreign exchange. Attempts are being made to make similar
arrangements in respect of some other foreign languages also. Keeping in view the overall needs of economy in the present emergency,
the production of Republic Day brochures abroad was discontinued.
For the same reason the annual pictorial diary produced by the
External Publicity Division was also dropped.
Sixteen leaflets and sixty-five special feature articles on various
subjects were produced and supplied to Missions for purposes of
publicity. In addition, a large number of background features,
photo features etc. were issued.
The two daily news transmissions in morse continued to supply
to Indian Missions valuable publicity material for use in their own
bulletins as well as for release to the press. The Daily world Press
Review was issued regularly bringing to the reader comments on
India or on subjects of vital interest to India appearing in newspapers abroad.
(iv) Films.-Indian features and decumentary films remained
in considerable demand abroad. Information Posts arranged hundreds of shows to audiences totalling many thousand. During the
period one feature And two children's films were purchased and
orders placed for seven feature and children's films. Copies of the
film "Chinese Threat" were sent to Indian Missions abroad. A large
number of selected documentaries produced by the Films Division
were sent to Missions. Other documentaries relating to the Chinese
aggression were shown abroad extensively. With the active assistance of our Missions, India participated in 19 film festivals abroad
winning awards for feature and documentary films in some of the
well-known festivals. Six compilation films relating to visits abroad
of the President and the Prime Minister and of foreign dignitaries
to India were produced by the Films Division in close collaboration
with the External Publicity Division. The film "Pather Panchali"
was sent to Nairobi for special screening during Kenya's Independence celebrations.
The usual newsreel coverage of visits of foreign dignitaries to
India was continued during the year.
(v) Cultural and Audio Visual Publicity.-During the period
under report India participated in 55 cultural exhibitions in various
countries. Material for these exhibitions was supplied from Headquarters and covered such diverse items as photographs, charts and
posters, postage stamps, paintings, dolls, costumes and books. Substantial assistance was rendered from Headquarters for a mammoth

<pg69>
exhibition on India organised by the Lytton Centre, Hollywood. The
proceeds of this exhibition are to be credited to the Prime Minister's
Fund and the National Defence Fund.
Ocer 33,000 photographs of news and feature interest were supplied during the period to Missions abroad for purposes of publicity.
A considerable number of these related to, the national defence
effort. Regular supply of blocks and ebonoids was made to Missions
in places where facilities for block-making are scarce. Special photo
coverage was also arranged in connection with the visit of foreign
dignitaries to India.
Five hundred and seventy-one tapes of recorded music and feature programmes of All India Radio were supplied to selected Missions abroad for the use of local radio stations. In several places
these tapes were used extensively.
(vi) Research and Reference.-Four hundred and fifty important enquiries on different subjects were answered during the period
by the Research and Reference Wing of the Division. A total of
96.000 clippings (60,000 Indian and 36,000 foreign) were handled
in the Reference Section. These were scrutinised, used and classified for various purposes.
(vii) Press and Public Relations.-Great emphasis was placed,
at Headquarters as well as by Missions, abroad on active public
relations as distinct from publicity. At Headquarters regular daily
briefings on matters relating to external affairs were held. Efforts
were made to minimise the problems which foreign correspondents
stationed in India were said to have experienced in their day to
day work. 467 press releases were issued during the period. Three
press delegations, one from West Germany, one from Afghanistan
and a joint delegation from Rumania, Hungary, Bulgaria and Czecoslovakia visited the country during the period under review. In
addition, hospitality was provided to 22 distinguished journalists
from abroad. Forty-eight applications for accreditation for varying
periods from foreign correspondents were handled. Facilities
were provided to, press parties accompanying important visitors
from abroad. There were 60 such visits during the period. Thirty
film and television teams visited India and facilities of various kinds
were arranged for them. A visit of six accredited representatives
of Indian ond foreign news agencies to Poonch was arranged for an
on-the-spot survey of diversion of the Betar waters.
(viii) Changes in Cadre.-The following changes in cadre occurred during the period:-(a) Three temporary posts of Assistant
Press Attaches/Assistant Information Officers-one in Washington
<pg70>

and two at the Headquarters of the External Publicity Divisionwere converted into the Junior scale of the Indian Foreign Service.
(b) An Indian Foreign Service Officer of the Deputy Secretary's
rank was appointed at the Headquarters of the External Publicity
Division Incharge of production work. (c) The two Indian Foreign
Service Officers who were working against the posts of Public Relations Officers at the Headquarters of the External Publicity Division
and Karachi were reverted to their cadre and two Officers of the
Information Service of India are now working against these posts.
(ix) Organisation and Staff.-The External Publicity Division, at
Headquarters and in the Information Units abroad, employs a total
staff of 548. It consists of 9 Public Relations Officers, one Deputy
Director, Information Service of India, one Under Secretary, (Information), 40 Information Officers/Press Attaches, 26 Assistant Information Officers/Assistant Press Attaches/Attaches Information, one
Research Officer, 5 Publicity Officers, 143 India-based ministerial
staff and 322 locally recruited personnel in various Missions abroad.
Five publicity set-ups were created/strengthened in Moscow,
Hong-Kong, Dar-es-Salaam, Kampala and Beirut during the year
under review.
The Information Post at Kalimpong was finally wound up on 30
April 1963.
As a result of a re-examination of Indian publicity needs, posts
of Public Relations Officers/Press Attaches/Assistant Press Attaches
at Kalimpong, New York, Trinidad, Khartoum and Jeddah were
transferred to Hong-Kong, Headquarters of the External Publicity
Division, Dar-es-Salaam and Kampala.
The post of Public Relations Officer at Washington was transferred to Kuala Lampur and the post of Assistant Press Attache, Kaula
Lumpur, to Washington.
A temporary post, of Counsellor/(Information) was created in
the Information Service of India, London, in the Senior Scale of the
Indian Foreign Service against the existing post of Public Relations
Officer. The change-over is intended to take plaee as soon as the present Public Relations Officer relinquishes charge.
The Information Service of India Libraries and Reading Rooms
at Rajshahi and Dacca (East Pakistan) had to be closed down at
the instance of the Government of Pakistan.
<pg71>
The local staff at Jeddah which was to be retrenched with the
transfer of the post of Assistant Press Attache from Jeddah to Kampala has been retained for publicity work.
(x) Budget.-The total budgetary provision for the External

Publicity Division including Information Units abroad amounts to
Rs. 1,05,06,500 (This amount does not, however, include the budget
provisions of about 12 Information Units which is included in the
budget provision of the Missions concerned as a whole). Of this
amount, Rs. 28,15,900 is for expenditure at Headquarters.
With the existing budget, External Publicity Division runs 53
separate Information Units and provides Information Service to, all
Indian Missions and Posts abroad.
I. MISCELLANEOUS
(i) Central Passport and Emigration Organisation-Policy.The following major passport policy decisions were taken during the
year:-(1) With effect from 1 August 1963, a new series of Emergency Certificates in Hindi-English was brought into use in Indian
Diplomatic and Consular Missions abroad, replacing the unilingual
Emergency Certificates. (2) With effect from 1 October 1963, a new
series of bilingual Identity Certificates in Hindi-English was introduced in the Offices of Passport Issuing Authorities in India in replacement of the unilingual series. (3) The requirements and implications of the Commonwealth Immigrants' Act, 1962, continued to be
taken into account while issuing passports to persons going to the
United Kingdom for purposes of employment. (4) Functions relating to the grant of Indian International passports and-other travel
documents to residents of Pondicherry, Karaikal, Yanam and Mahe
were transferred from the Chief Commissioner, Pondicherry, to the
Regional Passport and Emigration Officer, Madras, with effect from
15 March 1963. (5) To prevent misuse of passports by change of
the photograph of the passport holder, it was decided to bring into
use the eyeletting of passport photographs. Eyeletting machines
were purchased from the United Kingdom. The innovation came
into force from 15 July 1963, in Delhi and from 10 August 1963, in
Madras Offices as an experimental measure. It is proposed to equip
the Calcutta, Bombay and Lucknow offices with similar machines in
the near future.
On 1 January 1963, there were 2218 applications pending decision
in the Regional Passport Offices in India.
<pg72>
The following is the position of applications for passports during
the period January to December 1963:
--------------------------------------------------------------------------Regional Passport Offices No. of Fresh Number of Number of
Applications Passports Applications of Cases
received
granted rejected
closed
--------------------------------------------------------------------------(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------Delhi
21,909
15,832
189
5,770

Number

Bombay
15,813
14,867
579
743
Madras
12,828
12,081
115
1,099
Calcuta
5,056
4,716
72
1,250
Lucknow
2,530
2,172
49
366
--------------------------------------------------------------------------Total
58,136
49,668
1,004
9,228**
--------------------------------------------------------------------------The following are the statistics of passport work directly performed at the Headquarters of the Ministry during the period January
to December 1963:A. Number of Passports issued by the Ministry:(1) Diplomatic passports
381
(2) Official passports
2,657
(3) Indo-Pakistan passports
110
(4) Emergency Certificates
11
B. Number of Passports serviced;(1) Diplomatic passports
(2.) Official passports
(3) Indo-Pakistan passports
C. Number of Visas issued for foreigners

161
850
28
2969

Stringent measures were taken to counteract and check-mate the
activities of passport racketeers. Several cases of the use of forged
passports were detected. The Special Police Establishment did a
commendable job in bringing the culprits to book.
Emigration.-The Indian Emigration (Amendment) Act, 1963,
(No. 23 of 1963) which extends the provisions of the Principal Act
to journeys by air and prescribes more severe penalties for illicit
emigration was passed by Parliament and received the assent of the
President. The new Act came into force from 1 January 1964.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------(**The closed cases are re-opened as soon as the information/documents cal
led for
is/are received.)
<pg73>
Despite the counteracting measures taken by the Government of
India, illicit emigration to Ceylon from the coastal areas of Madras
continued, though in a much smaller scale. The statistics of deportees from Ceylon arriving at Dhanushkodi were as follows:
--------------------------------------------------------------------------Month
Number
Month
Number
--------------------------------------------------------------------------January
145
July
190

February

77

August

March

188

September

April

75

May

147

November

June

146

December.

October

98
165
197
224
227

--------------------------------------------------------------------------During the year, 2,268 agreements of skilled workers were registered under Section 18 of the Indian Emigration Act, 1922 with the
different Protectors of Emigrants. The figures regionwise are as
under: --------------------------------------------------------------------------Protector of Emigrants, Bombay
1,980
Protector of Emigrants, Calcutta
49
Protector of Emigrants, Madras
215
Protector of Emigrants, Nagapattinam
18
Protector of Emigrants, Mandapam Camp
6
-----Total
2.268
--------------------------------------------------------------------------Administration.-The Regional Passport Office, Calcutta, was
inspected by the Joint Secretary and Controller General of Emigration. Other Regional Passport Offices were inspected by the Chief
Passport Officer during the year. Emigration Establishments in the
Madras State were inspected by the Deputy Secretary in charge of
the Southern Division of the Ministry besides the Chief Passport
Officer. The Re-organisation Unit team of the Ministry conducted
an on-the-spot work-study of the Regional Passport Office, Lucknow,
about the end of the last year. In accordance with their recommendations, one post of Lower Division Clerk and another of Superintendent at Lucknow were abolished during the year.
As an anti-corruption measure and to ensure prompt service to
the public, a system of surprise checks, every three months, of the
work of the dealing hands was introduced in all the Regional Passport Offices this year.
<pg74>
It was decided to absorb in the Central Passport and Emigration
Organization the surplus locally recruited Indian clerical staff of the
Indian Missions in East Pakistan.
Promotions and confirmations of officers and staff of the various
grades of the Central Passport and Emigration Organisation were
done according to the recommendations of the Departmental Promo-

tion Committees.
(ii) Haj.-As usual, the Government of India made necessary
arrangements to facilitate the Haj pilgrimage in Saudi Arabia by
Indian Muslims. 15,000 pilgrims went to Saudi Arabia for the Haj
pilgrimage from India in 1963. India was third among the countries
from where the largest number of pilgrims went for the Haj. Besides other facilities, each pilgrim was permitted foreign exchange
to the extent of Rs. 1,000 for his expenses in Saudi Arabia. A special medical team, consisting of 4 doctors (including a lady doctor)
and four compounders (including a lady compounder), was sent to
Saudi Arabia to render medical assistance to the Haj pilgrims in
that country. This medical team was in addition to the permanent
Indian dispensary at Mecca and the dispensary set up at Jeddah
during the Haj season every year. Adequate quantities of medicines
were also sent from India to Saudi Arabia for the use of the medical
team for rendering medical aid to the pilgrims.
Apart from the Embassy of India, Jeddah, which rendered every
assistance to the pilgrims, a batch of five volunteers was also sent by
the Port Haj Committee, Bombay, to look after the welfare of Indian
pilgrims.
The term of the Central Haj Committee, originally constituted
in 1948 to advise the Central Government on matters relating to the
Haj pilgrimage, was extended for another year. This Committee
rendered valuable advice to the Government in respect of the Haj
pilgrimage.
Pilgrimage to Iraq and Iran.-700 pilgrims went on pilgrimage to
Iraq and Iran during the year under report. Each pilgrim was permitted foreign exchange worth Rs. 700.
(iii) Legal and Treaties Division.-The editing of the volumes of
treaties since 1947 (up to date) is in hand and will soon be published
year-wise. In addition to the above, the Division has also prepared
briefs on legal items for the 18th session of the General Assembly
of the United Nations.
(iv) Consular Division.-The work relating to the compilation of
the Consular Manual is in progress. Certain chapters on subjects
with which other Ministries are concerned could not be finalised
<pg75>
for want of their comments. However, every effort is being made
to complete the work as early as possible.
45 letters of request and commissions for examination of witnesses
abroad and vice-versa were forwarded to the authorities concerned
after due scrutiny. Similarly, 15 maintenance orders and an equal
number of summonses and other processes were sent for execution
or service abroad and vice versa.

The proposal for reciprocal arrangements, under section 29(c)
of the Civil Procedure Code, 1908, for service of summonses and
other processes with Argentina was dropped for want of reciprocity.
The cases relating to similar arrangements with Nepal, France,
Spain, Thailand and New Zealand could not be finalised for want
of final replies from the Governments concerned. Similar arrangements with the Soviet Union, the United Arab Republic, Canada,
Hong Kong, Belgium, Japan, West Germany and Switzerland are
pending as the Ministry of Law did not receive replies from the
various High Courts about the amendment of the relevant rules in
the Code of Civil Procedure for enabling such summonses being sent
abroad by our Courts through Diplomatic channel.
Cases relating to reciprocal arrangements for execution of
decrees, under section 44A of the Code of Civil Procedure, with
Japan and Trinidad and Tobago are pending for want of final
replies from the Governments concerned. Proposal to have similar
arrangements with Kenya was not agreed to as the relevant laws
in that country do not afford sufficient reciprocity.
Negotiations for reciprocal arrangements, under section 504(3)
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, were completed with Ghana and
Fiji and notifications declaring these countries as reciprocating
territories for the purposes of the aforesaid section were issued.
Proposal to have similar arrangements with Central African Federation has been deferred until the implementation of the impending constitutional changes in that Federation. The cases in regard to
similar arrangements with Nepal, West Germany, Nigeria, Liberia,
Czechoslovakia, the United Arab Republic, Gambia, Sierra Leone,
Swaziland and the Federal Republic of Cameroons are under correspondence.
337 Commercial and Judicial documents including Powers of
Attorney and Birth, Death, Marriages and Educational certificates
etc. were attested for use in foreign countries.
The proposal to have reciprocal arrangements, under section 14
of the Notaries Act, 1952, for recognition of notarial. acts with the
<pg76>
Netherlands, Lebanon, Poland and the Sudan was dropped as the
laws in these countries do not afford reciprocity. Cases relating to
similar arrangements with some other countries are being pursued.
On a reference received from the Commission of India, Hong
Kong, that the Certificates of Origin issued by the Indian Chamber
of Commerce, Hong Kong, were not being accepted by certain
countries who are signatories to the International Convention Relating to The Simplification of Customs Formalities, 1923, even though
the Government of Hong Kong had designated that Chamber as
competent to issue such Certificates of Origin in accordance with
the provisions of that Convention, the matter was taken up with

the countries concerned through the Indian Missions. As a result
of these efforts, the Government of Sweden have agreed to accept
such Certificates issued by the above Chamber. The replies from
other Governments are awaited.
Negotiations for reciprocal arrangements for execution of Maintenance Order, under Maintenance Orders Enforcement Act, 1921,
with West Germany have been dropped as the West German Government do not consider it opportune to enter into such arrangements since the number of recognition and execution of Court decision in respective countries is insignificant. They also added that
they were observing further development of relevant statistics and
would consider the question of signing such an agreement whenever
necessary. A similar arrangement with the Government of the
U.S.A. is under correspondence.
83 cases of estates and properties of Indians abroad and 16 such
cases relating to foreigners in respect of their properties in India
were dealt with during the period under review.
The cases relating to revision of existing arrangements with
Thailand, Argentina, Iran and Costa-Rica, under section 56 of the
Administrator General's Act, 1913, for administration of properties
of deceased Indian nationals dying intestate, by Indian Diplomatic
and Consular Officers in those countries are being pursued further.
Negotiations for reciprocal arrangements, under the provision of
the enactments referred to in the preceeding paragraph, with
Denmark were dropped for want of reciprocity. A proposal for
making similar arrangements, made by the Government of Yugoslovia, has not been pursued further by that Government.
During the period under reference, 16 persons were repatriated
from foreign countries by various Indian Missions at public expense at a total cost of Rs,. 27,616.45. Efforts to make recoveries of
<pg77>
this amount through the State Governments concerned are in progress. Out of the amount so advanced, a sum of Rs. 6,606.66 has
been recovered. Out of the amount advanced in previous years, a
sum of Rs. 2,594.64 has been written off on the recommendations
of the State Governments because of the indigent circumstances
of the repatriates or on account of their whereabouts not being
traceable.
A total amount of Rs. 7,485.47 was advanced from public funds
to 30 Indian citizens to enable them to tide over temporary financial difficulties which arose due to unforseen circumstances such as
theft, illness, delay in the departure of ships or their travellers'
cheques not being endorsed for the country where they were
stranded. A sum of Rs. 1,475.80 has since been recovered from the
persons concerned.

The new Extradition Act, 1962 came into force on 5 January 1963.
In all, 50 cases relating to extradition of offenders from or to India,
trial of citizens of India for offence committed abroad and trial of
foreigners in the country of their nationality for offences committed
in India were dealt with in the Section. In addition, 34 cases of
deportation of Indian citizens from other countries were also dealt
with.
A number of cases for the grant of Indian citizenship, referred
by the Ministry of Home Affairs, were returned to them with comments of this Ministry. Besides, 76 references on this subject received from Indian Missions abroad, foreign Missions in India,
etc. were replied to. These included requests received from persons
of Goan origin who failed to surrender their foreign passports within the prescribed time limit for being recognised as Indian citizens.
66 cases relating to queries in regard to the laws on marriages,
divorces and adoption of Indian children by foreigners were dealt
with.
74 cases of death of foreigners in India were reported to the
foreign Missions concerned. In addition, 62 cases of death reports
were sent to the foreign Missions concerned, by the State Governments direct.
15 cases relating to remittance facilities from or to India were
also dealt with. About 193 cases, relating to whereabouts of Indians
abroad and foreigners in India, complaints from abroad against individuals and firms in India and vice versa, recovery of outstanding
dues from Indians abroad, criminal proceedings against Indians and
assistance to Indians in miscellaneous matters, such as obtaining of
entry permits, were also handled.
<pg78>
47 cases relating to settlement of claims of Indian citizens for
pay, pension and gratuity against foreign Governments were received and pursued with the Governments concerned.
During the period under review, several officers and staff who
were either fresh appointees or who had not handled consular work
in Missions/Posts abroad previously were imparted necessary training in consular matters.
In pursuance of the decision taken that irrecoverable amounts
against the advances granted to the evacuees from Burma, Malaya
etc. under the scheme of financial assistance to evacuees from war
zones during 1942-47 should not be written off in bulk but individual cases should be examined on merits, the work relating to
recovery of such advances was pursued further. For this reason
and in view of the fact that some of the evacuees continue to repay
the advances, no time limit for completing the work, as suggested

by the Public Accounts Committee, has been fixed. However, in
order to keep the expenditure in connection with this work to the
minimum, one post of Superintendent (Gazetted) and one post of
Upper Division Clerk in the Regional Passport Office, Calcutta, and
9 posts of various categories of staff on Local cadre in the Indian
Embassy, Rangoon, sanctioned for the purpose were abolished. The
following steps have been taken to bring the outstanding balance
of these advances to the minimum:(a) The recommendations of the two officers of the Central
Government, one representing the Ministry of Finance
and the other the Ministry of External Affairs, who visited all the States concerned during the years 1959-62, to
write off or to effect recovery of these advances are being
implemented.
(b) In addition to enhanced powers to write off irrecoverable
advances upto Rs. 5,000/- in each case delegated to the
State Governments last year, similar enhanced powers
were delegated to the Indian Missions in Rangoon, Kuala
Lumpur and Singapore.
(c) As a result of the Government of Burma's agreement to
accept the debits raised against them upto 31 March 1961,
an amount of Rs. 24.12 lakhs, in respect of the expenditure incurred by the Government of India an evacuees for
which that Government had accepted responsibility, is
likely to be settled. Out of this amount, approximately
Rs. 3-52 lakhs have already been adjusted. A further
debit amounting to Rs. 97,306:64, raised by the Ac<pg79>
countant General, Madras, has also been accepted by
the Accountant General, Burma, during the current financial year. Action to have the remaining amount adjusted
is being pursued.
A clear picture about the recoveries made and amounts written
off is not yet known as reports called for from the State Governments in this regard have not been received. The matter is being
pursued further.
The consular activities of the Indian Missions abroad are covered by work dealt with in the Consular Section. However, figures
relating to important consular items handled by the Missions
are given below:1. Number of cases relating to estates of deceased Indians abroad
handled
374
2. Number of passports, visas and emergency certificates
issued :-

(a) Passport
(b) Visas
(c) Emergency certificate

32,762
2,12,221
10,668

3. Total revenue from the consular services rendered. Rs. 15,43,266.87 nP.
4. Total number of Indians repatriated and amount spent on
them :
(i) Number

39(*)
(**)
Rs. 11,616.50 nP.

(ii) Amount

5. Number of Indian citizens stranded abroad to whom financial
assistance was granted and the amount of such assistance :(i) Number
(ii) Amount

41(***)
Rs. 9,386.98 nP.
(****)
6. Number of deportation cases handled

87

Generally, Missions assisted Indian nationals in respect of several
matters connected with their stay abroad. Besides, some of the
Missions rendered assistance to Indian sea men engaged on ships,
under the Indian Article of Agreement, in settling their disputes
with the shipowners.
(v) Economic and Co-ordination Division.-The Division continued to play an advisory role in such matters as trade agreements,
--------------------------------------------------------------------------(*) Figures from 1-1-1963 to 31-12-1963 based on reports from 64 Missions o
nly.
(**) A number of persons were repatriated for which finances were provided f
or by the
local Indian Associations.
(***) Some of the Missions, other than 64 referred to above have also incurre
d some
expenditure on this account.
(****) A few persons were given financial assistance by the local Indian Assoc
iations
etc.
162 M of EA-6.
<pg80>
credit and payments agreements, foreign aid negotiations, technical
agreements, air and shipping agreements and matters relating
specially to the foreign trade of India through its association with

the activities of the Board of, Trade, the Import and Export Promotion Advisory Council and the Institute of Foreign Trade. The
Division was closely associated with the preparation of briefs for
the Colombo Plan Consultative Committee and with the deliberations regarding the forthcoming United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development. The Joint Secretary in charge of the
Division was included in the Indian delegation to the Ministerial
Conference on Asian Economic Co-operation held at Manila from
December to 6 December 1963.
Within the Ministry, the Division was actively associated with
the preparation of briefs, background papers and inter-Ministerial
discussions connected with the Conference of the Heads of Indian
Missions in South East Asia held from 27 to 30 May and of the
Heads of Indian Missions in West Asia and Africa held from 8-13
November 1963. Following the Conference in May, a high level
Inter-Ministerial Committee and a Study Group have been set up
to consider economic questions having an important bearing on
foreign policy.
The functions of the Division in respect of technical assistance
assumed greater importance because of the increasing emphasis
which was laid on the need and desirability of offering technical
assistance to the emerging countries of Africa and West Asia during the Conference of Heads of Indian Missions in West Asia and
Africa. Even before the Conference, with a view to stream-lining
the procedure for the processing of requests for deputation of Indian
personnel for service in Africa and West Asia, the Ministry of Home
Affairs, at the request of the Ministry, set up a cell for the preparation of panels of names of suitable persons who are available for
assignments abroad. The Ministry of Home Affairs have been given
a list of the various categories of Indian experts required. The
Division, apart from taking action on the decisions arrived at in this
regard at the above Conferences, has also followed up the recommendations and decisions in regard to technical and economic cooperation.
In view of the increasing load of work and the frequency of
inter-Ministerial meetings and conferences and discussions with
foreign delegations, with which the Division has necessarily to associate itself, it was found necessary to strengthen the Division by
the addition of a Deputy Secretary (part-time). He has since
<pg81>
been replaced by an Under Secretary. An additional post of Senior
Research Officer has also been created but it remains to be filled.
Some increases in the ministerial staff have also been made.
(vi) Diplomatic Missions and Consular Posts in India.-At the
end of the period under review, there were 51 Embassies, 10 High
Commissions, and 4 Legations, including the Apostolic Internunciature. During the period under review, diplomatic relations were

established with the Republic of Peru. A list of the diplomatic
Missions in India and a list of the sub-offices of the High Commissions of the Commonwealth countries are given at Appendix III.
A consular Agency of Italy was opened at Cochin, bringing the
total number of foreign Consular Posts to Ill. The status of the
Consulate of Italy in Bombay was raised to that of a ConsulateGeneral. The following new Consular Offices were opened:
(1) Consulate-General (Honorary) of Philippines at Calcutta.
(2) Consulate (Honorary of Finland at Madras
During the period under review the Swiss Consular Agency
(Honorary) at Madras was closed down.
(vii) Distinguished visitors from abroad.-Among the distinguished visitors to India from January to December 1963 were four
Heads of State, six Heads of Government and two Vice-Presidents.
The list of distinguished visitors for the period January to December 1963 is as follows:The Hon'ble Sirimavo R. D. Bandarnaike, Prime Minister of
Ceylon (10 to 15 January 1963); H.E. Mr. Ali Sabry, President of the
Executive Council of the United Arab Republic (12 to 14 January
1963); H.E. Mr. Kofi Asante Ofori Atta, Minister of Justice of Ghana
113 to 15 January 1963); H.E. Mr. Z. A. Bhutto, Minister for Industries
and Natural Resources of Pakistan (15 to 19 January 1963); H.E. Mr.
Raschid Karame, Prime Minister of Lebanan (15 to 25 January 1963);
His Majesty the King of Nepal (16 to 27 January 1963); H.E. Mr. Sam
P. C. Fernando, Minister of Justice of Ceylon (17 to 18 January
1963); H.E. Mr. Adam Rapacki, Foreign Minister of Poland (19to
26 January 1963); The Soviet Cosmonaut Major Nikolaev (20 January 1963); H.E. Mr. J. S. Kasambala, Tanganyikan Minister for Community Development and Co-operation (21 January to 3 February
1963); Shri Jigmie Dorji, Prime Minister of Bhutan (22 to 25 January 1963); H.R.H. Prince Norodom Sihanouk, Head of the Kingdom
of Cambodia (24 January to 8 February 1963); H.E. Dr. Subandrio,
Foreign Minister of Indonesia (29 January to 2 February 1963);
Their Majesties King Paul and Queen Frederica of the Hellenes (2
to 14 February, 1963); H.E. Lt. Gen. Seyed Sadegh Amir-Azizi;
<pg82>
Minister of Interior, Government of Iran (10 to 18 February 1963);
The Hon'ble Sir Adetoukunbo Ademola, Chief Justice of Nigeria,
accompanied by Lady Ademola (10 to 27 February 1963); H.M. Sri
Savang Vatthana, the King of Laos (in transit-11 February 1963);
H.E. Mr. Emmanuel Pelaez, Vice-President of the Philippines (in
transit); H.E. Mr. Gancho Ganev, Minister of Education and Culture,
People's Republic of Bulgaria (18 to 26 February 1963); Dr. W. W.
Schuetz, Chairman of the Kuratorium Unteilbares Deutzchland (25February to 5 March 1963); H.E. Dr. Fazil Kutchuk Vice-President
of the Republic of Cyprus (7 to 16 March 1963); H.R.H Limar-e-Ala

Marshal Sardar Shah Wali of Afghanistan accompanied by H.R.H.
Princess Bilqis and H.R.H. Sardar Abdul Wali(12 March to 1 April
1963); H.E. Sardar Fakher Hekmat, Speaker of the Majlis of Iran,
(14 to 17 March 1963); H.E. Mr. Abdul Razzaq Rizouki, Permanent
Observer of Kuwait at the United Nations and Envoy Plenipotentiary (19 to 30 March 1963); Marshal R. Y. Malinovsky, DefenceMinister of the Soviet Union (in transit-24 March 1963); His.Majesty Sri Savang Vatthana, King of Laos (27 to 30 March 1963);
H.E. Dr. Muguel Aleman, former President of Mexico (4 to 8 April
1963); H.E. Prof. Dr. Walter Hallstein, President, European Economic Commission (5 to 13 April 1963); H.E. Mr. Ali Gerard Jama,
Somali Minister of Agriculture (5 to 21 April 1963); H.E. Mr.
Thanat Khoman, Foreign Minister of Thailand (14 to 17 April
1963); H.E. Dr. M. N. Hashad, U.A.R. Minister of Agriculture (15 to
18 April 1963); Maharajkumar of Sikkim accompanied by Maharajkumarani of Sikkim (15 to 18 April 1963); H.E. Mr. Haji Mohamed
Khir Johari, Minister of Agriculture and Co-operatives, Federation
of Malaya (16 to 19 April 1963); Earl of Lytton and Lady Lytton of
the United Kingdom (20 to 26 April 1963); H.E. MR. Ali Sabry, President of the Executive Council of the United Arab Republic (26 to.
28 April 1963); Admiral of the Fleet the Earl Mountbatten of Burma(29 April to 3 May 1963); Mr. Dean Rusk, Secretary of State of the
U.S.A (1 to 3 May 1963); Rt. Hon. Duncan Sandys, British Secretary
of State for Commonwealth Relations (1 to 5 May 1963); Mr. J. R.
Jayawardene, Deputy Leader of the United National Party of
Ceylon accompanied by Mrs. Jayawardene (11 to 15 May 1963);
British Labour Party Delegation led by Mr. John Strachey (12 to
20 May 1963); The Hon'ble Mr. Z.A. Bhutto, Leader of the Pakistan Delegation (14 to 17 May 1963); H.E. Mr. Jacques Rebemanjara, Minister of State and National Economy of Madagascar (14 to
17 May 1963); Mr. C. C. Mojekwu, Federal Public Service Commissioner of Nigeria (21 to 23 May 1963); The Hon'ble Mr. Fairhall,
Minister of Supply of Australia (29 May to 2 June 1963); Their Highnesses the Sultan and Sultanah of Kedah (Federation of Malaya)
(4 to 6 June 1963); H.E. Mr. Louis Ignacio-Pinto, Ambassador of the
<pg83>
Republic of Dahomey to the United Nations and Mrs. Ignacio-Pinto(12 to 15 June 1963); Mr. Sinan Korle, Deputy Chief of Protocol of
the United Nations accompanied by Mr. Korle (21 to 22 June 1963)
Nepalese Trade Delegation (24 July to 4 August 1963); Bhutanese
Prime Minister, (31 July to 4 August 1963); H.E. Mr. J. Heffron,
Prime Minister of New South Wales, (5 to 9 August 1963); H.E. the
Prime Minister of the Somali Republic (12 to 15 August 1963); H.E.
W. Wurie, Education Minister of Sierra Leone, (17 to 21 August
1963; Nigerian Federal Public Service Commission Delegation (27
to 31 August 1963); His Majesty the King of Nepal (27 August to
9 September 1963); Hon'ble H.R. Vaghjee, Speaker of the Mauritius
Legislative Council (5 to 10 September 1963); H.E. Mr. Vu
Van Mau, Foreign Minister of the Republic of Vietnam (8
to 15 September 1963): Bulgarian Government Economic Delegation led by H.E. Mr. Zhivko Zhivkov, First Deputy Chair-

man of the Council I of Ministers, People's Republic of Bulgaria, (7 to 12 September 1963); Dr. Y. P. Pant, Finance Secretary
of Nepal (15 to 23 September 1963); Hon'ble G. Dickson Thomson,
Minister of Social Welfare of Sierra Leone, (16 to 22 September
1963); Dato Abdul Jamil, Secretary to the Treasury, Malaysia (18
to 22 September 1963); H.E. Mr. Anwar Salamah, the United Arab
Republic Minister of Labour, (18 to 21 September 1963); H.E. Mr.
Baddiuddin Mahmud, Minister of Health, Government of Ceylon
(19 to 27 September 1963); H.E. Mr. Ionescu Nicolae, Deputy Minister of Oil and Chemistry of the People's Republic of Rumania, (21
to 27 September 1963); Mr. Browne-Marke, Principal Private Secretary to H.E. the Governor General of the Federation of Nigeria
(22 to 26 September 1963); Mr. Brooks Mandell, Director, People for
People's Programme, New York (22 September to 3 November 1963);
H.E. Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, Algerian Ambassador to the U.A.R. (2
to 4 October 1963); His Majesty the King of Nepal (4 to 11 October
1963); Her Majesty Queen Juliana of the Netherlands (Transit visit14/15 October 1963); H.E. Mr. Gerard Montano, Minister of Works
of the Trinidad Government (15 to 19 October 1963); H.E. Senator
Luis A. Samoza, former President of the Republic of Nicaragua, (23
to 25 October 1963); H.E. Dr. Heinrich Luebke, President of the
Federal Republic of Germany (Transit visit-27/28 October 1963);
Chief the Hon'ble J.M. Johnson, Minister of Labour, Government
of Nigeria (1 to 14 November 1963); H.E. Dr. Brune Kreisky, Foreign
Minister of Austria (4 to 12 November 1963); Mr. Hugh Fernando,
Deputy Speaker of Ceylon House of Representatives (5 to 18 November 1963); H.R.H. Princess Margrathe of Denmark (Un-official
visit-6 to 17 November 1963); Mr. Edgar Faure, former Prime
Minister of France (6 to 20 November 1963); Soviet Cosmonauts
Valentina Tareshkova Nikolaeva, Lt. Col. A. G. Nikolaev and
<pg84>
Lt. Col. V. F. Bykovsky accompanied by Mrs. Bykovsky (10to 23November 1963); Chief D. A. Ogunleye of Nigeria (11 to 13 November
1963), H.E. Mr. M. A. Abdo, Minister for Local Government, Government of Aden (11 to 23 November 1963); H.E. Mr. A. A. Ojera,
Minister of Community and Labour of Uganda (12 to 21 November
1963); H.E . Aft. Habib Bourgiba Jr., Tunisian Ambassador in theU.S.A. accompanied by Mrs. Bourgiba (18 to 21 November 1963); M.
Mendes France, former Prime Minister of France (20 November to8 December 1963); Mr. J. D. Weerasekara, M.P. Ceylon House of Representatives accompanied by Mrs. Weerasekara (23 to 30 November
1963); H.M. the king of Jordan (3 to 16 December 1963); Premier
of the Northern Region of the Federal Republic of Nigeria (6 to 19December 1963); Lord Denning, Master of Rolls of United Kingdom
accompanied by Lady Denning (13 to 24 December 1963); and H.E.
Mr. A. P. Jayasuriya, Minister of Home Affairs and Local Government, Government of Ceylon (14 to 21 December 1963); Mr. Abdul
Rehman Al Attiqi, Permanent Under Secretary of Kuwait (16 tow
19 December 1963).

INDIA
BHUTAN SRI LANKA USA RUSSIA AFGHANISTAN PERU BURMA CHINA NEPAL PAKISTAN
LATVIA BANGLADESH MALI CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC AUSTRALIA NEW ZEALAND
INDONESIA LAOS SWITZERLAND VIETNAM CAMBODIA MALAYSIA REPUBLIC OF SINGAPORE
UNITED KINGDOM PHILIPPINES OMAN THAILAND TOTO GHANA JAPAN KOREA MONGOLIA
IRAN ETHIOPIA SUDAN KENYA IRAQ JORDAN KUWAIT LEBANON SAUDI ARABIA SYRIA
YEMEN EGYPT FRANCE LIBYA TUNISIA MOROCCO ALGERIA NIGER NIGERIA CONGO
SOMALIA SOUTH AFRICA AUSTRIA BELGIUM BULGARIA CYPRUS DENMARK GERMANY
ITALY FINLAND GREECE HUNGARY IRELAND THE NETHERLANDS NORWAY SPAIN ANGOLA
PORTUGAL SWEDEN YUGOSLAVIA CANADA ARGENTINA BOLIVIA BRAZIL CHILE COLOMBIA
CUBA MEXICO PANAMA PARAGUAY VENEZUELA JAMAICA TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
SLOVAKIA UGANDA HONG KONG FIJI LIBERIA SIERRA LEONE CAMEROON SWAZILAND
POLAND MADAGASCAR MAURITIUS NICARAGUA
Mar 07, 1963

A. United Nations
PART III
A. UNITED NATIONS
(i) The Eighteenth Session of the General Assembly opened in
New York on Sep 17, 1963 and ended on 17 December 1963.
(ii) Admission of New Members.-With the admission of Kuwait,
Zanzibar and Kenya, the total membership of the United Nations rose
to 113.
(iii) General Assembly.-Following were some of the important
matters on the agenda of the current session of the Assembly:(a) Security Council election,-There were three vacancies of
non-permanent seats. Due to the retirement of Ghana, the
Philippines and Venezuela, Ivory Coast and Bolivia were elected to
the Security Council for two years. As no decision could be reached
on the third vacant seat, Czechoslovakia and Malaysia reached an
informal agreement among themselves to divide the two-year term.
Czechoslovakia will hold the seat initially and resign in favour of
Malaysia at the end of 1964.
(b) Election to the International Court of Justice.-Mexico,
France and the United Kingdom were re-elected to the International
Court of Justice for a nine-year term commencing on 5 February 1964.
Pakistan and Senegal were elected in place of Panama and Argentina.
(c) Representation of China-On the initiative of Albania, the
Assembly discussed the question of representation of China. in the

United Nations but rejected the Albanian-Cambodian proposal to replace the representative of the Republic of China (Formosa) by those
of the People's Republic of China.
India voted for the proposal as she supported the principle of
universality in regard to the membership of the United Nations and
believed that it was necessary for China to be represented so that
it became subject to the obligations and discipline of that Organization. During the general debate, the Indian representative, however,
also referred to the invasion mounted by the People's Republic of
China against India, its continued occupation of Indian territory and
its refusal to accept the Colombo proposals and solve differences
with India in a peaceful manner.
<pg85>
<pg86>
(d) Buddhist Question in South Viet-Nam.-At the request of
sixteen countries including India, the Assembly discussed this question and unanimously accepted the former Diem Government's invitation to the United Nations to send a mission to South Viet-Nam to
investigate charges that it was persecuting its Buddhist nationals.
The Government in South Viet-Nam was overthrown while the
Mission was still in South Viet-Nam. The Assembly accordingly
decided to take no further action.
(e) Non-Self-Governing Territories.-The Special Committee of
Seventeen Members (now Twenty-four) set up, by the Assembly at
its Sixteenth Session to examine the application of the Declaration of
the granting of independence to colonial countries and peoples, has
been able to consider the case of more territories. By the end of the
Seventeenth Session of the Assembly it had considered the case of 12
territories. The Committee has submitted its report for 1963 to the
Assembly containing its recommendations.
Acting on the report of the Special Committee of Twenty-four on
the situation with regard to the implementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
the Assembly:
Noted with satisfaction that Malta would attain independence not
later than 31 May 1964;
Invited the United Kingdom, as the administering Power, to work
out with the representatives of the people of Fiji a new constitution
providing for "one man, one vote", and to take immediate steps to
transfer all powers to its population;
Noted with satisfaction that elections for the new legislative council in Northern Rhodesia would be held in January 1964 and requested
the United Kingdom, as the administering Power, in consultation

with the newly elected Government, to fix a date for the territory
independence;
Expressed satisfaction that Nyasaland would attain independence
not later than 6 July 1964;
Requested the United Kingdom, as the administering Power, to
convene immediately a constitutional conference for each of the three
territories of Basutoland, Bechuanaland and Swaziland to devise constitutional arrangements which would lead to general elections and
to immediate independence thereafter, and solemnly warned the
Government of South Africa that any attempt to annex any of the
territories shall be considered an act of aggression;
<pg87>
Called on the United Kingdom, as the administering Power, to fix
without delay a date for the independence of British Guiana in accordance with the wishes of its people; and
Called on the United Kingdom, as the administering Power, to
cease all repressive action against the people of Aden and the Aden
Protectorates, release political prisoners, allow the return of those in
exile, make the necessary constitutional changes to establish a representative organ and Get up a provisional government for the whole
territory, requested the Secretary-General, in consultation with the
Committee of Twenty-four and the administering Power, to arrange
for an effective United Nations presence before and during the general elections, and recommended that talks be held between the government resulting from the elections and the administering Power to
fix a date for independence.
(f) Portuguese Territories.-Following a series of meeting between African and Portuguese representatives, arranged by the Secretary-General, the Assembly noted with "deep regret" Portugal's
continued refusal to implement resolutions on its territories. It called
on the Security Council to give effect to its own decisions, particularly
those dealing with the requirement of Portugal's recognition of the
right of the people in the territories to self-determination and independence.
The Security Council on 13 December 1963, called on Portugal to
Show evidence of its good faith by granting amnesty to persons imprisoned or exiled for advocating self-determination, and asked all
states not to provide Portugal with military assistance to be used for
the "repression" of the people in its territories.
(g) South Africa.-The Assembly and the Security Council also
took action with regard to the policies of Apartheid of the Government of South Africa. Two Assembly resolutions appealed to all
states to intensify efforts to dissuade South Africa from pursuing
these policies and continuing with its trials and requested the Secretary-General to find ways to assist persons and their families "perse-

cuted" by the South African Government for opposing Apartheid.
The Security Council, in this connection, unanimously adopted a
resolution calling for the extension of the arms embargo, including
material for the manufacture or maintenance of arms. It requested
a United Nations study of how Apartheid could yield to a new South
African society based on racial equality.
In resolutions relating to the territory of South West Africa, administered by South Africa, the Assembly condemned that Government for its refusal to co-operate in implementing the Declaration on
<pg88>
ending colonialism. The Assembly asked all states not to supply arms,
military equipment, petroleum and petroleum products to South
Africa. Reaffirming the right to self-determination of the people of
South West Africa, the Assembly declared that any attempt by South
Africa to annex the territory would be considered an "act of aggression".
(h) Southern Rhodesia.-The Assembly called on the United,
Kingdom not to transfer sovereignty or armed forces and militarymaterial to the present Government of Southern Rhodesia but to
await the formation of a fully representative government.
In another resolution, the Assembly urged the United Kingdom to,
hold a Constitutional Conference immediately with a view to making,
constitutional arrangements for independence, on the basis of universal adult suffrage, including the fixing of the earliest possible date
for independence.
(i) Question of Oman.-On Oman, the Assembly set up an ad hoccommittee of five members to examine this matter and called on all
parties concerned to co-operate with the Committee, by all possible
means, including facilitating visits to the area.
(j) United Nations Year for International Co-operation.-On 21
November 1963, the General Assembly unanimously decided to designate 1965-the twentieth year of the United Nations-as International Co-operation Year. This item had originally been proposed, by
India in the sixteenth session.
The Assembly adopted a resolution which called upon MemberStates, the Specialised Agencies, the International Atomic EnergyAgency and non-governmental organisations concerned, to designate
1965 as International Co-operation Year to publicize as widely as
possible the activities planned for its observance, and to formulateand make available to the Special Committee their plans for the,
International Co-operation Year.
The resolution recommended that a twelve-member Committee,
appointed by the President of the General Assembly, should be set up,
to prepare for the 1965 activities.

(k) United Nations Emergency Force.-On 17 December 1963,
the General Assembly decided to continue the Special Fund for the
United Nations Emergency Force and to appropriate an amount of
$17,750,000 for the operations of the United Nations Emergency Force
for 1964. It also decided to apportion the amount of $ 2 million.
among all Members States in accordance with the regular scale of
assessment for 1964 and approved a formula for apportioning
<pg89>
$15,750,000 among Member States. Developing countries were to
be given a rebate of 57.5 per cent on their contributions; that is to
say, they would be required to pay 42.5 per cent of their assessed
contributions towards the cost of maintaining the United Nations,
Emergency Force in Gaza.
India has a battalion of troops serving with the United Nations,
Emergency Force in Gaza.
(iv) Economic and Social Council.-India is a member of theUnited Nations Economic and Social Council for the three-year term,
1962-1964. The Council held two sessions during 1963. Its 35th
Session was held at New York in April, 1963, when India was represented by its Permanent Representative to the United Nations.
India was elected to the following functional commissions of the,
Council in the elections held during this Session:-(1) Statistical,
Commission (re-elected for a further term of 4 years from the 1
January 1964). (2) Commission on Narcotic Drugs (re-elected for
a further term of 3 years from 1 January 1964). (3) Commission on
International Commodity Trade (elected for a term of 3 years from 1
January 1964).
The 36th session of the Economic and Social Council was held at
Geneva in July 1963, in which India was represented by Shri R. K.
Nehru, the then Secretary-General of the External Affairs Ministry,
for the first 15 days of the session and thereafter by Shri B. N. Chakravarty, Permanent Representative of India to the United Nations.
The resumed 36th session of the Council was held in New York-in December 1963. In this session, India was elected to the Governing Council of the United Nations Special Fund for a term of one
year.
(v) Commission on Human Rights.-India participated in the
19th session of the Commission on Human Rights held at Geneva in,
March-April 1963.
The 15th anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights was celebrated all over the country on 10 December 1963. A
number of programmes were arranged by Government as well as
non-Government organisations. Special messages were issued on
this occasion by the President and the Prime Minister of India. A

special commemorative stamp of 15 nP denomination, carrying aportrait of the late Mrs. Eleanor Roosevelt, was also brought out by
the Posts and Telegraphs Department on this day.
(vi) Food and Agriculture Organisation.-In the Food and Agriculture Organisation Conference held in Rome in December 1963,
it was ruled with strong Indian support that South Africa "shall no,
<pg90>
longer be invited to participate in any capacity in Food and Agriculture Organisation conferences, meetings, training centres or other
activities in the African Region".
(vii) Disarmament.-The Conference of the Eighteen-Nation
Committee on Disarmament, which began its meetings in Geneva on
14 March 1962, held two sessions during 1963-one from 12 February
to 20 June and the other from 30 July to 31 August. The Conference was since then in recess to enable discussions to be held on
disarmament matters in the forum of the United Nations General
Assembly and was reconvened on 21 January 1964.
1963 opened with bright prospects of an early nuclear test ban
agreement, following an exchange of letters between Chairman
Khrushchev and President Kennedy and discussions between the
three nuclear Powers, viz. the Soviet Union, the United States and
the United Kingdom. An agreement was reached on 25 July on the
draft of a treaty banning nuclear weapons tests in the atmosphere,
in outer space and underwater. The treaty was signed on 5 August
and has since been acceded to by more than 100 States. Among the
countries which have not signed the treaty are France, the People's
Republic of China, Albania, Cuba, Cambodia and the Central African
Republic. The Government of India were among the first to sign
the treaty and urged its extension to cover underground tests.
As in previous years, India inscribed an item on the agenda of
the eighteenth session of the United Nations General Assembly
stressing the urgent need for the suspension of nuclear and thermonuclear tests. The General Assembly adopted a resolution, cosponsored by all the 17 participating Members of the Disarmament
Committee, including India, which calls upon all states to become
parties to the treaty and requests the Disarmament Committee to
achieve the discontinuance of all test explosions, including underground tests.
Discussions took place in the Eighteen-Nation Committee at
Geneva on the various collateral tension-reducing measures suggested by the Soviet Union and Western group of countries. An agreement was reached on 20 June 1963 between the Soviet Union and the
United States on one of the measures proposed by the United States
for the prevention of an accidental war, viz. the establishment of a
direct communications link between Washington and Moscow. This
link was established and became operational on 31 August 1963.

The General Assembly adopted a resolution on the denuclearization of Latin America, which expressed the hope that the Latin
American States would initiate such studies as they deemed appropriate to make the region of Latin America a nuclear-free zone.
<pg91>
Hopes have arisen regarding the possibility of accord being reached
between the Super Powers on the prevention of a further spread of
nuclear weapons and on measures, particularly the establishment of
ground control posts, to reduce the risk of surprise attacks.
In the field of general and complete disarmament, discussions took
place in the Eighteen-Nation Committee on measures to be included
in the first stage of the disarmament programme concerning elimination of nuclear weapons together with their delivery vehicles, reduction of conventional armaments and dismantling of militarybases. Discussions on the subject of nuclear weapons delivery vehicles centred on the Gromyko proposal of 21 September 1962, regarding the retention by the United States and the Soviet Union, exclusively on their own territories, of a strictly limited number of
inter-continental, anti-missile and anti-aircraft missiles until thesecond stage of the disarmament programme. The Soviet Union
made a further concession to the Western position on this question
when the Soviet Foreign Minister announced on 19 September 1963
the Soviet Union's willingness to agree to the concept of a nuclearumbrella and the retention of a limited number of nuclear delivery
vehicles till the third and final stage of the disarmament programmeThe General Assembly, in its resolution on general and complete disarmament, called upon the Eighteen-Nation Disarmament Committee
to resume its negotiations "with energy and determination" to encourage the widening of the areas of agreement on general and complete disarmament and to try to reach agreements on collateral
measures. A resolution on "convening a conference for the purpose
of signing a convention on the prohibition of the use of nuclear and
thermonuclear weapons" requested the Committee of Eighteen top
study urgently the question of such a conference. The General
Assembly also adopted a resolution on conversion to peaceful needs
of the resources released by disarmament, whereby it stressed the
need for undertaking studies of the problems which might arise in
this regard and of the means for dealing with those problems.
(viii) Outer Space.-At the instance of the United Nations Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, its two Sub-Committees,
namely, the Legal Sub-Committee and the Scientific and Technical
Sub-Committee, carried out further studies on aspects of outer space
and held several sessions.
A significant step towards denuclearization of outer space was
taken when the eighteenth session of the General Assembly adopted
on 17 October 1963 a 17-Power resolution banning nuclear weapons
from outer space. This resolution, which was co-sponsored, among

others, by the United States, the Soviet Union and India, welcomed
the joint declaration by the United States and the Soviet Union of
<pg92>
their intention not to orbit or station in outer space any object carrying nuclear weapons or other weapons of mass destruction and called
upon all states to refrain from doing so.
The General Assembly unanimously adopted the two draft resolutions on outer space worked out and submitted to it by the Committee on Outer Space. One of the resolutions, namely, the Declaration of Legal Principles Governing the Activities of States in the
Exploration and Use of Outer Space, expressed the view that the
exploration and use of outer space should be carried out for the
benefit of all mankind, on the basis of equality and in accordance
with international law. It also contained provisions which fix responsibility on states and international organizations which launched
objects into space for damage caused to other States and their
nationals. The second resolution set out guide-lines for international
co-operation in the use of outer space and endorsed the progress reports of the World Meteorological Organization and the International Telecommunication Union an the work done in their respective fields. The resolution also welcomed the establishment at
the request of the Government of India, of a group of 6 scientists to
visit the Sounding Rocket Launching Facility at Thumba, in the
State of Kerala, for advising the United Nations Committee on Outer
Space on the matter of according United Nations sponsorship to the
project.
B. International Conferences
India took part in several conferences held under the aegis of the
United Nations and its Specialised Agencies. Brief reports on Indian
participation in the more important of these conferences will be
found in the Reports of the appropriate operating Ministries.
A list of International Organisations, of which India is a member,
is contained in Appendix VI.
USA
KUWAIT KENYA GHANA BOLIVIA PHILIPPINES VENEZUELA MALAYSIA NORWAY SLOVAKIA
MEXICO FRANCE ARGENTINA PAKISTAN PANAMA SENEGAL ALBANIA CHINA CAMBODIA
INDIA SRI LANKA MALTA FIJI SWAZILAND SOUTH AFRICA PORTUGAL RUSSIA OMAN
SWITZERLAND CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC ITALY CUBA
Sep 17, 1963

Appendix I Indian Missions abroad
Jan 01, 1963
APPENDIX I
(Indian Missions abroad)
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------Embassies
Location
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------1. Afghanistan
Kabul
2. Algeria .

Algiers

3. Argentina

Buenos Aires

4.

Austria

Vienna

5.

Belgium

Brussels

6.

Bolivia

7.

Brazil

8.

Bulgaria

9.

Burma

Concurrently accredited to Paraguay
as Ambassador and Uruguay as
Minister.

Concurrently accredited to Luxembourg as Ambassador.
Ambassador resident
Janeiro, Brazil.

Rio-de-Janeiro

in

Rio-de-

Concurrently accredited to Venzuela
and Bolivia as Ambassador.
Ambassador resident in Belgrade.

Rangoon

10. Cambodia

Phnom Penh

11. Chile

Santiago

Concurrently accredited to Colombia
as Ambassador.

12. China

Peking

13. Colombia

Ambassador
(Chile)

resident in Santiago

14. Congo

Leopoldville

15. Cuba

Havana

Ambassador resident in Mexico.

16. Czechoslovakia

Prague

Concurrently accredited to Rumania
as Ambassador.

17. Denmark.

Copenhagen

18. Ethiopia

Addis Ababa

19. Finland

Helsinki

21. France

Paris

21. Germany

Bonn

22. Greece
23. Hungary

Ambassador resident in

Stockholm

(Sweden).

Ambassador

resident in Belgrade.

Budapest

24. Guinea

Ambassador resident in Accra.

25. Indonesia

Djakarta

26. Iran

Tehran

27. Iraq

Baghdad

28. Ireland

Dublin

Ambassador resident in London.

29. Italy
Albania
as

Rome

Concurrently accredited to

Minister.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg93>
<pg94>
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------Embassies
Location
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------30.

Ivory Coast

31.

Japan

32.

Jordan

33.

Kuwait

Kuwait

34.

Laos

Vientiane

35. Lebanon
Ambassa
-

Ambassador resident in Dakar.
Tokyo
Ambassador resident in Beirut.

Beirut

Ambassador resident in Beirut.

Concurrently accredited as

dor to Jordon and Kuwait and as,
High Commissioner to Cyprus.
36.

Liberia

Ambassador resident in Accra.

37.

Libya

Ambassador resident in Cairo.

38.

Luxembourg

Ambassador resident in Brussels.

39. Malagasy
Consul
-

40.

Tananarive

General to Comores (Re-union
Island).

Mali

Ambassador resident in Accra.

41. Mexico
Amba
s-

Mexico City

42. Morocco
Tunis
ia as.

Rabat

accredited as

Concurrently accredited to
Ambassador.

Mongolia

44.

Nepal

Kathmandu

45.

Netherlands

The Hague

46.

Norway

Oslo

47.

Panama

Ambassador resident in Moscow.

Ambassador resident in Mexico.

48. Paraguay
A
ires.

Montevideo

49.

Philippines

Manila

50.

Poland

Warsaw

51.

Rumania

Bucharest

52.

Saudi Arabia

Jeddah

Volt
a.

Concurrently

sador to Cuba and Panama.

43.

53. Senegal
Amba
ssador

Concurrently accredited as

Dakar

Ambassador resident in Buenos

Ambassador resident in Prague.

Concurrently accredited as
to Ivory Coast and Upper

54.
Lou
is.

Somalia

Mogadiscio

55.

Spain

Madrid

56.

Sudan

Khartoum

Ambassador resident in Port

57. Sweden
Fin
land

Stockholm

58.
th
e

Switzerland

Berne

59.

Syrian Arab
Republic

Damascus

60.

Thailand

Bangkok

61.

Togo

Lome

Ambassador resident in Lagos.

62.

Tunisia

Tunis

Ambassador resident in Rabat.

63. Turkey
64. United Arab
Ambas
saRepublic.

Ankara
Cairo

Concurrendy accredited as

65.

Concurrently

accredited to

as Ambassador.
Concurrently

accredited to

Vatican as Minister.

dor to Libya and Yemen.

Upper Volta

Ambassador resident in Dakar.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg95>
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------Embassies
Location
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------66. Union of Soviet So- Moscow
Concurrently accredited to
Mongo
lia
cialist Republic.
as Ambassador.
67.

United States of
America.

Washington

68.

Venezuela

Caracas

Ambassador

resident in Rio-de-

Janeiro.
69.

Yemen

70. Yugoslavia
Gree
ce

Ambassador
Belgrade

Concurrently

resident in Cairo.
accredited to

and Bulgaria as Ambassador.

High Commissions
1.

Australia

2. British East Africa
Ruan
da

3.

Canada

4. Ceylon
5.
at

Canberra
Nairobi

Concurrently

accredied

to

and Burundi as Consul-General.
Ottawa
(a) Colombo
(b) Kandy

Cyprus (Nicosia)

High

Commissioner

resident

Beirut.
6. Ghana
Guin
ea,

Accra

Concurrently

accredited to

Liberia and Mali as Ambassador
and as High Commissioner
Sierra Leone.

7.

Malayasia

8.

New Zealand

(a) Kuala Lumpur
(b) Singapore

Deputy

o

High Commissioner.

Wellington

9. Nigeria
Amb
assador

Lagos

10. Pakistan

(a) Karachi
(b) Dacca (East Pak)

Concurrently accredited as
to the Republic of Togo.

11. Sierre Leone
in

Deputy High Commissioner.
High

12. Tanganyika

Dar-es-Salaam

13. Trinidad and Tobago
H
igh

Trinidad

Commissioner resident

Accra.
Concurrently

accredited as

Commissioner to Jamaica, as

C
om-

missioner

Guian
a,

to

British

Barbados, Antigua, Gredada,

D
o-

minica, St.

Luci
a, St

Kitts, St.

Vincent, Montserrat, and as

C
onsul-

General to Surinam.

14. Uganda

Kampala

15. United Kingdom
I
reland as

London

Concurrently accredited

to

Ambassador.

Legations
1. Albania
(I
tay).

Minister

2. Uruguay
A
ires.

Minister resident in Buenos

3.

Minister resident in Berne.

Vatican

resident in Rome

Special Missions
1. Bhutan
in
Gang-

Political Officer resident

tok.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg96>
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------Embassies
Location
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------2. Sikkim
Gangtok
3. United Nations
Commissions

New York

1. Aden

Aden

2.

Salisbury

3.

Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland.
Fiji

Suva

4. Hong Kong

Hong Kong

5. Mauritius
Ambass
ador

Mauritius

Concurrently accredited as
to Somalia.

Trade Commission
1. Australia

Sydney

2. British East Africa

Mombasa

3. Canada

Vancouver

4. Bahrein

Trade Agency.

Consulates-General
1. Burundi
Na
irobi.

Consul-General

resident in

2. Denmark

Copenhagen

Hon. Consul-General.

3. Dutch Guiana
T
rini-

Surinam

Consul-General

4.

Germany

(a) Berlin
(b) Frankfurt
(c) Hamburg

5.

Muscat

Muscat

6. Re-Union Island
Tanan
a6A. Republic of San
Rome.

Comores

resident in

dad.

Consul-General resident in
rive.
Consul-General resident in

Marino.
7. Ruanda
Nairo
bi.

Consul-General resident in

8. Surinam
Trini
dad.

Consul-General resident in

9.

Switzerland

Geneva

10.

United States of
America.

(a) New York
(b) San Francisco

11.

Vietnam (North)

Hanoi

12.

Vietnam (South)

Saigon

Consulates
1.

Belgium

Ghent

Hon-Consul

2.

Canary Islands

Las Palmas

Hon-Consul

3.

French Somaliland

Djibouti

Hon-Consul

4.

Germany

(a) Munich
(b) Stuttgart

Hon-Consul
Hon-Consul

5. Greece
Athens
Hon-Consul
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg97>
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------Embassies
Location
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------6. Iran
Khorramshahr
7.

Indonesia

Medan

8.

Iraq

Basra

9.

Japan

Kobe

10. U.S.S.R.

Odessa

11. U.S.A.

(a) Cleveland
(b) Honolulu

Hon-Consul

Vice-Consulates
1.

Afghanistan

(a) jalalabad
(b) Kandhar

2.

Burma

Mandalay

3.

Iran

Zahidan

INDIA
AFGHANISTAN

ALGERIA

ARGENTINA

PARAGUAY

URUGUAY

AUSTRIA

USA

BELGIUM

BOLIVIA BRAZIL BULGARIA YUGOSLAVIA BURMA CAMBODIA CHILE COLOMBIA CHINA
CONGO CUBA MEXICO CZECH REPUBLIC NORWAY SLOVAKIA DENMARK ETHIOPIA
FINLAND SWEDEN FRANCE GERMANY GREECE HUNGARY GHANA GUINEA INDONESIA
IRAN IRAQ IRELAND UNITED KINGDOM ALBANIA ITALY SENEGAL JAPAN JORDAN
LEBANON KUWAIT LAOS CYPRUS LIBERIA EGYPT LIBYA MALI PANAMA MOROCCO
TUNISIA RUSSIA MONGOLIA NEPAL PHILIPPINES POLAND ROMANIA SAUDI ARABIA
SOMALIA SPAIN SUDAN SWITZERLAND SYRIA THAILAND TOTO TURKEY YEMEN
CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC VENEZUELA AUSTRALIA KENYA BURUNDI CANADA SRI
LANKA SIERRA LEONE MALAYSIA REPUBLIC OF SINGAPORE NEW ZEALAND NIGER
NIGERIA PAKISTAN TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO JAMAICA MONTSERRAT UGANDA BHUTAN
FIJI HONG KONG MAURITIUS OMAN VIETNAM DJIBOUTI
Jan 01, 1963

Appendix II Information Units abroad

Jan 01, 1963
APPENDIX II
Indian Information Units abroad
1.

Algiers

28. London

2.

Accra

29.

Manila

3.

Addis Ababa

30.

Moscow

4.

Buenos Aires

31.

New York

5.

Belgrade

32.

New York (Indiadel)

6.

Brussels

33.

Nairobi

7.

Berne

34.

Ottawa

8.

Bonn

35.

Prague

9.

Beirut

36.

Paris

10.

Baghdad

37.

Port Louis

11.

Bangkok

38.

Peking

12.

Cairo

39.

Phnom Penh

13.

Colombo

40.

Rio de Janeiro

14.

Dacca

41.

Rome

15.

Dar-es-Salaam

42.

Rabat

16.

Damascus

43.

Rangoon

17.

Djakarta

44.

San Francisco

18.

Gangtok

45.

Stockholm

19.

Hong Kong

46.

Salisbury

20.

Istanbul

47.

Sydney

21.

Karachi

48.

Tokyo

22.

Khartoum

49.

Tehran

23.

Kampala

50.

Trinidad

24.

Kathmandu

51.

The Hague

25.

Kabul

52.

Washington

26.

Kuala Lumpur

53. Warsaw

27.

Lagos
<pg98>

INDIA
ALGERIA UNITED KINGDOM GHANA PHILIPPINES RUSSIA ETHIOPIA ARGENTINA USA
YUGOSLAVIA BELGIUM KENYA CANADA SWITZERLAND CZECH REPUBLIC GERMANY
FRANCE LEBANON IRAQ MAURITIUS CAMBODIA EGYPT SRI LANKA ITALY MOROCCO
SYRIA INDONESIA SWEDEN HONG KONG AUSTRALIA TURKEY JAPAN PAKISTAN IRAN
SUDAN UGANDA NEPAL AFGHANISTAN MALAYSIA POLAND
Jan 01, 1963

Appendix III Diplomatic Missions in India

Jan 01, 1963
APPENDIX III
Foreign Diplomatic Missions in India
(i) Embassies
1.

Afghanistan

27.

Jordan

2.

Argentina

28.

Laos

3.

Austria

29.

Lebanon

4.

Belgium

30.

Mexico

5.

Bolivia

31.

Mongolia

6.

Brazil

32.

Morocco

7.

Bulgaria

33.

Nepal

8.

Burma

34.

Netherlands

9.

Cambodia

35.

Norway

10. Chile

36.

Philippines

11. China

37.

Poland

12. Colombia

38.

Rumania

13. Cuba

39.

Saudi Arabia

14. Czechoslovakia

40.

Spain

15. Denmark

41.

Sudan

16. Ethiopia

42.

Sweden

17. Finland

43.

Switzerland

18. France

44.

Syria

19. Germany (Federal Republic of)

45.

Thailand

20. Greece

46.

Turkey

21. Hungary

47.

U.A.R.

22. Indonesia

48.

U.S.A.

23. Iran

49.

U.S.S.R.

24. Iraq

50.

Venezuela

25. Italy

51.

Yugoslavia

1. Australia

6.

New Zealand

2. Canada

7.

Nigeria

3. Ceylon

8.

Pakistan

4. Ghana

9.

Tanganyika

26. Japan
(ii) High Commissions

5. Malaysia

10.
<pg99>
<pg100>

U.K.

(iii) Legations
1. Albania (Stationed at Baghdad)
2. Apostolic Internunciature (Holy See)
3. Uruguay
4. Peru
(iv)

Sub-offices of High Commission

1.

Office of the Assistant High Commissioner for Ceylon at Madras.

2

Office of the Ceylon High Commissioner Visa Office at Tiruchirapalli.

3.

Office of the Assistant High Commissioner for Malaysia at Madras.

4.

Office of the Deputy High Commissioner for Pakistan at Calcutta.

5.

Office of the Assistant High Commissioner for Pakistan at Shillong.

6.

Office of the Deputy High Commissioner for U.K. at Bombay.

7.

Office of the Deputy High Commissioner for U.K. at Calcutta.

8.

Office of the Deputy High Commissioner for U.K. at Madras.

9.

Office of High Commissioner for U.K. at Patna.

INDIA
AFGHANISTAN JORDAN ARGENTINA LAOS AUSTRIA LEBANON USA BELGIUM MEXICO
BOLIVIA MONGOLIA BRAZIL MOROCCO BULGARIA NEPAL BURMA CAMBODIA NORWAY
CHILE PHILIPPINES CHINA POLAND COLOMBIA CUBA SAUDI ARABIA SLOVAKIA
SPAIN DENMARK SUDAN ETHIOPIA SWEDEN FINLAND SWITZERLAND FRANCE SYRIA
GERMANY THAILAND GREECE TURKEY HUNGARY INDONESIA IRAN IRAQ VENEZUELA
ITALY YUGOSLAVIA JAPAN AUSTRALIA NEW ZEALAND CANADA NIGER NIGERIA
PAKISTAN GHANA MALAYSIA UNITED KINGDOM ALBANIA URUGUAY PERU
Jan 01, 1963

Appendix IV Foreign Consular Offices in India

Jan 01, 1963
APPENDIX IV
(iv) Foreign Consular Offices in India
--------------------------------------------------------------------------Sl. Country
Location
Status
No.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------1. Afghanistan
Bombay
Consulate-General
2.

Austria

Bombay

Hon. Consulate

3.

Austria

Calcutta

Hon. Consulate

4.

Austria

Madras

Hon. Consulate

5.

Belgium

Bombay

Consulate-General

6.

Belgium

Madras

Hon. Consulate

7.

Belgium

Calcutta

Consulate-General

8.

Bolivia

Calcutta

Hon. Consulate-General

9.

Brazil

Bombay

Consulate (Vacant)

10.

Brazil

Calcutta

Consulate

11.

Burma

Calcutta

Consulate-General

12.

Burma

Madras

Vice-Consulate

13.

Colombia

Calcutta

Hon. Consulate (Vacant)

14.
15.

Costa Rica
Costa Rica

Madras
Bombay

Hon. Consulate-General
Hon. Consulate-General

16.

Cuba

Calcutta

Hon. Consular Agency

17.

Czechoslovakia

Bombay

Consulate-General

18.

Czechoslovakia

Calcutta

Consulate-General

19.

Denmark

Bombay

Hon. Consulate-General

20.

Denmark

Calcutta

Hon. Consulate

21.

Denmark

Cochin

Hon. Consulate

22.

Denmark

Madras

Hon. Consulate

23.

Dominican Republic

Bombay

Hon. Consulate-General

24.

Dominican Republic

Calcutta

Hon. Consulate

25.

Equador

Calcutta

Hon. Consulate

26.

El Salvador

Calcutta

Hon. Consulate

27.

Ethiopia

Bombay

Hon. Consulate

28.

Ethiopia

Calcutta

Hon. Consulate-General

29. Finland
Bombay
Hon. Consulate
--------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg101>

<pg102>
--------------------------------------------------------------------------Sl.
Country
Location
Status
No.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------30. Finland
Calcutta
Hon. Consulate
31.

Finland

Madras

Hon. Consulate

32.

France

Bombay

Consulate-General

33.

France

Calcutta

Consulate-General

34.

France

Cochin

Hon. Consular Agency

35.

France

Madras

Consulate

36.

France

Pondicherry

Consulate-General

37.

Germany

Bombay

Consulate-General

38.

Germany

Calcutta

Consulate-General

39.

Germany

Madras

Consulate

40.

Greece

Bombay

Hon. Consulate-General

41.

Greece

Calcutta

42.

Haiti

Bombay

Hon. Consulate

43.

Haiti

Calcutta

Hon. Consulate

44.

Indonesia

Bombay

Consulate

45.

Indonesia

Calcutta

Consulate

46.

Iran

Bombay

Consulate-General

47. Iran
(Temporari
ly closed)

Calcutta

Consulate-General

48.

Iraq

Bombay

Consulate-General

49.

Israel

Bombay

Consulate

50.

Italy

Bombay

Consulate

51.

Italy

Calcutta

Consulate-General

52. Italy
(Tempor
arily

Madras

Hon. Consular Agency

53.

Bombay

Japan

Hon. Consulate-General

closed)
Consulate-General

54.

Japan

Calcutta

Consulate-General

55.

Japan

Madras

Hon. Consulate-General

56.

Jordan

Bombay

Hon. Consulate. (Vacant)

57.

Kuwait

Bombay

Consulate-General

58.

Liberia

Calcutta

Hon. Consulate

59.

Luxembourg

Bombay

Hon. Vice-Consulate

60.

Monaco

New Delhi

Hon. Consulate-General

61.

Monaco

Bombay

Hon. Consulate (Vacant)

62. Nepal
Calcutta
Consulate-General
--------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg103>
--------------------------------------------------------------------------Sl.
Country
Location
Status
No
--------------------------------------------------------------------------63. Netherlands
Bombay
Consulate-General
64.

Netherlands

Calcutta

Hon. Consulate-General

65.

Netherlands

Cochin

Hon. Consulate (Temporarily closed

66.

Netherlands

Madras

Hon. Consulate

67.

Nicaragua

Bombay

Hon. Consulate

68.

Nicaragua

Calcutta

Hon. Consulate

69.

Norway

Bombay

Consulate-General

70.

Norway

Calcutta

Hon. Consulate-General

71.

Norway

Cochin

Hon. Vice-Consulate

72.

Norway

Madras

Hon. Consulate

73.

Panama

Bombay

Consulate-General

74.

Panama

Madras

Hon.

75.

Panama

Calcutta

Consulate

76.

Peru

Calcutta

Consulate-General

77.

Philippines

Bombay

Hon. Consulate-General

78.

Philippines

Calcutta

Hon. Consulate-General

79.

Poland

Bombay

Consulate

80.

Poland

Calcutta

Consulate

Consulate (Vacant)

81.

Saudi Arabia

Bombay

Consulate-General (Temporarily closed)

82.

Spain

Bombay

Consulate-General

83.

Spain

Calcutta

Hon. Vice-Consulate

84.

Spain

Madras

Hon. Vice-Consulate

85.

Sudan

Bombay

Consulate-General

86.

Sweden

Bombay

Hon. Consulate-General

87.

Sweden

Calcutta

Hon. Consulate

88.

Sweden

Madras

Hon. Consulate

89.

Switzerland

Bombay

Consulate-General

90.

Switzerland

Calcutta

Hon. Consulate

91.

Switzerland

Cochin

Hon. Consular Agency

92.

Syria

Bombay

Consulate-General

93.

Thailand

Calcutta

Consulate-General

94.

Turkey

Bombay

Hon. Consulate-General

95.

Turkey

Calcutta

Hon. Consulate-General

96.

Turkey

Madras

Hon. Consulate-General

97. U.S.S.R
Bombay
Consulate-General
--------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg104>
--------------------------------------------------------------------------Sl.
Country
Location
Status
No.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------98. U.S.S.R.
Calcutta
Consulate-General
99.

U.S.S.R.

Madras

Consulate-General

100. U.A.R.

Bombay

Consulate-General

101. U.A.R.

Calcutta

Consulate-General

102. U.S.A.

Bombay

Consulate-General

103. U.S.A.

Calcutta

Consulate-General

104. U.S.A

Madras

Consulate-General

105. Yugoslavia

Bombay

Consulate-General

106. Yugoslavia

Calcutta

Consulate-General

107. Democratic People's
Republic of Korea

New Delhi

Consulate-General

108. Republic of Korea.

New Delhi

Consulate-General

109. Democratic Republic
of Viet-Nam

New Delhi

Consulate-General

110. Republic of VietNam

New Delhi

Consulate-General

--------------------------------------------------------------------------INDIA
USA AFGHANISTAN AUSTRIA BELGIUM BOLIVIA BRAZIL BURMA COLOMBIA
COSTA!!CUBA NORWAY SLOVAKIA DENMARK DOMINICA EL SALVADOR ETHIOPIA
FINLAND FRANCE GERMANY GREECE HAITI INDONESIA IRAN IRAQ ISRAEL ITALY
JAPAN JORDAN KUWAIT LIBERIA MONACO NEPAL CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC
NICARAGUA PANAMA PERU PHILIPPINES POLAND SAUDI ARABIA SPAIN SUDAN
SWEDEN SWITZERLAND SYRIA THAILAND TURKEY YUGOSLAVIA KOREA
Jan 01, 1963

Appendix V Treaties, Conventions and Agreements

APPENDIX V
Treaties, Conventions and Agreements concluded or renewed by India with other
c
ountries
during 1963-64
1.

Trade Agreement with Indonesia signed on Apr 24, 1963 at New Delhi.

2.

Trade Agreement with the Soviet Union signed on 10 June 1963 at Moscow.

3.

Trade Agreement with Jordan signed on 18 July 1963 at New Delhi.

4.

Trade Agreement with Pakistan signed on 1 September 1963 at Karachi.

5.
Delh
i.

Trade Agreement with Czechoslovakia signed on 7 November 1963 at New

6.

Trade Agreement with Hungary signed on 22 November 1962 at New Delhi.

7.

Trade Agreement with Poland signed on 18 December 1953 at New Delhi.

8. Protocol No. 2 to the Indo-Egyptian Trade Agreement of 8 July 1963
signed

on 14

January 1963 at Cairo.

9. Letters exchanged on 4 July 1963 at Baghdad ratifying Trade Agreement
wit
h Iraq.
signed on 13 December 1962 at New Delhi.
10. Letters exchanged on 22 March 1963 at New Delhi renewing the Trade
Agreem
ent
with Greece.
11. Letters exchanged on 4 April 1963 at Paris renewing the Trade Agreement
w
ith
France.
12. Letters exchanged on 3 May 1963 at, New Delhi renewing the Trade
Agreemen
t with
Chile.
13. Letters exchanged on 31 October 1963 at Vienna renewing the Trade
Agreeme
nt with
Austria.
14. Letters exchanged on 28 December 1963 at New Delhi renewing the Trade
Agr
eement
with the Democratic Republic of Germany.
15. Trade Agreement with Morocco renewed on 3 August 1963 by tacit consent
of
the
two parties.
16. Trade Agreement with Tunisia renewed on 5 October 1963 by tacit consent
o
f the two
parties.
<pg105>
INDIA
INDONESIA RUSSIA JORDAN PAKISTAN
IRAQ GREECE FRANCE CHILE AUSTRIA

NORWAY SLOVAKIA HUNGARY POLAND
USA GERMANY MOROCCO TUNISIA

Apr 24, 1963

Appendix VI Organisations of which India is a Member

EGYPT

Jan 01, 1963
APPENDIX VI
International Organisations of which India is a Member.
UNITED NATIONS
1. General Assembly
2. Committees and Commissions of the General Assembly
(a)
(b)
Reviewi
ng

Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space.
Committee on Arrangements for a Conference for the purpose of
the Charter.

(c) Special Committee of 24 on the situation with regard to the
implement
ation of
the declaration on the granting of independence to Colonial
Countries
and
peoples.
(d)

Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation.

(e)

Peace Observation Commission.

(f)

Disarmament Commission.

(g)

International Law Commission.

(h)

Committee on Contributions.

(i)

Administrative Tribunal.

(j)

18-Nation Disarmament Committee.

(k) Investment Committee.
(l) Working Group of 21 to examine Administrative and Budgetary
Procedure
s of,
the United Nations.
(m)

Staff Pension Committee.

(n)

U. N, Year for International Cooperation-Preparatory Committee.

(o)

U. N. Advisory Committee on Congo.

(p)

Scientific Advisory Committee.

3.

Economic and Social Council.

4.

Functional Commissions of the Economic and Social Council
(i) Human Rights Commission.

(ii) Narcotic Drugs Commission.
(iii) Statistical Commission.
(iv) Population Commission.
5. Regional Commisson of the Economic and Social Council
Economic Commission for Asia and the Far East (ECAFE).
6. Other Subsidiary Bodies of the Economic and Social Council
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)

United Nations International Children's Emergency Fund (UNICEF).
Committee for Industrial Development.
Permanent Central Opium Board.
Technical Assistance Committee and Technical Assistance Board.
Special Fund.

7. Specialised Agencies :
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)

Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO).
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT).
International Bank of Reconstruction and Development (IBRD).
International Monetary Fund (IMF).
<pg106>
<pg107>

(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)
(k)
(l)
(UNESC
O).
(m)
(n)

International finance Corporation (IFC)
International Development Association (IDA).
International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO).
International Tele-communication Union (I.T.U.)
World Meteorological Organisation (W.M.O.)
Universal Postal Union (UPU).
International Labour Organisation (ILO).
United Nations Educational Scientific and Cultural Organisation
World Health Organisation (WHO).
International Maritime Consultative Organisation (IMCO).

8. International Atomic Energy Agency.
Other International Organisations.
1. Asian African Legal Consultative Committee, New Delhi.
2. Asian Broadcasting Conference.
3. Asian Productivity Organisation, Tokyo.
4. Asian Statisticians Conference.
5. American Society of Travel Agents, New York.
6. Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works as
revised at
Brussels in 1948.
7. Commonwealth Air Transport Council.
8. Commonwealth Advisory Aeronautical Research Committee.
9. Commonwealth Agriculture Bureau, U.K.
10. Commonwealth Broadcasting Conference
11. Commonwealth Statisticians Conference.
12. Commonwealth Telecommunications Board, London.
13. Conference Internationale des Grands Reseaux Electriques (CIGRE),
Pari

s.

14. Central Bureau of the International Map of the World on the millionth
scale
subsequently incorporated in the U.N. Cartographic Office of the
UNES
CO.
15. Committee on Space Research, The Hague.
16. Federation Internationale des Agences de Voyage, Paris.
17. International Association for Bridges and Structural Engineering,
Zuri
ch.
18. International Commission on Irrigation and Drainage, New Delhi.
19. International Commission on Large Dams, Paris.
20. International Committee of the Red Cross, Geneva.
21. International Conference of Social Works, Paris.
22. International Cotton Advisory Committee, Washington.
23. International Council of Archives, Paris.
24. International Council of Building Research Studies and Documentation,
Paris.
25. International Criminal Police Commission, Paris.
26. International Customs Tariff Bureau, Brussels.
27. International Electro-Technical Commission, Geneva.
28. International Federation for Documentation, The Hague.
29. International Federation for Housing and Town Planning, The Hague.
30. International Federation for University Women, London.
31. International Hydrographic Bureau, Monte Carlo.
32. International Institute for administrative Sciences, Brussels.
33. International Mathematical Union, Zurich.
34. International Organisation of Legal Metrology, Paris.
<pg108>
35. International Organisation for Standardisation, Geneva.
36. International Railway Congress Association, Brussels.
37. International Scientific Radio Union, Brussels.
38. International Tea Committee, London.
39. International Union of Biological Sciences, Paris.
40. International Union of Crystallography, Cambridge.
41. International Union of Geodesy and Geophysics, Paris.
42. International Union of Geography, New York.
43. International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry, Paris.
44. International Union of Pure and Applied Physics, Paris.
45. International Union of Theoretical and Applied Mechanics, Delft.
46. International Union of Official Travel Organisation, Geneva, and its
allied Commission, viz the South Asia Travel Commission.
47. International Hide and Allied Trade Improvement Society, U.K.
48. International Union for the Protection of Literary and Artistic
Works
and
Universal Copyright Convention, Geneva.
49. International Association of Hydraulic Research, Delft.
50. International Bureau of Weights and Measures, Sevres (France).
51. International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea, London.
52. International Commission of Table of Constants.
53. International Dairy Federation (I.D.F.), Brussels.
54. International Society of Soil Mechanics and Foundation Engineering,
L
ondon.
55. International Union of Astronomy, Greenwich (U.K.)

56.

International Union of the History and Philosophy of Science, Paris.

57.
58.
59.
60.

International
International
International
International

Statistical Institute Conference, The Hague.
Wheat Council, London.
Council for Museums, Paris.
Committee on Monuments, Artistic and Historical Sites

a
nd Archaeological Excavations.
61. International Lead and Zinc Group, New York.
62. International Seed Testing Association, Washington.
63. International Society for Photogrammetry, London.
64. International Union Against the Venereal Diseases and the
Treponema
toses,
Paris.
65. International Folk Music Council, London.
66. International Council for Bird Preservation, British Museum
(Natura
l History),
London.
67. International Council of Scientific Unions, London.
68. International Union of Anthropological Sciences, Mexico.
69. International Organisation for Pure and Applied Biophysics.
70. International Association for the Exchange of Students for Technical
Experience.
71. international Association of Lighthouse Authorities.
72. International Union of Railways.
73. International Office of Epizootics.
74. International Society for Horticultural Sciences.
75. International Council of Scientific International Unions of
Geography
.
76. International Union of Chemistry.
77. International Union of Radio Sciences.
78. international Union of Biochemistry.
79. International Advisory Committee on Research in Natural Sciences
Prog
ramme
of UNESCO.
<pg109>
80.
81.
82.
83.
84.
85.
86.
87.
88.
89.
Brussels.
90.
91.
92.

En
gland.

International Association for Shell Structures, Madrid.
International Geological Congress.
International Union of Geological Sciences.
International Institute for the Unification of Private Law, Rome.
League of Red Cross Societies, Geneva.
Lithographic Technical Foundation Inc., New York.
Pacific Area Travel Association, San Francisco.
Pan Indian Ocean Science Association.
Permanent Court of Arbitration, The Hague.
Permanent International Association of Navigation Congress,
Permanent International Association of Road Congress, Brussels.
Special Committee on Oceanic Research.
The British Electrical and Allied Industries Research Association,

93.
94.
95.
96.

Universal Copyright Convention.
Union Internationale Contre le Cancer, Paris.
World Power Conference, Paris.
World Poultry Science Association.

GMGIPND-L-162 EA-3-3-64-18,000.

INDIA
USA CONGO JAPAN SWITZERLAND BELGIUM UNITED KINGDOM CENTRAL AFRICAN
REPUBLIC FRANCE LATVIA MEXICO SPAIN ITALY
Jan 01, 1963


