   java script is required for this page java script is required for this
   page java script is required for this page java script is required for
   this page java script is required for this page java script is required
   for this page

   Sun, February 08, 2015 at 03:42:26 IST Indian Flag
   Ministry of                      Print Content Small Font Medium Font      
    External       MEA Library      Large Font                                
    Affairs,   Ministry of External   * Sitemap                               
   Government  Affairs, Government    * Contact Us                            
    of India         of India         * Feedback                              
                                      * _____________________           [  ]  

     * Home
     * Director's Office
          * Director Lib & Info
          * Library Officers & Staff
     * Journals
          * Current Journals
          * Online Journals
          * CD-ROMs Databases
     * Online Services
          * Business Monitor Online
          * EIU
          * JSTOR
          * Janes Online Services
          * Kessing World News Archive
          * Marketline MDIC
          * Online Service Links
     * Newspapers
          * E-Newspapers
          * Subscribed Print Newspapers
     * Library Bulletins
          * Foreign Affairs Documentation Bulletin
          * Recent Additions
          * Chronicle of Events
     * Alert
          * Book Alert
          * Article Alerts
     * Important Abbrevations

 Annual Reports Prior to 1999                                                                               
   * Home >   Annual Reports Prior to 1999 >   Annual Report 1990-91                        * Home          
 Annual Report 1990-91                                                                      * Director's    
                                                                                              Office        
                                        Contents                                            * Journals      
 Introduction, (i)-(ix)                                                                     * Online        
 S.NO. CHAPTERS                                                                PAGE No.       Services      
 1     India's Neighbours,                                                     1-13         * Newspapers    
 2     South-East Asia and the Pacific,                                        14-20        * Alert         
 3     East Asia,                                                              21-26        * Important     
 4     West Asia and North Africa,                                             27-33          Abbrevations  
       The Gulf Crisis,                                                        30           * Back          
 5     Africa (South of the Sahara),                                           34-41                        
 6     Europe,                                                                 42-47                        
       Soviet Union,                                                           42                           
       Eastern Europe,                                                         43                           
       Western Europe,                                                         45                           
 7     The Americas,                                                           48--54                       
       North America,                                                          48                           
       Central and South America and the Caribbean,                            52                           
 8     United Nations and International Conferences,                           55-74                        
       Political Issues,                                                       56                           
       Disarmament Issues,                                                     59                           
       Economic Issues,                                                        60                           
       Administrative and Budgetary Matters,                                   65                           
       Social and Humanitarian Issues,                                         66                           
       Apartheid,                                                              66                           
       Decolonisation,                                                         67                           
       Narcotic Drugs Control,                                                 67                           
       Election to UN Bodies and other International Organizations,            67                           
       Activities of the Non-Aligned Movement,                                 68                           
       Commonwealth,                                                           70                           
       Conferences,                                                            71                           
       International Law: Development and Activities,                          73                           
 9     Foreign Economic Relations,                                             75-76                        
 10    Policy Planning and Research,                                           77-78                        
 11    External Publicity,                                                     79-81                        
 12    Indians Overseas,                                                       82-83                        
 13    Protocol,                                                               84                           
 14    Passport and Consular Services,                                         85--88                       
 15    Administration and Organization,                                        89-90                        
 16    Foreign Service Training Institute,                                     91-93                        
 17    Use of Hindi in Official Work,                                          94-95                        
 18    Cultural Relations,                                                     96-102                       
       APPENDICES, A-1--A-29                                                                                
 Introduction                                                                                               
 DURING the year under review, momentous political, social and economic developments in                     
 different parts of the world brought about a radical transformation in international                       
 relations. The dramatic political changes in Eastern Europe and the march of Soviet                        
 Union towards market economy and political pluralism presaged a complete turnaround in                     
 international political alignments and rivalries. The Cold War came to an end and a new                    
 era of entente between major economic and political powers was ushered in.                                 
                                                                                                            
 The Gulf War was a massive aberration from the general trend of detente and cooperation                    
 in international affairs. Immediately after the occupation of Kuwait by Iraq, India                        
 issued a statement reiterating her firm position against the use of force in, relations                    
 between States and annexation of territory and calle d upon Iraq to withdraw her troops                    
 from Kuwait. India took a series of initiative s designed to seek a non-military                           
 solution to the Gulf crisis. Before the outbrea k of the war, India did all it could to                    
 prevent it. The two meetings of Non-align ed countries on this subject convened in                         
 Belgrade in September 1990 and January 1991, were both on India's initiative.                              
                                                                                                            
 India adhered to all the 12 mandatory UN Security Council resolutions on sanctions                         
 against Iraq and took effective steps to implement them. India also maintained                             
 Ministerial and diplomatic contacts with Kuwait, Saudi Arabia and other States in the                      
 region before, during and after the war in an attempt to safeguard our interests in the                    
 Gulf We adopted a principled position during the Gulf crisis, and have been playing a                      
 constructive role in the Security Council which has been constantly seized with this                       
 matter.                                                                                                    
                                                                                                            
 India was able successfully to undertake the gigantic task of evacuating i ts citizens                     
 from Iraq and Kuwait. After the first few days of disorder which led t o some suffering                    
 among our nationals as among those of all other countries, we carried out one of the                       
 most successful operations of organized evacuation ever undertaken in recent history.                      
 India completed, by the end of October 1990, the evacuation of over 150,000 Indians                        
 from Kuwait and Iraq, the bulk of them by ai r from Amman. This was appreciated and                        
 regarded as a model by leaders and senior officials of the local Governments and the                       
 international agencies associ ated with, the operation.                                                    
                                                                                                            
 India continued to pursue the goals of peace, friendship and cooperation i n her                           
 relations with neighbours in South Asia. Improvement of India-Nepal relations received                     
 high priority, particularly in. the context of the severe st rains (i) that had                            
 surfaced after the lapse of the Indo-Nepal Treaties of Trade and Trans it in March                         
 1989. The installation of a democratic Government in Nepal in April 1990 helped in the                     
 process. The signing of the joint Communique at the end of the visit of Prime Minister                     
 Bhattarai to Delhi and its prompt implementation resulted in the complete normalisation                    
 of relations between the two countries. This process was consolidated and additional                       
 measures for strengthening these relations were considered during the visit of the then                    
 External Affairs Ministe r, Shri I K Gujral to Kathmandu in August 1990. The visit of                      
 the former Prime Minister, Shri Chandra Shekhar to Nepal in February 1991--the first                       
 such visit in fourteen years--provided further momentum to the intensification of                          
 bilateral cooperation for mutual benefit.                                                                  
                                                                                                            
 India continued to nurture the traditionally close and friendly relations with Bhutan.                     
 The Bhutanese King visited India in November 1990, his third visit to India that year.                     
 India continued its contribution to ongoing and new develop- ment projects in Bhutan                       
 and promoting cooperation in other areas. Positive momentum was maintained in India's                      
 relations with Bang- ladesh. The then Bangladesh Foreign Minister visited New Delhi in                     
 May 1990 when the joint Economic Commission met after a gap of seven years. India has                      
 extended a Government-to-Government credit of Rs 30 crores to Bangladesh. A ruling by                      
 the Supreme Court of India on the leasing of the Tin Bigha territory to Bangladesh has                     
 paved the way for the full implementation of the Indo-Bangladesh Land Boundary                             
 Agreement. Our trade and economic cooperation with Banglad- esh has also registered                        
 impressive gains in the past year. India welcomed the establishment of a democratically                    
 elected Government in Bangladesh. Foreign Secretary visited Dhaka as Prime Minister's                      
 Special Envoy in March 1991 and conveyed to the Prime Minister of Bangladesh India's                       
 keen desire to work closel y with her Government for further improving our relations.                      
                                                                                                            
 India continued her endeavour to reduce tensions in her relations with Pakistan. A                         
 Confidence Building Package was proposed by India on May 28, 1990, which inter-alia,                       
 called upon Pakistan to stop its support to ter rorism, seize arms and terrorists, deny                    
 transit facilities to terrorists, and hand Over fugit ives from law. Pursuant to the                       
 proposal made by India, three rounds of Foreign Secretary level talks took place.                          
 Agreements were reached on several Confi- dence Building Measures. Weekly telephonic                       
 contact was introduced between Directors General of Military Operations of the two                         
 countries. A hot-line was established between the Prime Ministers of the two countries.                    
 Instruments of Ratification of the Agreement on Prohibition of Attack against Nuclear                      
 Installa - (ii) tion and Facilities were exchanged. Discussions were resumed on pending                    
 issues such as the boundary in the Sir Creek area. However, Pakistan's support to                          
 terrorism and subversion in the States of Punjab and Jammu & Kashmir continued unabated                    
 and stands in the way of the normalisation of our relationship. We are continuing our                      
 endeavour to persuade Pakistan to abandon her negative approach towards India and join                     
 us in establishing a good- neighbourly and tension-free relationship on the basis of                       
 the Simla Agreement. Soon after the de-induction of the Indian Peace Keeping Force from                    
 Sri Lan ka in March 1990, hostilities broke out again between the LTTE and the Sri                         
 Lankan forces, which have got caught up in an escalating spiral of violence. Govern-                       
 ment of India has remained concerned about this, and in particular the loss of innocent                    
 lives and the hardships and suffering caused to civilians. The continu - ing                               
 hostilities have also led to a fresh influx of refugees into Tamil Nadu numbering about                    
 120,000. Government of India's objectives in Sri Lanka have been: to strive for the                        
 safety and security of the Tamils in Sri Lanka, which w ould also permit a return of                       
 the refugees in India; to foster the process of politic al solution through dialogue on                    
 the basis of Indo-Sri Lanka Agreement; and to restore Indo-Sri Lankan relations to                         
 traditional levels of cordiality and frien d- ship. It is against this background that                     
 the then External Affairs Minister, Sh ri V C Shukla visited Colombo from 28 to 31                         
 January 1991. The visit enabled us to stress our concerns regarding the ethnic issue                       
 and our desire to expand bilater al relations in their widest sense.                                       
                                                                                                            
 The close and friendly relations between India and Maldives were further reinforced by                     
 high-level visits. President Maumoon Abdul Gayoom visited Delhi in March 1990 and again                    
 as Chief Guest for the Republic Day. The former Prime Minister, Shri V P Singh visited                     
 Male from 22 to 24 June 1990 and later the former Prime Minister, Shri Chandra Shekhar                     
 from 21 to 23 November 1990 for the SAARC Summit. Indo-Maldivian cooperation now                           
 encompasses health and welfare, infrastructure projects, defence, manpower resources                       
 development, civi l aviation, communication and trade.                                                     
                                                                                                            
 The first genuine elections held in Myanmar after almost twenty-eight year s resulted                      
 in an overwhelming verdict in favour of democratic forces. Despite thi s clear verdict,                    
 power has not been transferred to the elected representatives of her people. We hope                       
 this will be done soon so that normalcy can return in the country, facilitating the                        
 revival and strengthening of our bilateral relations with Myanmar and enabling her to                      
 play her rightful role in the comity of nations. (iii) India continued to work for a                       
 strong, stable, independent and non-aligned Afghanistan and to strengthen the                              
 traditional ties of friendship and cooperatio n with that country. The Foreign Minister                    
 of Afghanistan came to New Delhi in June 1990 for the meeting of the Indo-Afghan joint                     
 Commission. Thereafter, President Najibullah visited India on a State Visit in August                      
 1990. New areas o f cooperation have been identified, bilateral relations have been                        
 further intensi fied and agreements signed on cooperation in agriculture, narcotics                        
 control and cultural exchanges. We have agreed upon a major expansion of our technical                     
 and economic cooperation with Afghanistan. India continued to take initiatives within                      
 SAARC for deepening and expand- ing regional cooperation among South Asian countries.                      
 India actively pursued adoption of measures for increasing people-to-people contacts;                      
 and increasing cooperation in trade, industry, money and finance. Studies exploring                        
 pos- sibilities of such cooperation have been undertaken in some of these areas. The                       
 former Prime Minister, Shri Chandra Shekhar, visited Maldives to participate in the 6th                    
 SAARC Summit in November 1990. At India's suggestion regional cooperation under SAARC                      
 was extended to the field of biotechnology and the proposal to create a Fund for the                       
 identification and development of regional projects to be financed by national banks of                    
 the member-countries was also accepted. Cooperation among the SAARC countries is                           
 essential for accelerating our economic development, for building individual and                           
 collective self-reliance and for enhancing our bargaining strength in multilateral                         
 negotiations. India remains committed to assuming responsibility for making SAARC an                       
 effective and full-fledged venture of regional cooperation, consistent with her size,                      
 resourc es and stage of development.                                                                       
                                                                                                            
 India's relations with China have steadily improved since the visit of the then Prime                      
 Minister, Shri Rajiv Gandhi to that country in December 1988. The momentum of bilateral                    
 exchanges has increased. The high-level political dialo- gue has intensified.                              
 Successive Governments have stressed the factors of continuity and consensus in India's                    
 policy towards China. Better understanding and cooperation between India and China, the                    
 two largest countries of Asia, is not only in the mutual interest of the two countries                     
 but also can assist in the maintenance of peace and stability in our region and the                        
 world. The dialogue with China on the outstanding boundary question has continued with                     
 both sides having enhanced their understanding of each other's approach to a settlement                    
 of this question. The discussions during the second Meeting of the Joint Working Group                     
 on the boundary question, which met in New Delhi in August 1990 were held in an                            
 atmosphere of frankness and cordiality. We have stressed the (iv) adoption of a                            
 forward-looking approach so that a mutually acceptable solution that is in conformity                      
 with national interests and sentiments is arrived at. The Soviet Union has been                            
 undergoing fundamental changes over the past few years. India's priority has been to                       
 maintain the stability of our vital relationship with the Soviet Union in the light of                     
 new challenges imposed by perestroika and changing Indian and Soviet priorities. The                       
 warmth and cordialit y of Indo-Soviet relations were reaffirmed by the visit of the                        
 former Prime Minis ter, Shri V P Singh to Moscow in July 1990. The visit confirmed that                    
 India and the Soviet Union have a multi-dimensional, stable and time-tested                                
 relationship that enjoys the broad support of the peoples of both countries and should,                    
 therefore , be preserved and strengthened further.                                                         
                                                                                                            
 The ongoing interaction between India and United States of America has generated a                         
 greater degree of understanding and sensitivity to each other's concerns and interests.                    
 India's effort has been to enlarge the existing areas o f cooperation with USA,                            
 encompassing the commercial, scientific, technical and cultural fields. India believes                     
 that building a mutually beneficial and mature relationship is a goal shared by both                       
 India and USA. A series of high-level vis its and exchange of views have brought about                     
 a better appreciation of India's standpoint on a wide range of issues, including on the                    
 situation in the Punjab and Jammu & Kashmir in the context of Pakistan's role in                           
 aggravating the situation.                                                                                 
                                                                                                            
 There have been deep-rooted and profound changes in the European continent since                           
 traditional confrontation between the East and West blocs has given way to cooperation.                    
 The two Germanys are united and the free movement of peoples and in due course, of                         
 capital and labour, are shortly in th e offing. The base for a Common European Home has                    
 already been laid and the integration of the Common Market in 1992 will further                            
 contribute to transform- ing Europe into an important political and economic power.                        
 India has had close links with both halves of Europe through a wide network of economic                    
 and commercial contacts. We have welcomed these far-reaching changes, which no doubt                       
 will serve the cause of peace and stability and contribute to the development of the                       
 world economy. During the year under review, considerable progress has been made in                        
 bilateral relations with Western Europe through the exchange of several high- level                        
 visits. Notable among them have been those of our President, Shri R Venkataraman to UK,                    
 Portugal and Malta in March and April 1990 and of the President of Federal Republic of                     
 Germany to India. The then External Affairs (v) Minister, Shri I K Gujral also visited                     
 several European countries for discussio ns with his counterparts. Particularly                            
 important was our political dialogue with t he European Community's 'Troika' Foreign                       
 Ministers. The Community's progress towards an integrated European market by 1992                          
 offers challenges and oppor- tunities for India. Several measures, including those                         
 designed to foster instit u- tional linkages with EC, were either taken or under                           
 consideration, to take advantage of the Single European Market for promoting our                           
 exports and economic cooperation with the European Community.                                              
                                                                                                            
 Momentous changes in the direction of democracy and political pluralism have swept the                     
 nations of the Eastern Europe. We have welcomed this movement towards democracy and                        
 more humane and liberal system of governan- ce. India has traditionally enjoyed very                       
 close and mutually beneficial politica l and economic relations with the countries of                      
 Eastern Europe. As with the rest of the world, we are on the threshold of a significant                    
 new phase in our politic al and economic relations with these countries. We are                            
 confident that as these countries follow a more open economic system and integrate with                    
 the main- stream of the world economy, new opportunities will open up for strengthening                    
 and widening India's existing cooperation with them. The Deputy Prime Minister and                         
 Foreign Minister of Czechoslovakia and the President of Romania visited India. The then                    
 External Affairs Minister, Shri I K Gujral, visited Yugoslavia in March 1990 for                           
 bilateral discussions and again in September 1990 in the context of consultations on                       
 the Gulf crisis. We attach very high importance to our relations with Japan, a country                     
 with which we have traditionally enjoyed friendly relations. in recent years, our                          
 interaction with Japan in the economic and technological fields has been strengthened                      
 and diversified. Japan has become a major economic partner and we deeply appreciate the                    
 positive, and constructive attitude she has shown in responding to our requirements.                       
                                                                                                            
 The importance attached by India to the maintenance and expansion of close and friendly                    
 relations with all the countries of South East Asia is testified b y the high-level                        
 contacts and frequency of interactions with these countries. The ver y first bilateral                     
 visit by the former Prime Minister, Shri V P Singh was to Malaysia. High-level exchange                    
 of visits also took place with several other ASEA N countries. The India-Vietnam joint                     
 Commission met under the co-chairmanship of the two Foreign Ministers in April 1990                        
 during which an agreement was signed for the utilisation of the latest Government of                       
 India credit for railway s and telecommunications. The Ho Chi Minh Centenary                               
 celebrations in India, coordi- (vi) nated under the auspices of a National Committee                       
 chaired by the Prime Mini ster, concluded in January 1991 in Calcutta, where a big                         
 public function was organized with high-level Vietnamese participation. India continued                    
 her active and constructive role, through close contact both with ASEAN and the Indo-                      
 China states, in the process designed to find a political solution to the Cambo dian                       
 conflict. Developments in Fiji were of great concern to India. The Indian Mission in                       
 Suva had to be closed in May 1990. Institutionalisation of racial discriminatio n of                       
 Fiji was opposed by India and the promulgation of an undemocratic constitution was                         
 strongly condemned by us in August 1990.                                                                   
                                                                                                            
 There can be no durable or stable peace in West Asia without a comprehen- sive                             
 settlement of the Palestinian problem. India continued to extend full support to the                       
 just struggle of the Palestinian people. The then External Affai rs Minister, Shri I K                     
 Gujral participated in the meeting of the NAM Committee of Nine on Palestine, held in                      
 Tunis in March 1990. We have conveyed both through bilateral contacts and in                               
 multilateral fora our commitment to supportin g a settlement based on the Palestinian                      
 right to self-determination, the vacation of all Arab territories occupied since 1967                      
 and the security of all the States in the region. Developments in sub-Saharan Africa                       
 have been rapid and overall, positive. The release of Dr Nelson Mandela and the                            
 subsequent steps taken by the South African Government for dismantling certain aspects                     
 of apartheid were welcomed by India. India fully supported the demand of the African                       
 National Congress to implement further measures leading to the irreversible elimination                    
 of apartheid in South Africa. Namibia's independence in March 1990 was of far- reaching                    
 importance in the context, of the struggle for a unitary, non-racist a nd democratic                       
 South Africa. Former Prime Minister, Shri V P Singh participated in the Independence                       
 Day Celebrations in Windhoek. Dr Mandela's visit to India in October 1990 enabled India                    
 to pay homage to a living symbol of struggle against apartheid.                                            
                                                                                                            
 India was elected to the Security Council for a two-year term commencing 1 January                         
 1991. India was, therefore, directly involved in the deliberations an d decisions of                       
 the Security Council on the Gulf conflict in 1991. India's positio n on each question                      
 reflected her principled opposition to the use of force as wel l as her concern that                       
 all actions of the Security Council should be in conformity with the UN Charter.                           
                                                                                                            
 (vii) The UN Security Council has recently come to play an increasing role in resolving                    
 conflicts and dealing with situations leading to a breach of or threa t to                                 
 international security. This is because, for the first time since the inception of the                     
 United Nations, the five permanent members of the UN Security Council are acting in                        
 concert. India welcomes the enhanced effectiveness of the United Nations. At the same                      
 time, India calls for wider application of the democratic principle in the                                 
 decision-making procedures of the United Nations and specifi- cally in the Security                        
 Council. While the trend increasingly is to extend suppor t in ushering in pluralism                       
 and democracy in individual States, equality and democratic decision-making are absent                     
 in the functioning of international organizations--the UN Security Council in                              
 particular. These could have most disturbing implications for developing countries. The                    
 political preoccupation o f the industrialised countries with Eastern Europe and their                     
 disregard for develo p- ment issues on the international agenda have come in the way of                    
 the revival of the North-South dialogue There is also an increasing tendency to                            
 interfere in the internal affairs of developing countries on grounds of human rights                       
 and for the purpose of securing disarmament on a selective and discriminatory basis.                       
 India considers that the deepening of the debt crisis and the erosion of norms, rules                      
 and regulations of the international monetary, financial and tradi ng systems could                        
 have adverse repercussions on developing countries such as India. It was in this                           
 context that the summit level group on South-South cooperation, namely, the Group of 15                    
 had been set up at India's initiative at t he time of the last Non-aligned Summit                          
 Conference at Belgrade. The first Summit level meeting of the Group of 15 was held in                      
 Kuala Lumpur in June 1990. The Indian delegation was led by the former Prime Minister,                     
 Shri V P Singh. The Summit meeting, identified some concrete and specific projects for                     
 South-South cooperation And issued a statement giving the perception of the leaders of                     
 the G-15 on major international economic issues and outlining the common strategy to be                    
 adopted for resolving them.                                                                                
                                                                                                            
 India participated actively in a large number of multilateral meetings on global                           
 environmental issues. A Conference on Global Environmental Issues of twenty select                         
 developing countries was held in New Delhi in April 1990, with a view to evolving a                        
 developing country perspective on such issues. India also successfully promoted a                          
 series of amendments to the Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone                         
 Layer that were adopted at the London meeting of the States Parties in June 1990. India                    
 has been playing her due role in the preparatory process leading upto the UN Conference                    
 on Environment and Development scheduled in 1992. (viii) The transformation of                             
 East-West relations has changed the context but not the relevance of the Non-Aligned                       
 Movement. Its position against the blocs having been vindicated, its future course of                      
 action would have to concentrate increasingly on the North-South divide, disarmament,                      
 environment and the democratisation of the multilateral system under the United                            
 Nations. India has continued to contribute positively to the ongoing exercise on                           
 reorienting the role of the Movement in the changing global environment through the                        
 develop- ment of a broad consensus on the rationale of non-alignment in the context of                     
 the current reality and the adjustments that are called for in its method of wo rk,                        
 modalities of functioning and agenda.                                                                      
                                                                                                            
 (ix)                                                                                                       
 India's neighbours                                                                                         
                                                                                     Top                    
 INDIA'S NEIGHBOURS                                                                                         
                                                                                                            
 DURING the year under review, India continued to pursue the goals of peace, friendship                     
 and cooperation in relations with its neighbours in South Asia, bilaterally and through                    
 fora like SAARC, the Non-Aligned Movement and the United Nations. Relations between                        
 India and Nepal have traditionally been extremely close and cordial. Over the years                        
 India has been extending considerable economic and technical assistance to Nepal and,                      
 till recently, was one of its largest donors . However, strains surfaced in. Indo-Nepal                    
 relations over the past few years, especially after the lapse of the Indo-Nepal                            
 Treaties of Trade and Transit in M arch 1989, consequent on the non-fulfilment by Nepal                    
 of the commitments made when a new Trade. Treaty was negotiated aid initialled in                          
 October 1998. The Government of India accorded high priority to improving Indo-Nepal                       
 relations, and various initiatives were taken in this regard, which resulted in great                      
 mutual understanding of each other's interests and concerns and agreement on th e need                     
 for a comprehensive solution of all outstanding problems. In April 1990, the success of                    
 the mass movement for multi-party democracy in Nepal led to the installation of an                         
 interim Government headed by Prime Minister Krishna Prasad Bhattarai. India warmly                         
 welcomed these developments.                                                                               
                                                                                                            
 Prime Minister Bhattarai's visit to India in June 1990, ended with the sig ning by the                     
 two Prime Ministers of a joint Communique which restored status quo ante in bilateral                      
 relations to 1 April 1987, a period before the recent bilateral te nsions emerged. This                    
 was to be pending the finalisation of a comprehensive arrange-                                             
 pg1                                                                                                        
 ment covering all aspects of bilateral relations. India went beyond the status quo ante                    
 in extending certain extra relaxations in the tariff and entry regime of Nepalese                          
 exports to India that had considerable potential, if properly exploite d, to increase                      
 such exports. The Indian stand by credit facility for Nepal was increa sed from Rs 25                      
 crores to Rs 35 crores. Nepal undertook, inter-alia to remove Indian nationals in Nepal                    
 from the ambit of the Work Permit Scheme and to assure India n teachers in Nepal the                       
 same conditions of employment as Nepalese nationals. Both sides undertook to My respect                    
 each other's security concerns, not to allow activities in the territory of the one                        
 prejudicial to the security of the other, and to have prior consultations, with a view                     
 to reaching mutual agreement on such defence related matters which, in the view of                         
 either country, could pose a threat to its security.                                                       
                                                                                                            
 India and Nepal also decided to usher in a new era of bilateral cooperatio n,                              
 particularly in the spheres of industrial and human resource development, for                              
 harnessing of the waters of the common rivers for the benefit of the peoples of the two                    
 countries and for the protection and management of the environment. On the Indian side,                    
 the commitments under the Joint Communique were fulfilled ahead of the deadline of Jul                     
 01, 1990. Most of the Nepalese commit- ments were also fulfilled, and it is expected                       
 that action will be completed soo n on the outstanding points. The then Minister for                       
 External Affairs, Shri I K Gujral, visited Kathmandu in August 1990, and held                              
 discussions with Prime Minister Bhattarai and other Nepalese political leaders. Various                    
 possibilities of widening bilateral economi c cooperation were considered.                                 
                                                                                                            
 Prime Minister Bhattarai paid a transit visit to India in November 1990, a nd had                          
 detailed discussions with the Prime Minister, the Minister for External Aff airs and                       
 the Minister for Water Resources on issues of mutual concern. Various potentially                          
 far-reaching decisions on bilateral cooperation were taken, especia lly in the field of                    
 water resources development, one of the four key areas identified in the Joint                             
 Communique. These included undertaking of a comprehensive joint survey of the full                         
 hydel potential of Nepal and the working out of a phased programme for its development,                    
 setting up a bilateral joint Rivers Commission, a comprehensive survey of the potential                    
 of the whole Kosi river basin and India n                                                                  
 pg2                                                                                                        
 agreement in principle to purchase surplus power from the Nepalese hydel projects,                         
 subject to negotiation and agreement on prices. Early implementation of these decisions                    
 would substantially benefit the economies of both countries. A bilateral agreement was                     
 signed in December 1990 for the construction by India, on a turnkey and grant aid                          
 basis, of a Rs 3 crore new road cum rail brid ge at Raxaul, the most important border                      
 point for both bilateral and transit cargo movements to and from Nepal. The new bridge                     
 is expected to be ready by early 1993. In August 1990, the then Minister for External                      
 Affairs inaugurated the Rs 2 crore Mohana bridge in western Nepal, also constructed on                     
 a turnkey basis as a part of the Indian aid programme to Nepal.                                            
                                                                                                            
 Prime Minister's visit to Nepal from 13 to 15 February 1991 was the first such visit in                    
 14 years and his first bilateral visit abroad. It included visits to J anakpur and                         
 Biratnagar in the Nepalese Terai besides Kathmandu. At all these three places, Prime                       
 Minister addressed civic receptions in his honour; for Janakpur a nd Biratnagar this                       
 was again a first. Besides the official talks, Prime Minister a lso met a wide spectrum                    
 of Nepalese political leaders. Many significant decisions were taken and work                              
 programmes finalised for intensifying bilateral economic cooperation for mutual                            
 benefit. A high level ta sk force will be set up to prepare such a comprehensive                           
 economic cooperation programme by June 1991, working under the overall guidance of the                     
 Indo-Nepal joint Commission. A series of key technical meetings covering the most                          
 important hydel projects like Kosi, Karnali and Pancheshwar will be held betwee n end                      
 February and mid-April 1991. The Indo-Nepal Sub Commission on Water Resources will meet                    
 again in April after a gap of over two years. Both sides wi ll consider taking up                          
 several potentially attractive medium sized hydel projects a nd will immediately start                     
 work on additional flood protection measures. Cooperatio n in health care will also be                     
 intensified--the Bir Hospital in Kathmandu will be expanded; and a medical college in                      
 Biratnagar considered. Intensive cooperation in the fields of railways and civil                           
 aviation will be pursued.                                                                                  
                                                                                                            
 The traditionally close and friendly relations between India and Bhutan we re further                      
 strengthened during the year under review. His Majesty King Jigme Singye Wangchuck                         
 visited India thrice during 1990; in January, January/February                                             
 pg3                                                                                                        
 and November. He held discussions with the President, Shri R Venkataraman, the former                      
 Prime Minister, Shri V P Singh, the Prime Minister, Shri Chandra Shekhar, and other                        
 senior Ministers of the Government of India. The discus- sions on bilateral and                            
 multilateral issues of mutual interest were marked by a close identity of views and                        
 great warmth and cordiality. From the Indian side, the then Minister for Commerce and                      
 Tourism visited Bhutan in March 1990, and the then Minister for Energy and Civil                           
 Aviation in August 1990. The Finance Minister also paid a brief visit in January 199 1.                    
 Foreign Secretary visited Bhutan in October 1990. The growing economic and technical                       
 cooperation between the two coun- tries was maintained and intensified. The highlight                      
 in this regard was the signing of a Memorandum of Understanding, during the King's                         
 visit to India in November 1990, in accordance with which India is to prepare the                          
 Detailed Project Reports for the Tala Hydroelectric Project (Chukha, Phase II) and the                     
 Wangchu Reservoir Scheme (Chukha, Phase III), for 1000 MW and. 600 MW respectively, and                    
 more ambitious than the very successful 336 MW Chukha Hydel Project.                                       
                                                                                                            
 A new Indo-Bhutan Trade and Commerce Agreement (1990-1995) was signed in Thimphu on 2                      
 March 1990 during the then Commerce Minister's visit. It provided for the continuation                     
 of free trade between the two coun- tries, and also opened it to private Bhutanese                         
 traders, besides simplifying ent ry procedures and other similar facilities. A new Air                     
 Services Agreement between the two countries was finalised after prolonged negotiations                    
 and will be signed soon. The new runway and hangar building at Paro Airport, part of                       
 the airport upgradation project being executed by India, were inaugurated by the then                      
 Minister for Energy and Civil Aviation during his visit to Bhutan in August 1990.                          
 During the same visit, a new protocol was signed to equalize the rates at which India                      
 purchases firm and seasonal power from the Chukha Hydel Pro- ject. This involved a                         
 substantial rise in the Royal Government of Bhutan's revenue earnings from the CHP.                        
                                                                                                            
 India continued to cooperate with Bhutan in various other fields such as                                   
 telecommunications, livestock breeding, dairying, mini hydel projects, rural                               
 pg4                                                                                                        
 development, health services, forestry, industrial estates, road building and                              
 maintenance and education. India continued to offer Bhutanese students opportunities                       
 for secondary as well as higher education and training in various fields such as                           
 medicine, engineering and the humanities, plus specialised training in work connected                      
 wit h police, customs and defence. About 50 Bhutanese students were availing of the                        
 Government of India scholarship, and an equal number of additional scholarships for                        
 studies in India were also extended to them under the Colombo Plan. Increasing                             
 attention was being paid to human resource development as a key area of bilateral                          
 cooperation. India continued to supply Bhutan, at the Royal Government of Bhutan's                         
 request, with essential commodities such as wheat, rice, sugar, coal, steel, ed ible                       
 oils etc at controlled prices under a special quota system.                                                
                                                                                                            
 There was a steady improvement in Indo-Bangladesh relations during the yea r under                         
 review. The visit of the Bangladesh Foreign Minister to India in May imparted a                            
 positive momentum to them and a meeting of the Indo-Bangladesh joint Economic                              
 Commission was held in May in New Delhi after a gap of seven years. India announced a                      
 Rs 30 crore Government to Government credit to Bangladesh. The meetings of the joint                       
 Rivers Commission were reactivated and detailed discussions were held for working out a                    
 comprehensive long term solution to the problem of sharing the waters of common rivers.                    
 During the SAARC Summit in Male in November, President Ershad and the Prime Minister,                      
 Shri Chandra Shekhar had a cordial meeting. Following two months of a sustained                            
 opposition agitation launched by the students and joined in by a wide cross section of                     
 Bangladesh society-President Ershad resigned on 6 December and handed over power to Mr                     
 Shahabuddin Ahmed, the Chief justice of the Bangladesh Supreme Court, who assumed                          
 office as the Acting President of Bangladesh. Elections for Parliament were held on 27                     
 February 1991. The restoration of the democratic rights of the people of Bangladesh was                    
 a welcome development and India is looking forward to working closely with a                               
 democratically elected Government in Bangladesh. In July 1990, the military regime of                      
 Myanmar held elections in which the National League for Democracy (NLD) won an                             
 overwhelming mandate.                                                                                      
 pg5                                                                                                        
 It was expected that the power would thereafter be transferred to the elec ted                             
 representatives of the people. However, this did not happen and, at the end of the                         
 year, Myanmar's military Government appeared determined to continue in office for an                       
 indefinite period of time. While maintaining the policy of strict non- interference in                     
 Myanmar's internal affairs, India expressed its support to the democratic aspirations                      
 of the people of Myanmar and hoped that the electoral verdict would be respected by the                    
 country's military leadership. The Government of India's objectives in Sri Lanka are:                      
 striving for the sa fety and security of the Tamils in Sri Lanka; fostering the process                    
 of political sol ution through dialogue as the only basis for the resolution of the                        
 ethnic issue; contributing to peace and normalcy in Sri Lanka; and to restore Indo-Sri                     
 Lankan relations to traditional levels of cordiality and friendship. The visit of the                      
 then External Affairs Minister to Colombo in January 1991 came in this perspective.                        
                                                                                                            
 The Indo-Sri Lanka Agreement, to which the Government stands committed, led to the                         
 enactment of the 13th Amendment to the Sri Lankan Constitution, which for the first                        
 time provided a basis for the devolution of political power to the Tamils through the                      
 system of Provincial Councils and related legislation. Withdrawal of the Indian Peace                      
 Keeping Force in March 1990 brought to an end India's direct involvement in Sri Lanka                      
 and led to a new phase in Indo-Sri Lank an relations. The Government of India are                          
 extremely concerned at the outbreak of hostilities between LTTE and Sri Lankan armed                       
 forces which have led to civilian suffering and casualties. This has also led to an                        
 influx of refugees into Tamil Nadu which now stands at 122,972. These concerns have                        
 been conveyed by India to the Sri Lankan Government during the visit of the then                           
 Minister for External Affairs from 28 to 31 January 1991. During his visit, the then                       
 External Affairs Minister called on the Preside nt, the Prime Minister, the Speaker and                    
 other senior Cabinet Ministers of Sri Lanka and also met all shades of political and                       
 public opinion there. He also met representatives of all non-LTTE Tamil Groups and the                     
 President of the Ceylon Workers Congress representing largely the interests of persons                     
 of Indian origin , particularly those covered by the Srimavo-Shastri Agreement.                            
 pg6                                                                                                        
 The Government of India believe that only a negotiated political settlement which takes                    
 into account the legitimate demands and aspirations of the Tamils c an bring lasting                       
 peace to the island. The political settlement must be finally arr ived at between the                      
 Government and the Tamils of Sri Lanka. India has advocated for the cessation of                           
 hostilities and a return to dialogue. These views were conveye d to Sri Lanka                              
 Government during the then External Affairs Minister's visit there . The visit also                        
 served to underline the desire for strengthening and consolidati ng bilateral ties. It                     
 was agreed to upgrade the present Joint Economic Commission to that of a joint                             
 Commission at Foreign Minister's level.                                                                    
                                                                                                            
 The close and friendly relations between India and Maldives were further strengthened                      
 by high level visits. President Maumoon Abdul Gayoom visited New Delhi in March 1990.                      
 It was followed by the former Prime Minister, Shri V P Singh's visit to Male, the first                    
 after assuming office, from 22 to 24 June 19 90. Fresh impetus and content were given                      
 to the multi-faceted Indo-Maldivian cooperation which now encompasses health and                           
 welfare, infrastructure projects, defence, manpower resource development, civil                            
 aviation, communication and trade. Construction of the Indira Gandhi Memorial Hospital                     
 with Indian assistance is underway. It was also decided to set up a vocational training                    
 cen tre at an estimated cost of Rs 5 crores. Prime Minister Chandra Shekhar had                            
 bilateral discussions with President Gayoom during his visit to Male from 21 to 23                         
 November 1990 for the Fifth SAARC Summit. President Maumoon Abdul Gayoom again visited                     
 India from 25 to 27 January 1991 as the Chief Guest at the Republic Day 1991                               
 celebrations. He was accompanied by a high level delegation including Maldivian Foreign                    
 Minister. At the delegation level talks held by President Gayoom with Prime Minister                       
 Chandra Shekhar the entire gamut of bilateral relations was discussed. New areas of                        
 cooperation were considered. It was decided to review the 1981 Bilateral Trade                             
 Agreement. President Gayoom and Prime Minister Chandra Shekhar also exchanged views on                     
 the Gulf crisis and expressed their deep sorrow and concern over the loss of lives and                     
 human suffering caused by the hostilities. They expressed the hope that escalation and                     
 intensification of the conflict will be prevented and that all efforts will be made for                    
 a peaceful solution in conformi ty with the UN Security Council Resolutions.                               
                                                                                                            
 pg7                                                                                                        
                                                                                                            
 During the year under review, India continued her endeavours to develop tension free                       
 and good neighbourly relations with Pakistan on the basis of the Simla Agreement. The                      
 bilateral relationship had unfortunately come under severe strain on account of                            
 Pakistan's continued aid and abetment of terrorism directed against India in Punjab and                    
 Jammu and Kashmir. Ms was accompanied by inflammatory statements made by Pakistani                         
 leaders, in which efforts were also made to deliberately misrepresent the situation in                     
 Jammu and Kashmir. India conveyed in unequivocal terms to Pakistan that the latter's                       
 continued support to terrorism directed against India was not only in contravention of                     
 the Simla Agreement and of universally accepted norms of inter-State conduct, but also                     
 adversely affected any confidence-building in bilateral relationship. It also worked                       
 against the long term interest of peace and stability in the region. The then External                     
 Affairs Minister, Shri I K Gujral had a meeting with Pakistan's Foreign Minister,                          
 Sahabzada Yaqub Khan in New York on 25 April 1990. It was agreed in the meeting that                       
 tension should be reduced and confrontation avoided. The Directors General of Military                     
 Operations of India and Pakistan should remain in touch with each other and both sides                     
 should exercise restraint and keep channels of communication open.                                         
                                                                                                            
 In order to reduce tensions and allay fears of confrontation, India Pro- posed a                           
 package of Confidence Building Measures including both military and nonmilitary                            
 elements to Pakistan on 28 May 1990. Pursuant to this, three rounds of Foreign                             
 Secretary level talks were held between India and Pakistan. The discussions took place                     
 from 17 to 20 July (Islamabad), 9 to 12 August (New Delhi) and 18 to 20 December                           
 (Islamabad). It was pointed out to Pakistan that the root cause of the present tensions                    
 between the two countries was Pakistan's support to terrorist activities directed                          
 against India in Punjab and Jammu and Kashmir. For any meaningful and sustained                            
 improve- ment in India-Pakistan relations this support must stop. The Prime Ministers                      
 of India and Pakistan, Shri Chandra Shekhar and Mr Nawaz Sharif, had a fruitful and                        
 constructive exchange of views in the Mal- dives on 22 November 1990, on the occasion                      
 of the SAARC Summit. The two Prime Ministers decided that all differences should be                        
 resolved peacefully and through dialogue. Prime Minister Chandra Shekhar reiterated                        
 India's position on Pakistan's interference in her internal affairs. The two Prime Mini                    
 sters                                                                                                      
 pg8                                                                                                        
 agreed to remain in touch with each other. A 'hotline' has been established between the                    
 Prime Ministers of the two countries. The third round of Talks between the Foreign                         
 Secretaries was guided by th e directives of the Prime Ministers of India and Pakistan,                    
 following their meetin g in the Maldives on 22 November 1990. During the talks, it was                     
 decided to exchange, in January 199 1, the Instruments of Ratification of the Agreement                    
 on Prohibiti on of Attack against Nuclear. Installations and Facilities which was                          
 signed on 31 December 1988 and subsequently ratified by both Governments. The                              
 Instruments of Ratification were exchanged on 27 January 1991 and the Agreement came                       
 into effect from that date. Decisions were also taken to hold the next meeting of th e                     
 Surveyors General of India and Pakistan for demarcation of land boundary in Sir Creek,                     
 and to resume thereafter the discussions on the Tulbal Navigation Projec t. Surveyors                      
 General of India and Pakistan met in New Delhi from 23 to 26 March 1991. The meeting                       
 held in a better understanding of each other's perception. As a means of reducing                          
 tension between the two countries, it was agreed that the Directors General of Military                    
 Operations of Pakistan and India would keep in telephonic touch with each other on a                       
 weekly basis. This has already been initiated. The meetings of the Sub Commissions of                      
 India-Pakistan joint Commissi on are to be resumed at an appropriate time. It was also                     
 agreed that the next meet ing of the Foreign Secretaries would be held in New Delhi at                     
 mutually convenient dates. This would be preceded by a meeting of the experts to                           
 finalise the pendi ng drafts of (i) the Agreement on Advance Notice of Military                            
 Exercises and Manoeuvres and (ii) the Agreement on Prevention of Air Space Violation by                    
 Military Aircraft.                                                                                         
                                                                                                            
 There was some concern in India on account of recent reports regarding developments in                     
 Pakisan's weapons oriented and clandestine nuclear programme. Speaking in Parliament on                    
 7 January 1991, the Prime Minister had expressed the hope that Pakistan would not                          
 indulge in any misadventure. Should it do so, Indi a has the capability to meet the                        
 challenge, in whatever form it may arise. The Government of India hoped that Pakistan                      
 would join India in its endeavour to normalise relations and to promote peace and                          
 stability in the regi on. The conflict in Afghanistan, unfortunately, continued during                     
 the year. Period i- cally, foreign backed rebels mounted attacks on the cities in                          
 Afghanistan, but without much success. Over the year, various peace proposals were                         
 initiated; discussions were also held between the USA and the USSR to find a political                     
 solution to the crisis.                                                                                    
                                                                                                            
 pg9                                                                                                        
 India closely followed developments and maintained contacts with all those concerned                       
 with the situation in Afghanistan. India is for a political settlemen t of the problem                     
 arrived at by the Afghans themselves without external intervention and interference,                       
 and which takes into account the existing realities and legit imate interests of all                       
 concerned. India supports the preservation of Afghanistan's st atus as a sovereign,                        
 non-aligned and independent country. In the sphere of bilateral relations, there was a                     
 regular high level exchange of visits between India and Afghanistan. The Afghan                            
 President, Dr Najibullah visit ed India in August 1990. During this visit, agreements                      
 on Prevention of Traffickin g in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances,                               
 Cooperation between Agricultural Institutions, and Cultural Exchanges were signed. The                     
 9th Session of the Indo- Afghan joint Commission was held on 12 and 13 June 1990. This                     
 meeting was co-chaired by the Foreign Ministers of India and Afghanistan. A                                
 comprehensive protocol envisaging cooperation in areas ranging from agriculture to                         
 commodity assistance and telecommunications was signed during the meeting. Foreign                         
 Minister of Afghanistan, Mr Abdul Wakil, during his official visit to India fro m 7 to                     
 9 February 1991, met the President and the Prime Minister, and also had discussions                        
 with the then External Affairs Minister on bilateral, regional and international issues                    
 of mutual interest with special focus on the Gulf crisis. The then Minister for                            
 Commerce, Law and justice visited Afghanistan from 30 December 1990 to 1 January 1991.                     
                                                                                                            
 With the finalisation of the dates and venue for the Fifth Summit, the pace o f SAARC                      
 activities registered an increase. This was especially true of the Techni cal                              
 Committees in the twelve agreed areas of cooperation. Most of these Committees had not                     
 been convened in the earlier part of 1990 due to there being indecision about their                        
 Chairpersons. With the finalisation of the Summit dates, it was als o decided that                         
 Chairpersonship would continue to vest with the countries who were already vested with                     
 a particular charge during the year 1989. Broadly, India's stance on SAARC matters                         
 during the year was characterised by the following principles:                                             
                                                                                                            
 (a) Emphasis was laid on the need to introduce tangible cooperation in SAARC by                            
 focussing attention on core economic sectors;                                                              
                                                                                                            
 (b) A realistic approach was adopted in matters relating to the setting up of                              
 pg10                                                                                                       
 Regional Centres etc. In almost all such cases India recommended that rather than                          
 setting up of such centres, which could drain the limited resources of SAARC countries,                    
 member countries should explore the possibility of establishing networking arrangements                    
 between relevant institutions in the SAARC regions; and                                                    
                                                                                                            
 (c) AR efforts were made to keep SAARC initiatives anchored to the objective of                            
 achieving collective self-reliance within the region. Under the Integrated Programme of                    
 Action in the twelve agreed areas of cooperation, a total number of 86 SAARC                               
 activities/events were held in SAARC countries during the years 1989 and 1990 ie,                          
 during the period intervening between the Fourth and the Fifth Summits. Of these, 26                       
 activities were organized in India. Three events/activities were held in January 1991.                     
 Of these, two were organized in India. The culmination of all such activities was the                      
 Fifth SAARC Summit held in the Maldives which took place in accordance with the                            
 following schedule:                                                                                        
                                                                                                            
 (i) Eighth Meeting of the Programming Committee (13 and 14 November 1990);                                 
                                                                                                            
 (ii) Thirteenth Meeting of the Standing Committee of Foreign Secretaries (15 to 17                         
 November 1990);                                                                                            
                                                                                                            
 (iii) Eighth Meeting of the Council of Ministers (18 and 19 November 1990); aid                            
                                                                                                            
 (iv) Fifth Meeting (Summit) of Heads of State/Government (21 to 23 November 1990).                         
 During the Summit meeting at Mate, a general emphasis was laid on the streamlining of                      
 SAARC programmes and activities. Ms guideline was diligently implemented by the                            
 Programming Committee at the time of formulating the SAARC Calendar of Activities for                      
 the year 1991. Many of the events recom- mended by the various Technical Committees                        
 were deleted by the Programming Committee either because there had not been adequate                       
 response from member countries or in favour of other activities which pertained to new                     
 themes/hi-tec h subjects etc. Generally speaking, the Technical Committees instead of                      
 spreading their field too wide, were asked to concentrate on fewer programmes of better                    
 pg11                                                                                                       
 quality. The Presidents of Maldives and Bangladesh were asked to hold consultations                        
 with other member countries on the question of adopting a more business-like and                           
 functional approach in the SAARC meetings. The Fifth SAARC Summit took the following                       
 major decisions:                                                                                           
                                                                                                            
 (i) A SAARC Convention on Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances was signed in Male                    
 at the Foreign Secretaries level. The Convention is an important step in eliminating                       
 the scourge of Drug Trafficking and Drug Abuse from the region;                                            
                                                                                                            
 (ii) It was decided to set up new Regional Centres for the SAARC region-(a) a                              
 Tuberculosis Centre at Kathmandu to reduce the fatal disease in the region; (b) a                          
 Nucleus Human Resource Development Centre in Pakistan for qualitative improvement in                       
 the human skills of the people of the region; and (c) a Documentation Centre in India                      
 for collection, publication and dissemination of information of technical and                              
 scientific nature, including the social science, published in or upon the SAARC region;                    
                                                                                                            
 (iii) It was decided to launch the Special SAARC Travel Document which would entitle                       
 members of National Parliaments, Supreme Court Judges and Heads of National Academic                       
 Institutions, their spouses and depen- dent children, to visa-free travel within the                       
 region;                                                                                                    
                                                                                                            
 (iv) In order to focus attention and redress the grave problem of shelter it was                           
 decided to work together during 1991 which will be known as "SAARC Year of Shelter."                       
 During the year 1992, it was decided to concentrate through "SAARC Year of                                 
 Environment," on problems facing the region on the vital issues of environmental                           
 degradation and its adverse impact on future generations. There are a large number of                      
 disabled and physically handicapped people in the region for whose welfare it was                          
 decided to work together during 1993, the "SAARC Year of the Handicapped;"                                 
                                                                                                            
 (v) It was decided to complete the Regional Study on Trade, Manufactures and Services                      
 through which a blueprint of regional economic coopera- tion will be charted, by the                       
 end of February 1991. This would mark the beginning of a new phase of economic                             
 cooperation in SAARC, which alone can make a difference to the daily lives of the                          
 people of                                                                                                  
 pg12                                                                                                       
 the region. It was decided to set up a Fund for Identification and Development of                          
 Regional Projects which will be financed through SAARC national development banks. This                    
 Fund, once established, will enable the starting up of joint ventures of economic                          
 cooperation in the region. Likewise, it was decided to set up joint ventures in the                        
 field of Cottage Industries and Handicrafts as these activities have extensive scope                       
 for employment generation of large number of unemployed youth;                                             
                                                                                                            
 (vi) It was decided that India will host the Second Ministerial Meeting in 1991, to                        
 review the outcome of Uruguay Round and to coordinate the positions of SAARC countries                     
 at international conferences including the UN Conference on Environment and Development                    
 to be held in 1992. This meeting will also address itself to the objectives of                             
 attaining individual and collective self-reliance in the region;                                           
                                                                                                            
 (vii) It was decided to extend scientific and technical cooperation further into the                       
 fields of Biotechnology for attaining long term food security o f the South Asian                          
 countries as well as for medicinal purposes; and                                                           
                                                                                                            
 (WU) On the initiative of the Government of Sri Lanka, it was decided to promote                           
 tourism to the SAARC region from outside and to promote institutionalised cooperation                      
 among SAARC tourist industries. The Male Summit can be credited with substantial                           
 achievements. However, it hardly bears reiteration that only strong and clear political                    
 will can enable t he SAARC countries to move confidently in the new areas of                               
 cooperation identified by it. India is committed to South Asian cooperation under SAARC                    
 which she feels is essential for accelerating the economic development, for building                       
 indi - vidual and collective self-reliance and for enhancing the SAARC countries'                          
 bargaining strength in multilateral associations. Such cooperation has become a ll the                     
 more necessary in the context of the recent trends towards economic integration in the                     
 world, added to which the Gulf crisis may even have made cooperation vita or SAA                           
 countries' very survival. India, consistent with her size, resources and stage of                          
 development, is pledged to take on all the responsibilities necessary to make SAARC an                     
 effective and fullfledged instrumen t of regional cooperation.                                             
                                                                                                            
 pg13                                                                                                       
 South-East Asia and the Pacific                                                                            
                                                                                     Top                    
 SOUTH-EAST ASIA AND THE PACIFIC THE importance that India attaches to maintaining and                      
 expanding close and friendly relations with the countries in South-East Asia and the                       
 South Pacific is testified by the high level contacts and frequency of interaction with                    
 these countries. Relations with Cambodia continued to be close and friendly. Prime                         
 Minister Hun Sen paid a working visit to India from 7 to Oct 11, 1990, and met the                         
 former Prime Minister, the then External Affairs Minister and other Ministers.                             
 Discussions were held on bilateral issues as well as on prospects for the resolution of                    
 the Cambodian conflicts. Prime Minister Hun Sen stressed the importance of India                           
 continuing to play a role in the Cambodian settlement, and participating in the UNTAC                      
 (United Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia). India agreed to give Cambodia                         
 concessional credit and assistance worth Rs 3 crores, in addition to the ongoing                           
 assistance of Rs 2 crores for the Angkor Vat Restoration Project and Rs 1 crore for                        
 humanitarian assistance including the su pply of medicines and artificial limbs. India                     
 also agreed to explore the possibility of extending more food aid to Cambodia.                             
                                                                                                            
 India continued to play an active and constructive role to achieve a peaceful                              
 negotiated settlement in Cambodia through frequent official interaction and                                
 consultations with leaders in concerned countries. Discussions on a Cambodian                              
 settlement continued in various fora including regional meetings, and meetings of the                      
 Five Permanent members of the UN Security Council (P-5). A framework for a settlement                      
 based on a major UN role in governing Cambodia in the interim period leading upto                          
 elections has been formulated. India was actively involved                                                 
 pg14                                                                                                       
 in discussions on this proposal, and expressed her concern on a number of issue s,                         
 including the need for the settlement to be consistent with respect for Cambodi a's                        
 sovereignty. The importance of these concerns has been acknowledged. Senior officials                      
 of the Ministry attended meetings to discuss the P-5 proposa l, including the one held                     
 in Jakarta in September 1990. In her capacity as co- Chairman of the First Committee of                    
 the Paris international Conference, India participated in the November 1990 Jakarta                        
 meeting to draft the final agreement. Secretary (East), Shri L L Mehrotra visited                          
 Cambodia and Vietnam from 6 to 11 January 1991 and held detailed discussions with                          
 leaders of these countries. Bilateral issues were also discussed. India will continue                      
 to actively participa te in discussions at the forthcoming meeting of the Coordinating                     
 Committee of the Paris Conference, which is expected to take place in Paris in early                       
 1991.                                                                                                      
                                                                                                            
 At the request of the Cambodian Government, a diplomatic officer visited Hanoi and                         
 Phnom Penh in early 1990, to give a detailed exposition on the Namibian elections.                         
 India also sent constitutional and election experts to advi se the Vietnamese and the                      
 State of Cambodia Governments. India's traditionally close relations with Vietnam were                     
 further strengthened by exchanges of high level visits with particular stress being                        
 laid on enhancing bilateral economic, scientific and technical cooperation. The then                       
 External Affairs Minister, Shri I K Gujral visited Vietnam in April 1990, in connection                    
 with the 4th meeting of the Indo-Vietnam joint Economic, Scientific and Technical                          
 Commission and held detailed discussions. The Buffalo and Forage Research Centre and                       
 Rice Research Institute set up in Vietnam under the ITEC programme were formally handed                    
 over by the Minister. During talks on regional and international issues, the Vietnamese                    
 leaders expressed their support for India' s stand on Kashmir, and criticised                              
 Pakistan's interference in India's internal af fairs. The then Minister for Commerce,                      
 Shri Arun Nehru visited Vietnam in September 1990, and signed a Trade Protocol, which                      
 is expected to substantially increase bilateral trade and economic cooperation. A                          
 Vietnam-India Chamber of Com- merce was formally set up in mid-1990. ONGC Videsh Ltd                       
 completed its seismic survey in off-shore areas under contract with Petro-Vietnam, and                     
 began drilling in mid-1990. The Vietnamese Chief of General Staff visited India in                         
 November and held talks on enhancing defence cooperation.                                                  
                                                                                                            
 In response to a Vietnamese request for assistance, part of the food supplies sent for                     
 Indian nationals in Iraq was distributed to Vietnamese citizens there.                                     
 pg15                                                                                                       
 In the field of culture, a Vietnamese Puppet theatre group visited India unde r ICCR                       
 sponsorship. A number of initiatives were taken to appropriately commemorate the Birth                     
 Centenary of late President Ho Chi Minh on 19 May 1990. A National Committee chaired by                    
 the former Prime Minister was set up to coordinate the Centenary celebrations in India.                    
 These included the release of a commemorative stamp by the former Prime Minister on 17                     
 May 1990 at the Parliament House Annexe, where an exhibition of photographs on Ho Chi                      
 Minh was held, and re- naming of Chirag Delhi Road as Ho Chi Minh Marg at a ceremony                       
 presided over by the then External Affairs Minister and the Lt Governor of Delhi on 19                     
 May 1990. Publications of Ho Chi Minh's "Prison Diary" (poems) and a book on Ho Chi                        
 Minh by the former Vietnamese Prime Minister Pham Van Dong were brought out. The Chief                     
 Minister of West Bengal, Shri Jyoti Basu led a delegation to Vie tnam to participate in                    
 the Centenary celebrations there. A seminar on "Ho Chi Minh, Vietnam and International                     
 Peace" in which leading national and international scholars participated, and related                      
 cultural activities were held in Calcutta fr om 14 to 16 January 1991 to mark the                          
 culmination of the celebrations. General Vo Nguyen Giap, Vice Chairman of the Council                      
 of Ministers of Vietnam visited India from 11 to 20 January 1991 as the Chief Guest at                     
 the seminar. Prime Minister unveiled a bust of President Ho Chi Minh, presented by the                     
 Vietnamese Government and installed at a prominent location in Calcutta. A public                          
 meeting was organized where the Prime Minister, the then External Affairs Minister, Wes                    
 t Bengal Chief Minister and General Giap, among others spoke. Calcutta University                          
 conferred an Honorary Doctorate on General Giap at a special convocation. The Centenary                    
 celebrations also included an exhibition of photographs and momentos of Ho Chi Minh and                    
 a Vietnamese film festival. The celebrations and General Giap's visit received wide                        
 coverage in India and Vietnam and have been deeply appreciated by the Vietnamese                           
 authorities.                                                                                               
                                                                                                            
 India's friendly relations and economic cooperation with Laos were main- tained. Lao                       
 trainees continued to visit India for training in diverse fields un der ITEC and other                     
 programmes. Deputation of Indian experts also continued. Additional Secretary (East)                       
 visited Laos in April 1990 and held talks on bilate ral and regional issues, including                     
 the Cambodian settlement. Dato Haji Abu Hassan Bin Haji Omar, Foreign Minister of                          
 Malaysia visited Indi a from 11 to 13 April 1990 as Special Envoy of his Prime Minister                    
 to invite India 's                                                                                         
 pg16                                                                                                       
 Prime Minister to attend the First Summit Meeting on South-South Cooperation in Kuala                      
 Lumpur. The former Prime Minister, Shri V P Singh visited Malaysia from 1 to 4 June to                     
 attend the Summit and followed it up with a bilateral visit. Ways for enhancing                            
 bilateral cooperation with Malaysia in various fields including com- merce and                             
 economic, tourism, civil aviation, banking, health education, solar energy etc were                        
 discussed. It was decided to upgrade the joint Committee to a joint Commission at the                      
 level of Foreign Ministers to enhance bilateral coopera - tion. Responding to urgent                       
 requests from Malaysia, it was decided to assign 150 additional seats in six private                       
 medical colleges for foreign students, includin g Malaysians. Subsequently, Malaysia                       
 was assisted in recruiting Indian medical teachers to meet the shortage in their                           
 institutions.                                                                                              
                                                                                                            
 At India's request Malaysia agreed to increase the supply of crude oil by 500 0 BPD to                     
 meet her urgent requirement, consequent upon the Gulf situations. Foreign Secretary                        
 paid a visit to Kuala Lumpur from 3 to 6 January 1991 and had consultations with                           
 Malaysian authorities on bilateral, regional and interna tional issues of mutual                           
 concern. He also called on Prime Minister, Dr Mahathir. It was decided that the first                      
 meeting of the joint Commission at Foreign Minister's le vel would be held in Delhi. Mr                    
 Peter Sung, Minister of State for Foreign Affairs and Trade Development of Singapore                       
 paid a private visit to India from 8 to 14 April 1990 as the Head of a high level trade                    
 delegation to have discussions with representatives of Indian Trade and Industry and                       
 Indian leaders on development and expansion of bilateral trade and investment between                      
 the two countries. The Singapore trade delegation comprised of 38 executives from 36                       
 companies and visited Karnataka, Madras and Bombay besides Delhi.                                          
                                                                                                            
 Shri Arif Mohammed Khan, the then Minister for Energy and Civil Aviation, paid a visit                     
 to Indonesia in May and called on President Soeharto and other lea ders and exchanged                      
 views on matters of mutual concern. Mr Soeharto, who had kindly accepted an invitation                     
 to be India's Chief Guest during the Republic Day 1991 celebrations, cancelled the                         
 visit at the last moment due to developments in the Gulf region. India sent relief                         
 supplies of medicines worth Rs 5 lakhs to the Philippines a s a token of her concern                       
 for the victims of the earthquake that occurred there on 1 6 July 1990.                                    
 pg17                                                                                                       
 The Secretary of Foreign Affairs of the Philippines, Mr Raul S Manglapus visited Delhi                     
 from 1 to 4 August 1990. The Vice President of India released the Indian edition of Mr                     
 Manglapus' book "Will of the People" which deals with the origin of democracy in the                       
 East and democratic institutions in ancient India. A n economic! and technical                             
 cooperation agreement was signed during this visit. Although the second meeting of the                     
 Indo-Thai joint Commission scheduled to be held in New Delhi could not take place,                         
 bilateral economic and political relations continued to progress. Brunei's new High                        
 Commissioner resident in Kuala Lumpur and concurrently accredited to India, presented                      
 his credentials to the President on 24 November 1990.                                                      
                                                                                                            
 Relations with Australia which were progressing well, received a temporary setback when                    
 in April Australia announced the sale of 50 mothballed but air- worthy Mirage III                          
 aircraft along with an unspecified number of engines and spar es to Pakistan worth                         
 approximately Australian $ 35 million. India conveyed her concern at the timing of the                     
 decision which would not send a message of restrai nt to Pakistan at a time when                           
 tensions between India and Pakistan were. high and pointed out that the Australian                         
 decision was contrary to their announced foreig n policy objective of reducing tension                     
 in the region. To emphasize her concern, India limited bilateral exchanges. Foreign                        
 Minister Evans came to India in Augu st in an attempt to assure the Government of India                    
 that the contract would be reviewed in the event of hostilities breaking out or                            
 becoming imminent. He also implied that the actual delivery would not take place till                      
 the end of 1990 or e arly 1991. Despite these assurances, shipments got underway in                        
 October. The official spokesman issued a strongly worded statement conveying India's                       
 concern . The traditionally friendly relations between India and New Zealand were                          
 maintained.                                                                                                
                                                                                                            
 Developments in Fiji continued to cause concern. On 23 May 1990, the "interim                              
 Government" of Fiji asked India to close her Mission in Suva because o f allegedly                         
 "unfriendly and unwarranted acts." In accordance with international practice, India                        
 closed her Mission the next day and made arrangements to repatriate the India-based                        
 staff. Following the closure of the Mission in Suva, India's Missions in Canberra,                         
 Wellington and Sydney were authorised to maintain                                                          
 pg18                                                                                                       
 contact with the Indian community in Fiji, as well as those who have migrated t o New                      
 Zealand and Australia since the two military coups. In August 1990, the illegal regime                     
 in Fiji promulgated a new Constitution subverting the 1970 Constitution which came into                    
 force at the time of independ- ence. The National Federation Party (NFP) and Fiji                          
 Labour Party (FLP) Coalition, which won the last free and fair elections in Fiji,                          
 condemned the ne w Constitution as racist, feudal and undemocratic. India strongly                         
 condemned the promulgation of the new Constitution. India continues to extend moral                        
 support to all democratic forces committed to maintain racial equality and social                          
 harmony in Fiji. A high level delegation of coalition leaders visited India in                             
 September 1990 and met the then External Aff airs Minister and other Ministers. The                        
 delegation participated in seminars and meeti ngs with intellectuals and academics, and                    
 also visited Patna and Lucknow. Following the abduction and torture of a senior                            
 academic of Indian origin by the Fijian Police in October, India issued a strong                           
 statement condemning the autocratic suppression of legitimate democratic dissent in                        
 Fiji. The ban on trade, economic and technical cooperation with Fiji continued.                            
 However, India has decided to continue to provide scholarships to Fijian students of                       
 Indian origin, and to increase the number of these scholarships. The cases would be                        
 processed through the Missions in Australia and New Zealand.                                               
                                                                                                            
 India has been lobbying with concerned Commonwealth countries against the present                          
 regime in Fiji, and has also taken up the issue in international fo ra including the                       
 United Nations General Assembly, Human Rights Sub Commission for Prevention of                             
 Discrimination and Protection of Minorities, the Human Rights Commission and the                           
 Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (ESCAP). India also supported                      
 the efforts of the NFP-FLP Coalition to present its case at the South Pacific Forum                        
 Summit meeting in August 1990. The President of Nauru, Mr Bernard Dowiyogo, visited                        
 India between December 1990 and January 1991 to discuss their investment in the                            
 Paradeep                                                                                                   
 pg19                                                                                                       
 Phosphates Ltd plant in Orissa. Indo-Nauru Friendship Association, established in 1990,                    
 released a souvenir commemorating the President's visit. The High Commissioner of Papua                    
 New Guinea to India, resident in Malaysia, presented his credentials on 22 January                         
 1991.                                                                                                      
 pg20                                                                                                       
 East Asia                                                                                                  
                                                                                     Top                    
 EAST ASIA                                                                                                  
 DURING the year under review, there was further improvement in the dia- logue between                      
 India and China on matters of mutual interest. India's policy towards China, which aims                    
 at seeking a peaceful resolution of outstanding issue s in a fair and reasonable                           
 manner, was an important focus of Government's concerns. The factors of continuity and                     
 consensus of approach within the country to India's China policy were stressed in the                      
 political level dialogue, particularl y during the visits of the Deputy Prime Minister                     
 to China in May 1990 and the Chinese Foreign Minister, Mr Qian Qichen to India in March                    
 1990. India's commitment to further consolidating and improving the atmosphere of                          
 under- standing established following the Prime Ministerial visit to China in December                     
 1988, was emphasized. The high level political dialogue gathered further momentum with                     
 the visit of the then External Affairs Minister, Shri Vidya Chara n Shukla to China in                     
 February 1991.                                                                                             
                                                                                                            
 The Chinese Premier, Mr Li Peng in a message of felicitation addressed to Shr i Chandra                    
 Shekhar upon his assumption of the office of Prime Minister in November 1990, expressed                    
 the hope that bilateral relations between the two countries wil l be continuously                          
 improved and developed on the basis of Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence. Shri                       
 Chandra Shekhar reciprocated these sentiments and underlined the Government of India's                     
 desire to provide greater momentum to the process of dialogue and understanding                            
 initiated between the two countries in recent times.                                                       
                                                                                                            
 The dialogue and interaction with China was marked by cordiality and frankness. Efforts                    
 were made to intensify bilateral ties in various fields to                                                 
 pg21                                                                                                       
 strengthen cooperation on multilateral issues of concern to India and China as two                         
 large developing countries representing two fifths of the world's population, a nd also                    
 to engage in a candid and comprehensive discussion on issues affecting the region. Both                    
 India and China resolved to cooperate in seeking a peaceful and early settlement of the                    
 conflict in the Gulf.                                                                                      
                                                                                                            
 The fortieth anniversary of the establishment of diplomatic relations between India and                    
 the People's Republic of China was observed in April 1990. Messages of greetings were                      
 exchanged between the two countries at the level of the President, the Prime Minister                      
 and the then External Affairs Minister. Art exhibitions and cultural troupes were also                     
 exchanged in commemoration of the event. The visit of the Chinese Foreign Minister, Mr                     
 Qian Qichen in March 1990 provided both sides with the opportunity to have a detailed                      
 exchange of views o n matters of bilateral, regional and international concern.                            
 Discussions held duri ng the visit vielded a better understanding of the perceptions of                    
 each country. Discussions during the visit of the then External Affairs Minister to                        
 China f rom 1 to Feb 06, 1991 took place in a positive and friendly atmosphere. This                       
 Was evident during the discussions held with the Chinese Foreign Minister, and duri ng                     
 meetings with Premier Li Peng and Vice Premier Wu Xueqian. There was an exchange of                        
 views on a wide range of bilateral, regional and international issu es.                                    
                                                                                                            
 The Chinese side assessed relations with India as having improved "markedly."                              
 Significant outcomes of this visit were the decision to restore Consulates Gene ral of                     
 the two countries in Shanghai and Bombay and to resume border trade. The Deputy Prime                      
 Minister and Agriculture Minister, Shri Devi Lal visited China in April. During his                        
 visit, Shri Devi Lal met the then Acting Premier, Mr Yao Yilin, and held intensive                         
 discussions on agricultural cooperation with the then Chinese Minister for Agriculture,                    
 Mr He Kang. India's continued commitment to seeking a negotiated settlement of the                         
 boundary question in consonance with national interests and national sentiments was                        
 conveyed to the Chinese Govern- ment. Key areas for future agricultural cooperation                        
 such as hybrid rice cultivation, integrated fish-paddy culture, plasticulture,                             
 cotton-seed producti on, dryland farming, dairy development. and exchange of various                       
 germplasms were                                                                                            
 pg22                                                                                                       
 identified. A blueprint for such cooperation was then drawn up during the visit of the                     
 Chinese Vice Minister for Agriculture, Mr Wang Zhenliang to India in Octobe r. The                         
 second meeting of the Joint Working Group on the boundary question, followed by                            
 consultations at the Foreign Office level, took place in New. Delhi in end August 1990.                    
 The Chinese delegation was led by Vice Foreign Minister, Mr Qi Huaiyuan. The Indian                        
 delegation was led by the Foreign Secretary, Shri Muchkund Dubey. Discussions covered                      
 the principles and parameters which should govern an overall and comprehensive                             
 settlement of the boundary question. The meeting resulted in a clearer perception of                       
 views held by each side in rega rd to the approach to a negotiated settlement. The need                    
 for a practical and realis tic approach was stressed by the Indian side. Both sides                        
 expressed the hope that by working in a sincere and forward looking manner, it would be                    
 possible to arrive at a negotiated solution to the boundary question. During the visit                     
 of the then External Affairs Minister to China, it was resolved that next meeting of                       
 the jo int Working Group would take place not later than June 1991.                                        
                                                                                                            
 The second meeting of the Joint Working Group also resulted in agreement on a mechanism                    
 for maintaining peace and tranquillity in the border areas. This mechanism envisages                       
 the holding of periodic meetings between the border personnel of the two sides at                          
 specified locations in the eastern and western se ctors of the border. The first set of                    
 such meetings took place in November 1990. The mechanism is expected to strengthen                         
 confidence-building between border person- nel of the two sides.                                           
                                                                                                            
 High level visits during the year included the visit of Mr Li Guixian, Govern or of the                    
 People's Bank of China, to India in April for the ADB Board of Governors meeting, and                      
 the visit of Mr Li Xue, Vice Chairman of the State Environment Commission of China, to                     
 attend the meeting of Select Developing Countries on Environment and Development. Mr Li                    
 Xue's visit enabled the two sides to exchange views and discuss cooperation on the                         
 agenda of the London meeting on amendments to the Montreal Protocol. The Chinese                           
 Minister for Water Resources, Mr Yang Zhenhuai visited India in December 1990. A                           
 delegation of provincial leaders and Vice Governors sponsored by the Chinese State                         
 Council's Leading Group on Economic Development of Poor Areas also visited the country.                    
 The visit of Mr Deng Pufang, Chairman of the China Welfare Fund for the Handicapped                        
 between November and December, promoted bilateral cooperation in the field of welfare                      
 of the handicapped in India and China. Shri Soli Sorabj ee, the then Attorney General                      
 visited China in May. The Secretaries in the                                                               
 pg23                                                                                                       
 Departments of Electronics, Petroleum and Coal, and Culture, also paid visits t o                          
 China. During the visit of Secretary (Culture), a new Cultural Exchange Programme for                      
 1991 to 1993 was finalised, providing also for an expansion in th e number of                              
 scholarships offered to students of both countries. Cordial and friendly relations                         
 between India and Japan which received a new impetus in the mid-80s were further                           
 intensified during the year under review. Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu visited India                       
 between April and May 1990. Significantly, he chose India to begin his tour of South                       
 Asian nations and util ised the opportunity in his address to both the Houses of                           
 Parliament to expound the "New International Cooperation Initiative." President R                          
 Venkataraman represented India at the formal Enthronement Ceremony of Emperor Akihito                      
 in November 1990.                                                                                          
                                                                                                            
 Bilateral interaction between the two countries continued in all spheres including the                     
 political, economic, scientific, technological and cultural field s. The then Industry                     
 Minister, Shri Ajit Singh and the then Commerce and Tourism Minister, Shri Arun Nehru                      
 visited Japan to explore the possibility of greater Japanese investment in India as                        
 also to explain India's industrial policy and t ourist and commercial potential                            
 respectively. They utilised the opportunity to interac t with a broad spectrum of                          
 Japanese community, particularly the business commun- ity in addition to meeting                           
 Ministerial counterparts.                                                                                  
                                                                                                            
 Other areas where bilateral contacts and linkages were maintained are:                                     
                                                                                                            
 (i) The Indo-Japan Foreign Office Bilateral Consultative Talks in New Delhi in February                    
 1991 afforded both sides an opportunity for productive and frank exchange of views on                      
 issues ranging from the current international situation, including the Gulf war,                           
 developments in Europe, East-West relations, regional matters particularly relations                       
 with India's neighbours, and most important, the bilateral relations;                                      
                                                                                                            
 (ii) The 19th meeting of the India-Japan joint Study Committee deliberated on several                      
 aspects of relationship and suggested the possibility of establishing an industrial                        
 model town in India with Japanese participa- tion;                                                         
 pg24                                                                                                       
                                                                                                            
 (iii) The 8th official level trade talks focussing on both bilateral and multilateral                      
 issues particularly with reference to Uruguay Round of Trade Negotiations; and                             
                                                                                                            
 (iv) Two meetings of the Indo-Japan Working Group on Railways for furthering                               
 cooperation with Japan and for receiving technical assistance for the upgradation and                      
 improvement of India's railway system. India participated in several                                       
 exhibitions/conferences held in Japan, in field s as diverse as Science and Technology                     
 and Horticulture, the most significant being:                                                              
                                                                                                            
 (a) A Software India-90 Conference with participation by both Indian Government and                        
 leading Indian Software firms; and                                                                         
                                                                                                            
 (b) Successful participation at the six-month long Osaka Garden and Greenery Exposition                    
 which drew large crowds and won several awards. Japan continued to remain India's                          
 largest aid donor and pledged Yen 104,826 million as Official Development Assistance to                    
 India for fiscal year 1990 crossi ng for the first time the Yen 100 billion mark, at                       
 the Aid India Consortium meeting in Paris in June. On 23 January 1991 seven loan                           
 agreements totalling Yen 129.205 billion were signed in Tokyo, of which six were                           
 covered under ODA pledge for 1990 while the seventh for Yen 24.379 billion was for the                     
 Power System Improvement and Small Hydro Electric Project which formed part of the 1989                    
 fiscal year ODA package.                                                                                   
                                                                                                            
 Friendly relations with the Republic of Korea continued. A Special Envoy of President                      
 Roh Tae Woo, Ambassador Roh Jae Won, visited India with a special message to the Prime                     
 Minister and to explain his country's Nord-Politick. This visit was preceded by ROK                        
 Foreign Minister Choi Ho Joong's visit to India in March 1990. The visit envisaged                         
 greater growth in bilateral trade, economic relations and scientific and technological                     
 exchanges. The traditional Parliamentary contacts with the Republic of Korea continued                     
 with the visit of an 11 member Parliamentary delegation led by the Speaker of t he                         
 National Assembly, Mr Park Jyun Kyu to India from 6 to 11 January 1991 at the                              
 invitation of the Speaker of the Lok Sabha. The South Korean Parliamentarians met the                      
 Vice President and the Prime Minister. They also had fruitful exchanges with their                         
 Indian counterparts.                                                                                       
 pg25                                                                                                       
 There was close interaction at both the official and non-official levels. In the                           
 economic and commercial fields, bilateral relations received a boost with the v isit of                    
 a 25 member South Korean delegation led by the Chairman of the Indo-Korean Economic                        
 Cooperation Committee for the 8th joint Conference in New Delhi. The Conference                            
 highlighted the fact that there was ample scope for intensifying future areas of                           
 cooperation and collaboration. With 1989 bilateral trade betwee n India and the                            
 Republic of Korea at US $ 930 million--comprising less than 1 per cent of the ROK's                        
 total trade turnover, there was room for both India and the Republic of Korea to                           
 improve the volume of trade both ways from areas as divers e as consumer goods,                            
 electronics, automobiles and footwear to other areas such as computer software, oil                        
 drilling and deep sea fishing.                                                                             
                                                                                                            
 With the far-reaching economic and political changes and re-alignments having taken                        
 place in the erstwhile Communist nations of Europe, the Democratic People's Republic of                    
 Korea turned increasingly to traditionally friendly countr ies like India which is also                    
 a member of the Non-Aligned Movement. DPRK Vice Foreign Minister Cho Gyu 11 visited                        
 India for discussions on bilateral matters and matters of international and mutual                         
 interests. Contacts at other levels were maintained and bilateral relations remained                       
 cordial and steady. Former Presiden t Giani Zail Singh visited Pyongyang as a Guest of                     
 the Workers Party of Korea as also several Parliamentarians to attend the 45th                             
 anniversary of the founding of the Party. Contacts in the scientific, technological and                    
 cultural fields were also maintained.                                                                      
                                                                                                            
 India's age old and friendly relations with the Mongolian People's Republic were                           
 reaffirmed with modern linkages. Mongolia introduced major political changes and                           
 far-reaching economic reforms in 1990 when she opted for democracy. In view of the                         
 close relations with Mongolia, India sent an Observer to the first multi-party                             
 elections held in July 1990. Interaction and contacts at all levels and in the fields                      
 of science and technology, economic and commerce, and culture were intensified.                            
 Particularly significant was the visit of Dr J Batsuuri, Minister for National                             
 Development o f Mongolia who had detailed and extensive exchanges with, Ministerial                        
 counterpart s, academics and scientists to explore further areas of cooperation between                    
 the tw o countries. Other distinguished visitors included the Ministers of Law and                         
 Healt h, the former came to study the structure and functioning of India's legislature                     
 a nd parliamentary processes.                                                                              
 pg26                                                                                                       
 West Asia And North Africa                                                                                 
                                                                                     Top                    
 WEST ASIA AND NORTH AFRICA                                                                                 
 DURING the year under review, India's relations with the countries of the West Asia and                    
 North Africa region saw a further consolidation and diversifica- tion in all the                           
 important areas including political, economic and cultural. The Palestinian uprising                       
 against Israeli occupation of the West Bank and the Gaza Strip continued through the                       
 third year. President Yasser Arafat visited In dia in March 1990 to receive the                            
 Jawaharlal Nehru Award for International Under- standing. He briefed the Indian leaders                    
 on the situation prevailing in the occupied territories and various initiatives taken                      
 by him to promote positive climate for resumption. of the West Asian peace process.                        
 India assured him of her firm and unequivocal support for the Palestinian cause. During                    
 the visit, degree of Doctor of Science was also conferred on President Arafat by Jamia                     
 Mil ia Islamia. Three Special Envoys of Presided Arafat, Dr Suleman Daodi, Dr Salman                       
 Hirfi and Mr Jamal Sourani also visited India in June and October 1990 and Janu ary-                       
 February 1991 respectively. India espoused the Palestinian cause in all bilater al and                     
 multilateral fora. during the year and emphasized that a just and lasting solution to                      
 the Palestinian problem was possible only through the early conveni ng of an                               
 international peace conference under the UN auspices with the participati on of all the                    
 parties to the Arab-Israeli dispute including the Palestine Liberati on Organization as                    
 the sole legitimate representative of the Palestinian people. T he then Minister for                       
 External Affairs, Shri I K Gujral participated in the meeting of the NAM Committee of                      
 Nine on Palestine in Tunis in March 1990.                                                                  
                                                                                                            
 Close contacts and consultations were maintained with Egypt during this period. Visits                     
 from India to Egypt included that of the Deputy Chairperson of Rajya Sabha, Dr Najma                       
 Heptullah in January, of the then Minister for Energy and                                                  
 pg27                                                                                                       
 Civil Aviation, Shri Arif Mohammed Khan as Special Envoy of the former Prime Minister                      
 in March 1990, and of the then Minister for Railways and Kashmir Affai rs, Shri George                     
 Fernandes in July 1990. From Egypt Mr Abdel Hamid Shafi, Special Envoy of the President                    
 of Egypt visited India in September 1990 and the Egyptia n Minister of State for                           
 Foreign Affairs, Dr Boutros Ghali in November 1990. There were exchanges of other                          
 official and non-official delegations also. Relations with Syria developed further.                        
 Shri Muchkund Dubey as Secretary (ER) visited Damascus between March and April 1990 for                    
 Secretary leve l bilateral talks. S/Shri Inderjit and Charanjit Yadav, MPs visited                         
 Syria in June and November 1990 respectively. A protocol on cooperation in information                     
 and broadcasting was signed in Damascus in early March 1990, during the visit of a                         
 delegation from the Information and Broadcasting Ministry. The Chief of the Syrian Air                     
 Force, Major General Ali Malahifiji visited India in April 1990. Vis its of other                          
 official and non-official delegations also took place.                                                     
                                                                                                            
 India's relations with Jordan witnessed further intensification during the ye ar. A                        
 Parliamentary delegation led by Shri Rabi Ray, Speaker of the Lok Sabha visit ed Jordan                    
 in March 1990. The Deputy Chairperson of the Rajya Sabha, Dr Najma Heptullah and the                       
 then Minister for Energy and Civil Aviation, Shri Arif Mohamm ed Khan visited Jordan in                    
 July and August 1990 respectively as Special Envoys of former Prime Minister. Shri I K                     
 Gujral, the then Minister for External Affairs visited Jordan in August 1990 and                           
 discussed issues which arose in the wake of t he Iraqi attack and occupation of Kuwait                     
 including the evacuation of Indians from Iraq and Kuwait which was mainly through                          
 Jordan. The then Minister for Surface Transport, Shri K P Unnikrishnan visited Jordan                      
 in September 1990 to supervise the evacuation arrangements. The Government of Jordan                       
 extended full cooperation and assistance and provided all required facilities without                      
 which India's efforts to evacuate such a large number of people in such a short time                       
 would have been severely handicapped. Apart from ad hoc relief supplies, the Government                    
 of India donated Rs 1 crore worth of medicines and foodstuffs for us e in the refugee                      
 camps in Jordan. A medical team was also sent to assist the Jordanian Government in                        
 providing medical assistance. From Jordan Mr Nabil Abdul Huda, Minister of Transport                       
 visited India in July 1990 for Indo-Jordanian Civil Aviation talks. Visits of other                        
 official level delegations were also exch anged.                                                           
                                                                                                            
 Indo-Iranian relations are a factor of stability and peace in this region. During the                      
 year, bilateral cooperation continued to assume greater significance                                       
 pg28                                                                                                       
 against the back drop of the tensions and the potentials of conflict which had appeared                    
 in the region and in the rapidly changing international environment. Iran was currently                    
 addressing itself to the gigantic task of national reconst ruc- tion. India can be a                       
 cooperative partner in this Iranian endeavour. Foreign Ministers of both the countries                     
 had a fruitful exchange of views in April and September 1990 encompassing all issues of                    
 bilateral relations. Politi cal level exchanges continued and in October 1990, Mr                          
 Rajaei Khorasani, Chairman, Foreign Relations Committee of the Iranian Majlis visited                      
 India on 6 and , 199 10107 ti, . s Committee of the Iranian Majlis visited India on 6                      
 and @@1991 Foreign Secretary visited Tehran for discussions with the Iranian                               
 Government. Both sides reiterated their firm commitment to enhance bilateral                               
 cooperation. Several proposals, aimed at intensifying exchanges in the political,                          
 economic a nd cultural spheres, were under consideration. The then External Affairs                        
 Minister visited Tehran from 25 to 26 January 1991 to pursue NAM initiative on Gulf                        
 cris is. Both sides agreed to continue their efforts for maintaining peace in the                          
 region and further development of bilateral relations. Subsequently, Deputy Minister                       
 for External Affairs and finance also visited Tehran from 22 to 26 February 1991 as                        
 part of NAM Foreign Ministers' Peace Mission.                                                              
                                                                                                            
 India's traditionally friendly relations with the Lebanon and with Sudan and Djibouti                      
 in the horn of Africa were maintained. India also maintained close consultation and                        
 cooperation with the countries o f the Arab Maghreb. Shri Arif Mohammed Khan, the then                     
 Minister for Civil Aviation and Energy visited Algeria as Special Envoy of former Prime                    
 Minister i n March 1990. Mr S T Debagha, a Special Envoy of the President of Algeria                       
 visited India in January 1991 and delivered a message on the Gulf crisis to the Prime                      
 Minister. Deputy Minister for External Affairs, Shri Digvijay Singh also paid a visit                      
 to Algeria in January 1991 to discuss the Gulf crisis with the Algerian leaders . There                    
 were exchanges of other official and nonofficial delegations. Bilateral contacts with                      
 Tunisia were strengthened in political as well as economic fields . The then External                      
 Affairs Minister visited Tunis in March 1990 and held discuss ions with the Tunisian                       
 Prime Minister, Foreign Minister and other leaders. The then Minister for Home Affairs,                    
 Shri Mufti Mohammed Sayeed visited Tunis as Special Envoy of former Prime Minister in                      
 June 1990. Tunisian Minister of                                                                            
 pg29                                                                                                       
 National Economy, Mr Moncef Belaid visited India in February 1990 to attend the                            
 Indo-Tunisian joint Economic Committee meeting, held in New Delhi. The Minister of                         
 Foreign Affairs of Tunisia Mr Habib Boulares visited India in Decem ber 1990 and held                      
 wide ranging discussions with the Indian leaders. A number of official and, business                       
 delegations exchanged visits during the year. The then Minister for Home Affairs,                          
 visited Morocco in June 1990 as Special Envoy of former Prime Minister. Indo-Morocco                       
 trade and economic relations also developed smoothly. India's relations with the                           
 Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic remained friendly.                                                        
                                                                                                            
 The Minister of Scientific Research of Libya, Mr Nouri Al Fittouri Al-Madani visited                       
 India in September 1990 to discuss ways to resolve the problem of outstanding payments                     
 to Indian companies and other issues hampering the growth of smooth bilateral                              
 relations. Earlier Dr Mohammed Ahmed Sharif visited India i n July as Special Envoy of                     
 Colonel Qathafi. Indian Embassy personnel in Mogadishu (Somalia) had to be evacuated in                    
 January 1991 due to outbreak of heavy fighting in the city. Almost all Indian citizens                     
 there also had to leave. They are expected to return as soon as the conditions allow.                      
                                                                                                            
 India welcomed the merger of the People's Democratic Republic of Yemen (South Yemen)                       
 and the Yemen Arab Republic (North Yemen) into a unified State called the "Republic of                     
 Yemen" which was achieved in a peaceful and democratic manner on 22 May 1990. India's                      
 relations with the countries in the Gulf region were further streng- thened by exchange                    
 of several visits and joint Commission meetings.                                                           
                                                                                                            
 The Gulf Crisis                                                                                            
                                                                                     Top                    
 Iraq's invasion, military occupation and annexation of Kuwait in August 1990 was a                         
 matter of great concern for India. India reiterated in unambiguous terms its well known                    
 position against the use or threat of use of force to settle differences in inter-state                    
 relations and called for unconditional withdrawal of Iraqi troops from Kuwait so that                      
 the independence and sovereignty of Kuwait is                                                              
 pg30                                                                                                       
 restored. India fully subscribed to and faithfully abided by all the resolution s of                       
 the UN Security Council in this regard, despite the cost to her economy resulti ng from                    
 the compliance with Security Council Resolution 661 imposing economic sanctions against                    
 Iraq. India which has for ages maintained close and cordial relations with both Kuwait                     
 and Iraq, exerted herself to the utmost to seek a non-military resolutio n to the Gulf                     
 crisis. The then External Affairs Minister visited Moscow, Washing- ton, Amman and                         
 Baghdad in August 1990. From Baghdad he went to Kuwait to meet with the Indian                             
 community there, estimated at 172,000. In September 1990, he visited Belgrade, Rome and                    
 The Hague for further consultations on the Gulf crisis.                                                    
                                                                                                            
 A number of special envoys were sent and received in the context of search for a                           
 peaceful resolution to the Gulf crisis. Dr Najma Heptullah, Deputy Chairperson of the                      
 Rajya Sabha, visited Saudi Arabia in December 1990 as a Spec ial Envoy of Prime                            
 Minister where she met the Crown Prince. Subsequently she went to Taif and met the                         
 Crown Prince of Kuwait. There were two Special Envoys from Kuwait, Dr Rasheed Al-Ameeri                    
 (September 1990) and Dr Abdul Rehman Abdullah Al-Awadhi, Minister of State for Cabinet                     
 Affairs (February 1991). Dr Mohammed Sa'eed Al-Sahhaf, Minister of State for Foreign                       
 Affairs of Iraq visited India a s Special Envoy of President of Iraq in January 1991.                      
 Visits were also paid to India by M r Mohsin Al-Hamdani, Minister of State for                             
 Environment as a Special Envoy of Prim e Minister of Yemen, Mr ST Debagha, as Special                      
 Envoy of President of Algeria (January 1991), Mr jamal Sourani as Personal Envoy of                        
 President Yasser Arafat (January-February 1991) and Mr Mohamed Ibrahim Massoud,                            
 Minister of State as Special Envoy of King Fahd of Saudi Arabia in February 1991.                          
                                                                                                            
 Even when the prospects for a peaceful resolution of the crisis appeared rather bleak,                     
 as the deadline set for Iraq's withdrawal from Kuwait by UN Secur ity Council                              
 Resolution 678 approached, Prime Minister addressed a personal com- munication to the                      
 Presidents of the United States and the Soviet Union urging them to give peace one more                    
 chance. A similar communication was addressed to the President of Yugoslavia, Chairman                     
 of the Non-Aligned Movement.                                                                               
                                                                                                            
 Following the outbreak of hostilities on 17 January 1991, Prime Minister issued a                          
 statement suggesting a three point plan for restoration of peace. it envisaged:                            
                                                                                                            
 (i) Appeal to President Saddam Hussein to announce the commencement                                        
 pg31                                                                                                       
 of immediate withdrawal by Iraq from Kuwait in keeping with the Security Council                           
 resolutions;                                                                                               
                                                                                                            
 (ii) to be followed by a cessation of hostilities; and                                                     
                                                                                                            
 (iii) resumption of efforts to find peaceful solution to the conflict, the modalities                      
 of which could be worked out by the Security Council. India has always believed that                       
 the Non-Aligned Movement has a significant contribution to make in resolving                               
 international crises such as the Gulf crisis. When the then External Affairs Minister                      
 visited Belgrade in September 1990, consultations took place between India, Algeria and                    
 Yugoslavia. Unfortunately, the efforts of the Non-Aligned Movement to seek a                               
 nonmilitary resolution of the crisis did not bear fruit. Even after the outbreak of                        
 hostilities, India persis ted in its efforts to mobilise the Non-Aligned Movement in                       
 seeking a peaceful resolution t o the crisis. In that context, the then External                           
 Affairs Minister visited Belgrad e and Tehran in January 1991. India took part in a                        
 16-nation Non-Aligned Movement meeting in Belgrade (11 to 13 February 1991) held at the                    
 level of Foreign Ministers. As a follow up of that meeting, a small group of NAM                           
 Foreign Ministers were to visit Baghdad, Washington, Brussels, Riyadh and Taif.                            
                                                                                                            
 The Deputy Minister for External Affairs, Shri Digvijay Singh, visited Algeri a,                           
 France, Zimbabwe and the UK between 23 January and 1 February for consulta- tions in                       
 the context of the Gulf crisis. As the Gulf war proceeded and it became clear that the                     
 aerial bombing was not confined to military targets, in a statement issued on 8                            
 February 1991, Ind ia urged that internationally accepted methods of warfare be                            
 scrupulously adhered to and that every possible precaution should be taken to protect                      
 the civilian population against the devastation and risks of the military operations.                      
 The statement pointed out that even those countries which were taking part in the                          
 military operations had stated that the objective was to liberate Kuwait and no t to                       
 subdue Iraq or to dismantle its technological and physical infrastructure or to cripple                    
 its social and economic life. India also urged the Security Council to meet urgently to                    
 review the situation and to keep meeting on a regular basis fo r periodic review.                          
                                                                                                            
 India was also concerned over the possible use of nuclear and chemical weapons in the                      
 Gulf war and urged all concerned to eschew the use of such weapons.                                        
 pg32                                                                                                       
 There were 172,000 Indian nationals in Kuwait and another 9000 in Iraq when Iraq                           
 invaded Kuwait. Within a space of two months and a half, over 150,000 Indian nationals                     
 were evacuated through air, land and sea from Kuwait and Iraq. The bulk of them were                       
 airlifted from Amman where they reached through the land route from Kuwait and Baghdad.                    
 On receiving reports of shortages of food in Kuwait and Iraq, India sent 9775 tonnes of                    
 essential food supplies and medicines with the approval of the UN Sanctions Committee                      
 through Indian ship M.V. Vishva Siddhi, which reached the Iraqi port of Um Qasr on 26                      
 September 1990. Four thousand seven hundred seventy three tonnes of these food items                       
 were distributed among Indian nationals and others and the rest were off-loaded and                        
 stored in Iraq and Kuwait on the advice of the UN Sanctions Committee for distribution                     
 among nationals of other countries. The Gulf crisis has placed additional burden on                        
 India's economy, in terms of lost export opportunities, sudden stop in remittances,                        
 cost of repatriation and rehabilitation, higher prices of oil and the need to find                         
 alternative sources t o offset interruption in supplies from Iraq and Kuwait. India                        
 will have an additional foreign exchange burden during the year itself to the tune of                      
 US $ 4 billion di rectly due to these developments.                                                        
                                                                                                            
 In the wake of the Gulf crisis, a Special Coordination Unit (SCU) was set up in the                        
 Ministry of External Affairs on 13 August 1990, to coordinate work relating to the                         
 welfare and repatriation of thousands of Indian nationals stranded in Kuwai t, to                          
 answer queries of the general public regarding the ongoing developments on a da y to                       
 day basis in Kuwait and, to the extent possible, to ascertain welfare of individuals                       
 and relatives of those making the enquiries. The SCU maintained constant contact with                      
 Indian Mission in Kuwait through radio link. Arrangements were also made for despatch                      
 of letters of the relatives to individuals in Kuwai t/ Baghdad through                                     
 couriers/diplomatic bags and subsequent distribution of these letters through the                          
 Indian associations there. with effect from 25 August 1990. The same procedure was                         
 followed for the replies received from the individuals in Kuwait/Baghdad.                                  
 pg33                                                                                                       
 Africa (South Of The Sahara)                                                                               
                                                                                     Top                    
 AFRICA (SOUTH OF THE SAHARA)                                                                               
 DURING the year under review, events in sub-Saharan Africa moved rapidly but generally                     
 in a positive direction. Following Dr Nelson Mandela's release, the South African                          
 Government dismantled certain aspects of the dis- criminatory system and entered into a                    
 welcome dialogue with the African Nationa l Congress. However, the basic features of                       
 the apartheid system remain in place. The resolution of civil strife in Angola and                         
 Mozambique through dialogue, with the active encouragement of the USA and the USSR,                        
 advanced, with talks in Europ e being held periodically, despite occasional setbacks.                      
                                                                                                            
 Elsewhere in Africa, there was the delayed impact of democratisation in East Europe                        
 with reactions of single party systems in Africa varying from country to country but                       
 with growing certitude that the continent was in transition towards different degrees                      
 of political pluralism. This trend coincides with the liberat ion of Namibia and                           
 impending changes in South Africa.                                                                         
                                                                                                            
 As the continent entered into a more advanced political phase, the economics of most of                    
 the countries came under greater pressure from paucity of foreign exchange, growing                        
 imbalances of payments, depressed prices. of principal com- modities and greater                           
 indebtedness. There was a growing realisation, in several African countries, that India                    
 was a source of low cost, appropriate technology. Inhibiting factors against greater                       
 Indian cooperation at this crucial stage wer e the continuing nonpayment of blocked                        
 Indian dues by a number of African countries as well as India's own foreign exchange                       
 crunch. Most African countrie s stiff continued to press for Indian credit and                             
 favourable terms of trade. Howev er, a number of significant break throughs were made                      
 by Indian public and private sector companies, while the provision of training in                          
 diverse fields continued a pace.                                                                           
 pg34                                                                                                       
 The year 1990 was also significant in that a number of joint Commission meetings took                      
 place, which had been postponed for many years. These included the joint Commissions                       
 between India and Zambia, Zimbabwe and Kenya. India's relations with the countries of                      
 sub-Saharan Africa continued to impro ve further and diversify during the year. With                       
 the process of decolonisation virtually complete, emphasis in India's relations with                       
 Africa is shifting to ec onomic and technical cooperation. Special attempts were made                      
 to tide over the difficulties created by the problem of blocked funds.                                     
                                                                                                            
 India's relations with the countries of Southern Africa and the liberation movements                       
 fighting for a unitary, non-racist and democratic South Africa, remai ned very close.                      
 Following the former Prime Minister, Shri V P Singh's visit to Namibia, as the head of                     
 a high level multi-party delegation on the occasion of the independence of that country                    
 on Mar 19, 1990, India announced a Rs 20 crore assistance package to the newly                             
 independent nation. Details were discussed with a visiting Namibian delegation headed                      
 by their Minister of Mines and Energy, Mr Andimba Toivo Ya Toivo, and would consist of                     
 Rs 10 crore government to government credit, Rs 5 crore under the AFRICA Fund and the                      
 remaining by way of technical assistance under the ITEC and similar programmes. Namibia                    
 closed down its New Delhi SWAPO, office at the end of November 1990 wit the promise                        
 that a High Commission will be opened early in 1991.                                                       
                                                                                                            
 In South Africa the events moved rapidly following the lifting of ban on the African                       
 National Congress, Pan Africanist Congress and other anti-apartheid org ani- zations                       
 and the release of Dr Mandela. Mr Mewa Ramgobin, Vice President of the Natal Indian                        
 Congress and a Principal Trustee of the Phoenix Settlement Trust o f Mahatma Gandhi was                    
 in India from 29 April to 4 May 1990 to discuss the rehabilitation of the settlement to                    
 build it as a permanent symbol of Gandhian contribution to South African moral and                         
 political life.                                                                                            
                                                                                                            
 Dr Mandela visited India from 15 to 19 October 1990. He was awarded the Bharat Ratna,                      
 given unprecedented public welcome at New Delhi and Calcutta, honoured with a Doctorate                    
 by the Banaras Hindu University and was presented with US $ 5 million as cash                              
 contribution by India to the ANC for the rehabilita tion of political exiles.                              
 pg35                                                                                                       
 Dr Mandela delivered the Nehru Memorial Lecture. India also announced a Rs 2 crore                         
 technical assistance package for the people of South Africa. The former Prime Minister                     
 presented a cheque of US $ 800,000 on behalf of the AFRICA Fund. It was a most                             
 successful visit which enabled India to pay tributes to a living symbol of the struggle                    
 against apartheid who expressed his gratitud e to the Government and people of India                       
 for their historic contributions to the caus e of the people of South Africa. The                          
 Indian joint Commissions with Zambia and Zimbabwe met within a span of 3 weeks from 24                     
 to 29 October and from 10 to 12 October respectively. While the Zambian delegation was                     
 led by the Zambian Minister of Commerce and Industry, Mr R Chenge, the Zimbabwean was                      
 headed by their Minister of Finance, Economic Planning and Development, Dr T Masaya.                       
 The then Minister for External Affairs headed the Indian teams at both the meetings.                       
 Agreed Minutes were signed after both the meetings, enhancing the scope of bilateral                       
 cooperation and creating greater understanding between India and the two countries.                        
 Jawaharlal Nehru Award for International Understanding for the year 1989 is to be                          
 awarded to President Robert Mugabe of Zimbabwe.                                                            
                                                                                                            
 Relations with Angola continued to receive priority with a fruitful exchange of                            
 technical delegations. India followed with sympathy and understanding steps taken by                       
 the Angolan Government to introduce a multi-party system and a mixed economy, while at                     
 the same time, defending its national sovereignty. The then External Affairs Minister,                     
 Shri I K Gujral, chaired a meeting of the Heads of Mission in sub-Saharan countries in                     
 Nairobi from 9 to 11 July 1990 at which a high level review was conducted of India's                       
 relations with sub-Saharan Africa and ways and means to further enhance cooperation.                       
                                                                                                            
 Following the Heads of Mission meeting in Nairobi, the then External Affairs Minister                      
 commenced a two day visit to Kenya on 13 July 1990. He called on President Arap T Moi                      
 and had extensive discussions with his counterpart. Shri Gujral also visited the Pan                       
 African Mills Ltd, a show piece joint venture proje ct, run by an Indian private                           
 company, producing newsprint. India continued to be host to a considerable number of                       
 Kenyan students. Steps are being taken to arrange equivalence for admissions to Indian                     
 Universities, as Kenya changes ove r to a new educational system.                                          
 pg36                                                                                                       
 With growing domestic stability in Uganda, Indo-Ugandan relations became more friendly                     
 and warm. A Ugandan Constitution Commission visited India from 21 May to 1 June 1990 to                    
 study the Indian Parliamentary procedures and Constitutional practices. The then                           
 Minister of State for External Affairs visit ed Uganda from 1 to 3 July as a Special                       
 Emissary of the former Prime Minister. He was received warmly by President Museveni and                    
 also had useful bilateral exchanges with a number of Ugandan Ministers. It was                             
 announced during this visit that Uganda would be sending a delegation, headed by its                       
 Finance Minister , to discuss rescheduling of Indian blocked funds in Uganda. Some                         
 progress in this regard was noticed in the latter part of the year.                                        
                                                                                                            
 Dr Bizimungu Casimir, Minister of Foreign Affairs and International Coopera- tion of                       
 Rwanda visited India from 11 to 13 June. During the visit, Technical an d Economic                         
 Cooperation and Trade Agreements were signed. The Cultural Exchange Programme for 1990                     
 to 1992 and the Agreed Minutes of the official level talks were also signed. The                           
 Minister called on the President, the former Prime Minister, and the then Ministers for                    
 Commerce and Industry. With the assistance of France and Belgium, India took                               
 precautionary steps to evacuate th e Indian community in Kigali, when civil conflict                       
 erupted in Rwanda in October 1990. However, the contingency did not arise.                                 
                                                                                                            
 Two important events during the year were the visit by Shri Arun Nehru, the then                           
 Minister for Commerce, to Senegal and Nigeria on 2 April and 9 and 10 Apri l                               
 respectively, and the visit of the then Minister of State for External Affairs to                          
 Benin, Cameroon and Guinea on 18 and 19, 21 and 22, and 24 May respectively. While in                      
 Senegal, Shri Arun Nehru held wide ranging discussions with the Ministers of Finance,                      
 International Cooperation, Culture and Commerce. He also announced that India was                          
 willing to buy more from Senegal provided the Senegalese also responded positively to                      
 the Indian request for balancing of tra de, which was largely in favour of Senegal. In                     
 Nigeria he handed over a letter from the former Prime Minister addressed to General                        
 Babangida, Vice President of Nigeria.                                                                      
                                                                                                            
 The then Minister of State for External Affairs, Shri Hari Kishore Singh was well                          
 received during his tour. In Benin, he called on the President and the Prime Minister.                     
 The Prime Minister mentioned the ushering in of democracy in Benin                                         
 pg37                                                                                                       
 and referred to India as a 'role model'. In Guinea, Shri Singh met the Minister s                          
 incharge of International Cooperation, Commerce, Agriculture etc and handed over the                       
 former Prime Minister's message to President Lansana Conte. The two countries agreed                       
 that there was need for enhancing commercial and economic contacts particularly in the                     
 field of transportation. In Cameroon, he called on President Paul Biya and discussed                       
 with him the ways of enhancing bilateral cooperation as well as regional and                               
 international issues. President Biya was al so invited to visit India, which he                            
 accepted, adding that he would do so accompani ed by a high level delegation of                            
 businessmen. The proposed State visit of President Diouf of Senegal in November, was                       
 called off because of political changes in India. The Ministry will take steps to                          
 revive the Visit at Mutually convenient dates.                                                             
                                                                                                            
 The civil war in Liberia worsened in July and led to a mass exodus of people of Indian                     
 origin, who at the start of the trouble numbered nearly 10,000. However, about 600 were                    
 trapped in the city between the warring forces of Prince Johnson, Taylor and the                           
 entrenched President Samuel Doe. A Shipping Corporation of India vessel was diverted to                    
 the waters outside Monrovia. A special consular team was rushed to neighbouring Sierra                     
 Leone and the assistanc e of the USA sought to evacuate the trapped Indians. Between 14                    
 and 29 August, 449 persons were lifted by US helicopters to Sierra Leone from where                        
 onward bookings were arranged by the Indian team. By the end of the year as a truce                        
 seemed possible in Liberia, the only Indians left were those remaining behind o f their                    
 own volition and numbering about 50.                                                                       
                                                                                                            
 Relations between India and the Indian Ocean island countries which are special due to                     
 the commonality of interests in the Indian Ocean area, registere d further improvement.                    
 Mr A Parsuraman, Mauritian Minister of Education, visited India from 6 to 11 June 1990                     
 to discuss the modalities of the Ramayana Conference and the Third World Telugu                            
 Conference. Prior to this, the special relationship was under- scored by India                             
 responding positively to an urgent request from Mauritius on 11 April for power                            
 generation workers and engineers from India to temporarily run the power generators in                     
 Mauritius, following a protracted strike by Mauritian workers.                                             
                                                                                                            
 pg38                                                                                                       
 The then Minister of State for External Affairs visited Mauritius from 27 to 30 June                       
 and had discussions with the Mauritian leaders on bilateral and regional issues.                           
 Preparations are underway for the next meeting of the joint Commission to be held in                       
 Mauritius during the first half of 1991. President Rene of Seychelles visited India                        
 from 24 to 26 September and sought further economic assistance. A meeting of the                           
 Indo-Seychelles Joint Commission was also held. In the Agreed Minutes, steps were                          
 specified for further cooperation between the two countries. India also agreed to                          
 extend more training slots to Seychelles. The then Ministers for Commerce and Industry                     
 and the then Minister of State for Defence called on the President. President Rene                         
 called on the President and also had bilateral discussions with the former Prime                           
 Minister.                                                                                                  
                                                                                                            
 Madagascar became a new focus of attention, to develop bilateral relations. The then                       
 Minister of State for External Affairs visited Madagascar from 24 to 2 7 June and                          
 attended the 30th Anniversary of her independence and the 15th Anniversary of the                          
 Revolution of Madagascar. He called on, President Ratsiraka, the Prime Minister and the                    
 Foreign Minister of Madagascar. He had discussions with the President on bilateral and                     
 regional issues. Later during the year a success ful Buyer-Seller meet was organized in                    
 Madagascar from 6 to 9 August which opened up new opportunities for Indian exporters.                      
                                                                                                            
 The Action For Resisting Invasion, Colonialism and Apartheid (AFRICA) Fund was                             
 constituted by the 8th Summit of the Heads of State/Government of the Movement of                          
 Non-Aligned countries in Harare in September 1986 and its mandate was renewed by the                       
 9th Summit of the NAM in Belgrade in 1989. It was the political expression of the                          
 Movement's support and assistance to the Frontline African States to enforce sanctions                     
 against South Africa and to cope with any retaliatory economic actions by the racist                       
 regime. The Fund was set up to strengthen the economic and financial capability of the                     
 Frontline States to fig ht the Apartheid regime of Pretoria and to support the                             
 liberation movements in South Africa and Namibia in their unrelenting struggle against                     
 racist and colonialist oppression. It received considerable support not only from the                      
 members of the Non-Aligned Movement but also from non-member countries and.                                
 international organizations like United Nations Development Programme, United Nations                      
 Chil- dren's Fund, International Fund for Agricultural Developments (IFAD) and the                         
 Commonwealth Secretariat.                                                                                  
 pg39                                                                                                       
 In terms of monetary support, the Fund has received pledges in cash and kind including                     
 project assistances equivalent to US $ 440 million from 58 countries an over the world.                    
 Contributions to the Fund were also received from individuals a s well as organizations                    
 in India. A society called AFRICA (Public Contributions: India) Fund was set up to                         
 manage these contributions in Indian rupees. The society has received so far                               
 contributions totalling Rs 2.56 crores. A project f or supplying consumer durables of                      
 urgent need to the ANC will be financed partly from the contributions by the Indian                        
 public.                                                                                                    
                                                                                                            
 At the commencement of the Fund, India had announced a contribution of Rs. 50 crores.                      
 Since this announcement in January 1987, a large number of proje cts have been financed                    
 from this contribution in the Frontline countries. Recent such projects include supply                     
 of agricultural implements to Botswana, TATA vehicles to Zimbabwe, software for                            
 Mozambican Railway Protection Force and consumer durables to Mozambique, small scale                       
 industries to Botswana, supply of jeeps to the Tanzanian and the Zambian News Agencies                     
 and emergency supply of medicines to Zambia. The implementation of several other                           
 projects is underway with implementing agencies such as STC, PEC, MECON, HSCC and NSIC.                    
 Contributions from other member and non-member countries of the Non- Aligned Movement                      
 have been in the form of projects, scholarships or cash assistance. The sixth Senior                       
 Officials Meeting held in May 1990 in Lusaka decided to distribute a part of the cash                      
 assistance pledged by the donors. Accordingly, US $ 70,000 were given to each Frontline                    
 state apart from US $ 800,000 each to Namibia and the ANC and US $ 200,000 to the PAC.                     
 The film on the AFRICA Fund was revised and updated for publicity to elicit                                
 contributions t o the Fund.                                                                                
                                                                                                            
 India is the Chairman of the AFRICA Fund Committee. The Special Envoy of the Prime                         
 Minister for Africa (SEPM), Shri J R Hiremath, chaired the seventh Meeting of Senior                       
 Officials which took place in Windhoek, Namibia from 11 to 14 December 1990. This was a                    
 crucial meeting as it was held after a series of eventful developments in Southern                         
 Africa such as the release of Dr Nelson Mandela, the independence of Namibia, the                          
 lifting of the ban on the ANC and the PAC, and President De Klerk's announcement on the                    
 process of dismantling of apartheid. The seventh Meeting of Senior Officials of the                        
 Fund took note of the se developments but concluded that further intensification of the                    
 activities of th e Fund was necessary tiff the irreversible process for dismantling of                     
 apartheid s ets in.                                                                                        
 pg40                                                                                                       
 Shri J R Hiremath held useful discussions with the President of Namibia and other                          
 government dignitaries during his visit to Windhoek. A Memorandum of Understanding was                     
 signed for the implementation of four Indian aided projects v iz, a Vocational Training                    
 Centre, Technical Assistance in Water Resources Manage- ment, Technical Assistance in                      
 the Education Sector and Supply of Mobile Clinics together with medicines, under the                       
 AFRICA Fund. The seventh meeting also provided the opportunity to firm up a number of                      
 projects under India's contribution to the AFRICA Fund in Mozambique, Zimbabwe etc. At                     
 present, more than 90% of the contributions pledged to the Fund have been earmarked and                    
 committed against identified projects and programmes. More than 60% of the committed                       
 fund has already been utilised and benefits have reached the recipients.                                   
 pg41                                                                                                       
 Europe                                                                                                     
                                                                                     Top                    
 EUROPE                                                                                                     
 Soviet Union                                                                                               
 INDO-Soviet relations continued to be close, friendly and cordial. The visit of the                        
 former Prime Minister, Shri V P Singh to the USSR in July 1990 provided an opportunity                     
 to undertake a comprehensive review of Indo-Soviet relations and to give an impetus for                    
 their further development to mutual benefit. It was decided to extend the Indo-Soviet                      
 Treaty of Peace, Friendship and Cooperation and to befittingly celebrate in 1991 the                       
 20th anniversary of the signing of thi s important document. The joint documents signed                    
 during the visit reaffirmed the desire of both countries to further develop the                            
 multi-faceted bilateral relatio ns in various fields. Other high level exchanges during                    
 the year were the visit of th e Chairman of the USSR Supreme Soviet, Mr A I Lukyanov,                      
 who led a Soviet Parliamentary delegation to India from 4 to Apr 08, 1990; the then                        
 External Aff airs Minister, Shri I K Gujral's visit to the Soviet Union in August for                      
 consultatio ns with the Soviet side on the Gulf crisis; the visits of the then                             
 Ministers for Commer ce and Energy to the Soviet Union; and the visit of the Soviet                        
 Deputy Foreign Minister, Mr Igor Rogacher for regular bilateral consultations. He                          
 conveyed Sov iet Union's firm commitment to further strengthening the multi-faceted                        
 bilateral cooperation.                                                                                     
                                                                                                            
 While Indo-Soviet economic cooperation continued to develop well during the first half                     
 of the year, some difficulties have of late appeared in India's bilateral trade and                        
 economic relations with the Soviet Union because of the disruptions i n the Soviet                         
 economy arising out of internal difficulties in that country. Trade in 1990 is expected                    
 to fall slightly short of the target. Nevertheless, the Indo-S oviet Trade Plan for                        
 1991 signed in November 1990 envisages an increase in trade                                                
 pg42                                                                                                       
 turnover to Rs 9411 crores. The need for modifications and innovations in economic                         
 bilateral cooperation mechanism was recognised at a working meeting of the Indo-Soviet                     
 joint Commission for Economic, Scientific and Technical Cooperation in Moscow in July                      
 1990. Cooperation in the fields of banking, insurance, industrial management and other                     
 services is also envisaged. Academi- cian Marchuk, the President of the USSR Academy of                    
 Sciences, visited India to t ake part in the third session of the joint Council of the                     
 Integrated Long Term Agreement in the field of science and technology. In keeping with                     
 the tradition of helping each other in times of need, India extended urgently needed                       
 relief assistance to the USSR consisting of 1 million tonnes of wheat on loan basis,                       
 and a gift of 20,000 tonnes of rice, as well as medicines, medical supplies, processed                     
 foods and other items.                                                                                     
                                                                                                            
 Eastern Europe                                                                                             
                                                                                     Top                    
 The year under review saw consolidation of the processes of democratization, political                     
 pluralism and economic liberalisation in the countries of Central and Eastern Europe.                      
 In spite of the domestic preoccupations of these countries, and a reorientation of                         
 their foreign policy priorities, the traditionally close bil ateral ties between India                     
 and these countries were reaffirmed and renewed.                                                           
                                                                                                            
 After a gap of many years, diplomatic relations with Albania were fully restored on 27                     
 April 1990 with the accreditation of an Indian Ambassador to Tirana. Relations between                     
 India and Bulgaria were marked by continuing warmth and friendship. The Cultural                           
 Exchange Programme for 1990 to 1992 with Bulgaria was signed in Sofia in March 1990.                       
 During the year there was an active exchange of cultural troupes. Immediate                                
 humanitarian food assistance provided by India to the stranded Bulgarian nationals in                      
 Iraq was appreciated. Chairman of Bulgarian National Assembly visited India in January                     
 1991 and called on the Vic e President and the Speaker of Lok Sabha.                                       
                                                                                                            
 The Czechoslovak Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign Minister, Mr Jiri Dienstbier paid an                    
 official visit to India from 30 October to 2 November 1990. This was the first high                        
 level exchange with the new leadership in Czechos-                                                         
 pg43                                                                                                       
 lovakia, which constituted an important step in strengthening cooperative and friendly                     
 relations between India and Czechoslovakia. An Agreement, signed in Prague on 17                           
 January 1991, extended the bilateral Rupee Trade and Payments arrangements for a period                    
 of two years, ie, upto December 1992. A Parliamentary delegation led by the Speaker of                     
 the Lok Sabha, Shri Rabi Ray visited Hungary in June 1990, during the very first                           
 session of the newly electe d multi-party Parliament. These and other contacts at the                      
 political level testifi ed to the desire of both countries to further nurture the bonds                    
 of traditional friend ship between the two countries. Trade prospects continued to be                      
 good, while new opportunities and areas for economic cooperation were identified.                          
                                                                                                            
 The steady momentum of cooperative interaction between India and Poland was maintained.                    
 India's friendly relations received a fresh impetus with the vi sit of a Parliamentary                     
 delegation led by the Speaker of the Lok Sabha, Shri Rabi Ra y, to Poland in June 1990.                    
 Taking into account the changes in Poland, the two countries decided during the meeting                    
 of the Indo-Polish joint Commission in Warsaw in September 1990, headed on the Indian                      
 side by the then Energy Minister, Shri Arif Mohammed Khan, that trade with Poland would                    
 be conducted in convertible currency from January 1991. Accordingly, the Polish                            
 Minister of Foreign Economic Relations, Mr Marcin Swiecicki, visited India in November                     
 1990 and signed a new Trade and Payments Agreement.                                                        
                                                                                                            
 The positive trends in Indo-Romanian relations evident since December 1989 changes in                      
 Romania consolidated with increased bilateral contacts and exchanges . President R                         
 Venkataraman had a cordial and friendly meeting with President Ion Iliescu of Romania                      
 in Tokyo on 12 November 1990. Cultural exchanges have been revitalised, with increased                     
 exchanges of cultural troupes and scholars. A bilateral Air Services Commercial                            
 Agreement was initialled in December 1990. President Iliescu paid a transit visit to                       
 Delhi on 16 January 1991. He met Prim e Minister Chandra Shekhar and discussed                             
 bilateral and multilateral matters of mutual interest. The bilateral Rupee Trade and                       
 Payments Agreement was extended upto June 1991 through an exchange of letters on 7                         
 January 1991 pending formal renewal of the Agreement.                                                      
                                                                                                            
 Traditionally cordial Indo-Yugoslav relations were strengthened as a result o f an                         
 increased exchange of high level contacts. The then Minister for External                                  
 pg44                                                                                                       
 Affairs, Shri I K Gujral visited Yugoslavia in March 1990. He again visited Belgrade in                    
 September 1990 to participate in the meeting of the Foreign Ministe rs of Yugoslavia,                      
 Algeria and India within the NAM framework in the context of the Gulf crisis. The                          
 former Prime Minister, Shri V P Singh. met the Yugoslav President in Windhoek in March                     
 1990 and again at Kuala Lumpur in June 1990 during the G-15 meeting.                                       
                                                                                                            
 Western Europe                                                                                             
                                                                                     Top                    
 During the year under review, the European continent has undergone a major                                 
 transformation marking a turning point in its history. The Cold War has given way to                       
 detente and the Charter of Paris signed by the 34 CSCE (Conference on Security and                         
 Cooperation in Europe) countries has been hailed as the "magna carta" of new Europe.                       
 This was preceded by an agreement on the reduction of conventional weapons signed                          
 between NATO and Warsaw Pact countries which the participants called "a new era of                         
 democracy, peace and unity in Europe." India which has a wide network of political,                        
 economic, commercial, scientific, technological and cultural contacts with the                             
 countries in this region has welco med the process of reduction of tensions and hopes                      
 this would lead to peaceful and stable world order which will yield concrete benefits                      
 all over the globe. An important part of India's bilateral relations as well as                            
 assistance through multilateral organizations is channelled through India's contacts                       
 and negotiati ons with major countries in Europe. The year under review has seen                           
 considerable progress through exchanges of several high level visits both incoming and                     
 outgoing, President R Venkataraman visited the UK, Portugal and Malta in March and                         
 April 1990. The visit to the UK was the first by an Indian President after a gap of 14                     
 years. It was marked by great warmth and goodwill, and useful high level discussions                       
 between the President and Queen Elizabeth, the former Prime Minister Thatcher, Deputy                      
 Prime Minister Howe and other leaders. The process of dialogue with the UK on bilateral                    
 cooperation and on strengthening measures to prevent terrorist activities directed                         
 against India showed, significant progress and discussions on cooperation in tracing,                      
 restrai nt and confiscation of the proceeds and instruments of crime and terrorist                         
 funds a re being pursued.                                                                                  
 pg45                                                                                                       
 The President's State visit to Portugal was highly successful. It has led to                               
 strengthening of relations between the two countries in several fields. During the                         
 visit, Portugal also announced her decision in principle to return the gold ornaments                      
 which had been shifted to Portugal after the liberation of Goa in 196 1. The settlement                    
 of this problem has served to remove a major hurdle in improving India's bilateral ties                    
 with Portugal which are now characterised by warmth and friendliness.                                      
                                                                                                            
 The visit of the President to Malta--the first such visit by an Indian Presid ent to                       
 that country--provided an impetus for closer cooperation in areas of mutual interest. A                    
 decision to set up a resident mission in Malta was announced and ha s since been                           
 implemented. An Indian public sector company BHEL has also won a major contract for a                      
 power project in that country. Apart from the visits of the President, the then                            
 Minister for External Affair s, Shri I K Gujral, visited the Netherlands and Italy                         
 (September 1990), Belgium (March 1990) and Germany (June 1990). The then Minister of                       
 State for External Affairs visited Ireland and Cyprus. Close contacts with                                 
 Parliamentarians of several West European countries were also maintained. Of particular                    
 note were the visits of the Lok Sabha Speaker and Indian Parliamentary delegations to                      
 the UK, Belgium and Strasbourg in response to invitations from the British and European                    
 Parliaments.                                                                                               
                                                                                                            
 One of the landmarks of the year 1990 was the unification of the two Germanys on 3                         
 October. India has warmly welcomed this event as a reflection of the will of the people                    
 of Germany and has expressed the hope that this would lead to reduction of tensions,                       
 and that United Germany will further contribute to peace and stability in the world.                       
 Germany retains its position as the largest foreign investor and trading partner of                        
 India in the EEC. The then External Affairs Minister's visit to Bonn on the eve of                         
 German unification was a valuabl e and well timed exercise. Bilateral cooperation is                       
 expected to be further expanded and strengthened in the coming year.                                       
                                                                                                            
 The annual Indo-EEC TROIKA meeting was held in Brussels in March 1990. This political                      
 dialogue to which India attaches great importance was timely and useful. Apart from                        
 matters of mutual interest, it was also decided to set up a new Business Forum                             
 comprising leading entrepreneurs and officials from India and th e Community. The                          
 Community's progress towards greater European integration pg46                                             
                                                                                                            
 and the establishment of a single market in 1992 poses challenges and oppor- tunities                      
 for India and it is hoped that through various institutional linkages, India would be                      
 able to take advantage of the single market for promoting her exports and economic                         
 cooperation with the EEC. The Indo-EEC joint Commission meeting held in May 1990 was                       
 led by the then Commerce Minister, Shri Arun Nehru. Tourism and Fisheries were                             
 identified as new areas for cooperation. A Memorandum of Understanding was signed                          
 between India and EEC in October 1990 for cooperation in the fields of electronics and                     
 telecommunications. Preparations are going on smoothly in sectors such as standards,                       
 quality contro l etc as part of India's efforts for exploiting future single market of                     
 this regi on. India's relations with West Europe during the year have been marked with                     
 cordiality and mutual appreciation of each other's needs and potentialities. India's                       
 concerns, both internal and external, have been appreciated. India is looking forward                      
 to a period of continued expansion of her relations in a number of fields for common                       
 benefit.                                                                                                   
 pg47                                                                                                       
 The Americas                                                                                               
                                                                                     Top                    
 THE AMERICAS                                                                                               
 North America                                                                                              
 THE year 1990 witnessed the continuing consolidation of Indo-US relations. There was a                     
 great degree of understanding, both on bilateral and international issues.                                 
                                                                                                            
 A large number of prominent US Senators and Congressmen visited India early during the                     
 year. Congressman Stephen Solarz, Chairman of the House Asian and Pacific Affairs Sub                      
 Committee on Foreign Relations, Senators Arlen Spector and Richard Shelby, and Under                       
 Secretary for Defence, Dr Henry Rowen were the important visitors. Exchange of views                       
 with the Government of India on a wide range of issues helped in conveying India's view                    
 to the US Congress and Administration. The Principal Secretary to the former Prime                         
 Minister, Shri B G Deshmukh headed a delegation to the USA to present India's viewpoint                    
 at Washington on a number of issues. The Special Envoy of the US President and Deputy                      
 National Security Advisor Robert Gates, US Assistant Secretary of State John Kelly,                        
 Spec ial Assistant to the President on National Security, and Senior Director for the                      
 Ne ar Eastern and South Asia Bureau (NESA) Richard Haass visited India to exchange                         
 views on the Indo-Pak situation. US Congressman Stephen Solarz re-visited India for the                    
 same purpose and Senator Alan Cranston was another important visitor who came to                           
 discuss the Indo-Pak situation.                                                                            
                                                                                                            
 The then External Affairs Minister, Shri I K Gujral met his counterpart, Secretary of                      
 State James Baker on several occasions, including the Special                                              
 pg48                                                                                                       
 Session of the United Nations General Assembly. There were other high level visits                         
 undertaken by the then Ministers for Railways and for Labour and Welfare. As a follow                      
 up of ongoing Foreign Secretary level bilateral discussions, the Foreign Secretary                         
 visited Washington and discussed a wide range of bilateral and international issues.                       
 The situation in Punjab and Jammu and Kashmir figured prominently in these discussions                     
 especially in the context of Pakistan' s role in aggravating the situation.                                
                                                                                                            
 Governor Celeste of Ohio also visited India at the invitation extended to him by                           
 Punjab, Haryana and Delhi Chamber of Commerce and Industry. The year also saw the                          
 appointment of a new Indian Ambassador to the United States, Dr Abid Hussain. The then                     
 Minister for External Affairs, Shri V C Shukla visited New York from 3 to 15 December                      
 to attend the closing Session of the United Nations General Assembly (UNGA). The second                    
 round of the jointly sponsored IDSA-INSS Symposium on defence and strategic issues was                     
 held in Pune in December 1990. There was a wide ranging discussion on bilateral and                        
 multilateral issues by the particip- ants.                                                                 
                                                                                                            
 At the official level, meetings of the various Subgroups of the Indo-US Joint                              
 Commission were held. These included the Sub Commission on Educa- tion and Culture,                        
 Economic and Commercial Sub Commission and the Sub Commission on Agriculture. The                          
 Indo-US joint Business Conference also held its annual meeting in Washington. The USA                      
 remained India's largest trading partner and accounted for 18.5% of Indian exports and                     
 about 11.5% of her imports. On the other hand, India accounted for a mere 0.7% of US                       
 total imports and 0.8% of US total exports in 1989. Right from the year 1982, India has                    
 enjoyed a positive balance of trade with the USA and the trade surplus reached a level                     
 of US $ 906 million in 1989. Early indications of Indo-US trade figures for the year                       
 1990 showed                                                                                                
 pg49                                                                                                       
 a stabilisation of the two way turnover. The star performers of Indian exports over the                    
 years were diamonds, textiles, engineering products, carpets and floor coverings,                          
 leather and leather manufactures and chemicals. The USA is the largest investment                          
 partner of India and accounts for about 1/5th of the joint ventures approved by                            
 Government of India and 75% of these are in the manufacturing sector.                                      
                                                                                                            
 However, there were several problems which resulted in an adverse impact on Indian                         
 exports to the USA. Prominent among them are anti-dumping and countervailing duties by                     
 the USA and the stringent health and sanitary regulati ons of FDA which are affecting                      
 India's exports of Marine products, basmati rice, brassware etc. The US Government had                     
 cited India's policies on foreign investment insurance as barriers to trade but after                      
 subsequent negotiations, the US decided not to impose any sanction against India under                     
 the 301 legislation and postponed their decision till after December 1990, when the                        
 Uruguay Round of Multilateral Trade Talks was scheduled to be completed. The US                            
 Government, under Special 301, also claimed that India's protection of Intellectual                        
 Property Rights was inadeq uate. The US Government indicated that Indian action and                        
 policies would continue to be watched and this matter may be reviewed after the Uruguay                    
 Round of Talks in December 1990. India however refused to negotiate under the threat of                    
 retaliation.                                                                                               
                                                                                                            
 The Annual Review talks on the Indo-US Memorandum of Understanding were held in                            
 Washington. This led to the further streamlining of the implementation procedures,                         
 providing a fillip to the expanding area of high technology trade. Discussions                             
 continued on the sale of a second Super Computer to India. Modalities of enforcement of                    
 the Distribution licence Review System were discussed. A joint team of US Department of                    
 Commerce experts and Govern- ment of India officials conducted a security review in                        
 selected Indian Distribu tion licence holding companies.                                                   
                                                                                                            
 The joint Working Group on Narcotics was set up and a cooperation agreement between                        
 India and the USA in this field was signed.                                                                
 pg50                                                                                                       
 With the all-round improvement in bilateral ties, a limited cooperation in th e field                      
 of defence has commenced. At present, this is mainly focussed on the transfer of                           
 sophisticated technology and equipment for the Light Combat Air- craft Project. In                         
 recent years, the US Government has been earmarking small quantities of aid under its                      
 International Military Education and Training (IMET ) programme. US $ 299,000 was                          
 requested by US State Department from Congress Appropriations in the financial year                        
 1990. These funds are utilised to finance visits and exchanges between Indian and US                       
 armed forces per- sonnel.                                                                                  
                                                                                                            
 Lt General Claude M Kicklighter, Commanding General, US Army, Western Command visited                      
 India at the invitation of the Indian Chief of Army Staff. The Indian Chief of Naval                       
 Staff, Admiral J G Nadkarni visited US Naval Establishments in the USA, including the                      
 CINCPAC Headquarters in Hawaii in October 1990. United States Pacific Command,                             
 Commander-in-Chief Admiral Huntington Hardisty visited India to participate in a                           
 Indo-US Conference jointl y organized by the Delhi based Institute of Defence Studies                      
 and Analysis (IDSA) and the Washington based Institute for National Strategic Studies                      
 at Kharag- vasla, Pune from 11 to Dec 13, 1990.                                                            
                                                                                                            
 The Gulf crisis brought a new set of problems including the repatriation of 150,000                        
 Indian workers to India. The then External Affairs Minister flew to Washington to meet                     
 Secretary of State James Baker and apprise him of this human aspect of the Gulf crisis.                    
 The US has expressed sympathy and under- standing in assessing the impact of the Gulf                      
 crisis on Indian economy. During the year under review, bilateral relations between                        
 India and Canada remained cordial.                                                                         
                                                                                                            
 Two Canadian Ministers visited India during 1990. Madame Monique Landry, Minister for                      
 External Relations and International Development, in her capacity as Governor                              
 ad-interim came to attend the Asian Development Bank meeting held in New Delhi. Madame                     
 Barbara McDougall, Canada's Minister for Employment and Immigration also paid a visit.                     
 Shri Ajit Singh, the then Industry Minister visited Canada to deliver the keynote                          
 address at a conference organized by the Shastri Indo-Canadian Insti- tute in Montreal                     
 and Concordia University.                                                                                  
 pg51                                                                                                       
 During the year, Shri G N Mehra took up his assignment as the new Indian High                              
 Commissioner to Canada. Canada evinced interest in cooperating with India in the fields                    
 of power, defence, space, telecommunications, education and culture. In some fields,                       
 the preliminary formalities towards conclusion of a bilateral agreement were com-                          
 pleted during the year.                                                                                    
                                                                                                            
 Canada has also shown interest in the Yamuna Nagar Thermal Power Project and Chamera-II                    
 Project. These projects are being considered by the Indian Government appropriately.                       
 India has had an adverse balance of trade (-189.80 Rs crores) with Canada. Total                           
 exports from India were of the value of 264.09 crores of rupees, and imports of 453.89                     
 crores; of rupees, for 1989-90. Principal items of exports fr om India are RMG Cotton                      
 including accessories, leather and manufactured handmade carpets, gems and jewellery,                      
 cotton yam fabric made-ups, RMG manmade fibres, handicrafts etc. Principal items of                        
 import from Canada are sulphur and unroaste d iron parts, fertilisers, manufactured                        
 machinery, pulp and waste paper, other cr ude minerals, newsprint, metalliferous; ores                     
 and metal scraps, transport equipment etc.                                                                 
                                                                                                            
 There are no special problems between the two countries in regard to trade except that                     
 import of certain items like footwear and textiles into Canada are subject to quota                        
 restrictions.                                                                                              
                                                                                                            
 Central and South America and the Caribbean                                                                
                                                                                     Top                    
 During the year under review, India has made sustained efforts to consolidate and                          
 strengthen bilateral and multilateral relations with Latin American nations by                             
 initiating high level contacts. India has also attempted to register its presen ce as a                    
 reliable trading partner and a possible source of equipment and technology. India was                      
 represented at the inaugurations of (i) the Presidents of Chile and Brazil in March                        
 1990 by the then Minister for Surface Transport, (ii) the President of Nicaragua in                        
 April 1990 by the then Minister for Labour and Welfar e, and (iii) the Presidents of                       
 Peru and Colombia in July/August 1990 by the then Minister of State for External                           
 Affairs. The inauguration ceremonies provided                                                              
 pg52                                                                                                       
 occasions for India's Ministers to confer individually with Presidents, Vice Presidents                    
 and other leaders from the region and convey India's willingness to intensify bilateral                    
 relations. Bilateral consultations in areas of mutual inter est were held during the                       
 then Commerce Minister's visit to Brazil (July 1990).                                                      
                                                                                                            
 The then Minister of State for External Affairs represented India at the presentation                      
 of the Final Report of the South Commission at Caracas (August 1990). The then Minister                    
 for Information and Broadcasting and Parliamentary Affairs attended the third                              
 Conference of Information Ministers of Non-aligned countries in Havana (September                          
 1990). He also called on President Castro. Indian army officers participated in the                        
 United Nations Observer Group in Central America (ONUCA). Visits by Parliamentary                          
 delegations were encouraged. A Parliamentary delegation led by the Lok Sabha Speaker                       
 paid a goodwill visit to Colombia in October 1990 before attending the IPU Conference                      
 in Uruguay. A ten member Parliamentary delegation from Argentina visited India from 19                     
 to 27 November 1990. In consultation with the Ministry of Commerce and related                             
 agencies, concerted efforts were made to boost trade with the region, which absorbs                        
 less than one per cent of India's exports and accounts for 2.4 per cent of India's                         
 imports.                                                                                                   
                                                                                                            
 The first meeting of the Indo-Cuban joint Commission was held at the Foreign Ministers                     
 level in New Delhi in April 1990. Efforts were made to activate the Indo-Mexican joint                     
 Commission and the joint Committee for Trade with Argentina. Agreements for cooperation                    
 in the field of Science and Technology are being finalised with some countries in the                      
 region.                                                                                                    
                                                                                                            
 In an effort to strengthen relations with countries in the region as a whole, India has                    
 applied for Permanent Observer Status at the Organization of American States. This                         
 would provide an additional forum for interaction with the countri es of the region, 17                    
 of whom are members of the Non-Aligned Movement. The                                                       
 pg53                                                                                                       
 process of regular consultations with the Rio Group of Latin American countries was                        
 initiated in New York (2 October 1990) where the then External Affairs Minister, Shri I                    
 K Gujral met his counterparts from Colombia and Venezuela. The distinguished visitors                      
 from the region included the Minister for Planning and Reconstruction (March 1990) and                     
 the Minister for Industry, Enterprise and Tourism (July 1990) of Trinidad & Tobago; the                    
 Foreign Minister of Cuba (April 1990); the wife of the President of Suriname (May/June                     
 1990); and the Chairman of the Argentine Atomic Energy Commission (December 1990).                         
                                                                                                            
 India's gift to Nicaragua consisting of jeeps, three wheelers, bicycles, medi cal                          
 equipment, raw jute etc was appreciated by the Government of that country. India also                      
 provided to Trinidad & Tobago emergency medical relief and "Jaipur Feet." In Suriname,                     
 the democratically elected Government of President Ramasewak Shanker was overthrown by                     
 the military leader Lt Col Bouterse in a bloodless coup. He subsequently installed a                       
 provisional government and announced that fresh elections would be held in May 1991.                       
 The then External Affairs Minister made a statement in the Lok Sabha on 28 December                        
 1990 giving the broad facts and expressing the hope that democracy would be restored                       
 soon in that country.                                                                                      
 pg54                                                                                                       
 United Nations And International Conferences                                                               
                                                                                     Top                    
 UNITED NATIONS AND INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCES                                                               
 1990 was a watershed year for the United Nations. Dramatic changes-- political, social                     
 and economic--in Eastern Europe and elsewhere, policy reorientations in many countries,                    
 growing superpower collaboration, the emerg- ence of a unified Germany, European                           
 integration, Japan's uninterrupted economic growth and the Gulf crisis and its                             
 aftermath--all these were reflected in varyi ng degrees within the UN and they made an                     
 impact upon its functioning. Besides political issues such as the Gulf crisis, the                         
 situation in the Middle East (West Asia) and Cambodia, UN centre-stage was held by                         
 subjects such as drug abuse control, environmental protection and human rights.                            
                                                                                                            
 India's traditional attachment to the UN ideas continued to be reflected in i ts active                    
 role on all important issues coming up before the world body. The reputation and                           
 influence which India enjoys in the world body can be measured by the fact that she has                    
 been elected to the Security Council for the sixth tim e for a two year term (1991 and                     
 1992). India took its seat in the Security Council wi th effect from Jan 01, 1991. The                     
 current term of India has begun at a critical tim e in the history of the United                           
 Nations. India's role in the Council will be guide d by its commitment to the UN                           
 Charter which has entrusted the primary responsibility for maintenance of international                    
 peace and security to the Secur ity Council. In the non-aligned forum as well, India                       
 continued to exercise decisive influence, particularly at a time when the Non-Aligned                      
 Movement as a whole, disconcerted by the attack by one of its members (Iraq) on another                    
 (Kuwait) needed to define its role in the light of radical changes in international                        
 rela tions.                                                                                                
 pg55                                                                                                       
 India successfully countered attempts to internationalise the Kashmir issue made by                        
 Pakistan at various multilateral fora.                                                                     
 Political Issues                                                                                           
                                                                                     Top                    
 Following Iraq's invasion of Kuwait on 2 August 1990, the Gulf crisis dominated the                        
 United Nations. The Security Council remained continuously seized of the matter,                           
 holding frequent and often urgent meetings. India's respo nse to the developments in                       
 the Gulf was consistent with her principled position against the use of force, and in                      
 favour of a peaceful negotiated settlement of disputes between the parties concerned.                      
 India called for unconditional with- drawal by Iraq from Kuwait and the restoration of                     
 the sovereignty and independ- ence of the latter. India remained in step with the                          
 international community in implementing the Security Council resolutions.                                  
                                                                                                            
 The Gulf crisis has had severe adverse consequences for India's economy and for the                        
 Indian community in Iraq and Kuwait. When the Indian community there was faced with                        
 food shortages, the matter was pursued with promptness and effectiveness in the United                     
 Nations and permission secured to send a shipload o f foodstuffs from India to Iraq. In                    
 accordance with the terms of the UN decision, the Indian Embassy in Baghdad with the                       
 help of the Indian Red Cross Society and the organizations of Indian community there,                      
 undertook the distribution of the foodstuffs, not only to the Indian community but also                    
 to several other third country nationals, including Filipinos, Sri Lankans, Vietnamese                     
 and Palestinian s. India's efficient handling of this matter and her willingness to                        
 share food wit h other foreign nationals were widely appreciated in the UN. Later,                         
 prompt permission of the Security Council was secured for the flights of the Indian Ai                     
 r Force aircraft between Bombay and Baghdad for the evacuation of the Indian community.                    
                                                                                                            
 The adverse effects of the developments in the Gulf and economic sanctions against Iraq                    
 on India's economy were brought to the attention of the United Nations under Article 50                    
 of the Charter of the United Nations, with request for urgent consultations with the                       
 Security Council in order to seek a solution of t hese problems. The Security Council                      
 recognised the need to assist India in coping with its special economic problems and                       
 appealed to all States, UN agencies, financial institutions etc to provide immediate                       
 assistance.                                                                                                
 pg56                                                                                                       
 Even as the deadline set by Security Council Resolution 678 for withdrawal by Iraq from                    
 Kuwait (15 January 1991) was being crossed and outbreak of hostilitie s appeared                           
 imminent, Prime Minister addressed an urgent communication to Presidents of the United                     
 States, the Soviet Union and Yugoslavia (the current Chairman of the Non-Aligned                           
 Movement) emphasizing the imperative need to prevent the outbreak of hostilities. The                      
 Indian initiative was based on simulta ne- ous Iraqi withdrawal from Kuwait and                            
 suspension of hostilities; during the peri od of suspension, it should be possible to                      
 agree upon "the modalities" of resolvin g the issues such as provision of a guarantee                      
 to Iraq of non-aggression, Iraq-Kuwait differences and the Palestine question.                             
                                                                                                            
 The question of Palestine remained a major issue before the Security Council and the UN                    
 General Assembly (UNGA) at its 45th Session. several developments, including use of                        
 force by the Israeli authorities against the civilian Palestin ian population in the                       
 Occupied Territories, were cause of concern to the internatio nal community. In this                       
 context, India reiterated its steadfast support for the caus e of Palestine.                               
                                                                                                            
 The five Permanent Members of the Security Council undertook an initiative to formulate                    
 a framework for an agreement for the settlement of Cambodia., They held broad                              
 consultations with concerned parties and interested States, including India. India also                    
 attended, in its capacity as a co-Chairman of the F irst Committee of the Paris                            
 International Conference on Cambodia (PICC), a meeting in Jakarta in November convened                     
 to initiate the elaboration of the framework agreement into a comprehensive draft                          
 agreement for subsequent adoption by the resumed PICC and eventually by the United                         
 Nations. India also continued a process of consultations with several parties and                          
 States, aimed at facilitating an early settlement of Cambodia on the basis of full                         
 respect for its sovereignty, the will of the Cambodian people, the non-return of the                       
 genocidal policies and practices of the past and the maintenance of its non-aligned                        
 status. The General Assembly again adopted a resolution on Afghanistan by consen- sus.                     
 India welcomed the spirit of compromise and maintained its support to find a political                     
 solution to the problem of Afghanistan through full implementation of the Geneva                           
 Agreements. India also held consultations with the parties con- cerned, as well as with                    
 the UN Secretary General, in connection with the ongoin g peace efforts.                                   
 pg57                                                                                                       
 India continued to support the 1971 Declaration on the Indian Ocean as a Zone of Peace                     
 and the early convening of a Conference for the implementation of the Declaration.                         
 India participated constructively in the meetings of the Ad Ho c Committee on the                          
 Indian Ocean working to attain these objectives. India continued to attach importance                      
 to the holding of such a Conference with the participation of all the major maritime                       
 users and major powers with military presence in the Indian Ocean.                                         
                                                                                                            
 As in the past, negotiations between Treaty parties and non-Treaty members failed to                       
 produce a consensus text for draft resolution on Antarctica. Consiste nt with its                          
 anti-apartheid policy, India voted in favour of a draft resolution cal ling for the                        
 exclusion of South Africa from all the meetings of the Treaty parties. India remains                       
 committed to broaden and universalise the Antarctic Treaty. it supports all proposals                      
 relating to the protection of the fragile Antarctic environment and related ecosystems                     
 and favours bringing the results of scientif ic research in Antarctica increasingly to                     
 the attention of developing countries fo r their benefit.                                                  
                                                                                                            
 During the discussion on the Law of the Sea in the General Assembly Session, India                         
 supported the efforts of the signatories to the Convention on the Law of the Sea to                        
 explore possibilities to secure universal participation in the Conventio n. India also                     
 opposed any undermining of the universal character of the Convention . India maintained                    
 her traditional support, in the UN and other international fora, for efforts to resolve                    
 the long outstanding problem of Cyprus on the basi s of the latter's sovereignty, unity                    
 and territorial integrity and to promote peacef ul reunification of Korea. India                           
 welcomed the process of a peaceful settlement between Iran and Iraq and the peace                          
 process in Central America including the holding of elections in Nicaragua under the UN                    
 supervision. India responded positively to a UN request and contributed military                           
 observers in the UN peace keeping forces in Central America (ONUCA), besides                               
 maintaining her participatio n in other UN peace keeping operations in Iran and Iraq                       
 (UNIIMOG) and in Angola (UNAVEM).                                                                          
 pg58                                                                                                       
 Disarmament Issues                                                                                         
                                                                                     Top                    
 During the year under review, India played an active role in the three main                                
 multilateral disarmament fora, viz, the Conference on Disarmament (CD) in Geneva, the                      
 UN Disarmament Commission (UNDC) and the First Committee of the UN General Assembly.                       
 The Indian approach to disarmament is best reflected in the 'Action Plan for a Nuclear                     
 Weapon-free and Non-violent World Order' that was tabled at the Third Special Session                      
 of the General Assembly devoted to Disarmament. India continued to emphasize the                           
 objective of eliminating nuclear weapons within a time bound framework and a movement                      
 away from the doctrine of nuclear deterrence.                                                              
                                                                                                            
 A ban on nuclear weapon tests would be the most crucial step towards the above                             
 mentioned goal. India, therefore, highlighted the urgent need for commencing                               
 negotiations for a treaty to ban Nuclear Weapon Tests consistent with the preamble of                      
 the Partial Test Ban Treaty of 1963. Hoping to work toward s this goal, India showed                       
 adequate flexibility to accept the establishment by the CD of an ad hoc Committee on a                     
 nuclear test ban. India was among the main supporters of the Partial Test Ban Treaty                       
 Amendment Conference held in New York from 7 to 18 January 1991. The aim of this                           
 Conference was to highlight the need for urgent action for a treaty on a nuclear                           
 weapons test ban. Indian experts took part in the work of the ad hoc Group of                              
 Scientific Experts towards the elaboration of a global seismic monitoring system for a                     
 Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty.                                                                             
                                                                                                            
 In the negotiations on a global convention on Chemical Weapons, India worked for a                         
 comprehensive convention which would rule out discriminatory and short term measures.                      
 India was also represented in the meeting with the chemical industry held in June 1990                     
 at Geneva in the context of the chemical weapons negotiations. At the 45th Session of                      
 the UN General Assembly, India introduced two resolutions dealing with disarmament. The                    
 first, entitled "Scientific and Tech- nological Developments and their Impact on                           
 International Security" was in keepi ng with India's initiative in 1988 for ending the                     
 qualitative arms race. As a firs t step                                                                    
 pg59                                                                                                       
 in that direction, India suggested monitoring of Scientific and Technological                              
 developments by a panel of eminent experts under the UN auspices. The Indian resolution                    
 requested the Secretary General to submit a framework for technologi - cal assessment                      
 at the 47th Session of the UN General Assembly, with a view to ensuring that scientific                    
 and technological developments are used solely for peaceful purposes and for the common                    
 good of mankind. The Resolution gained widespread support with 133 countries voting in                     
 its favour.                                                                                                
                                                                                                            
 The second resolution, entitled "Convention on the Prohibition of the use of Nuclear                       
 Weapons," focussed on the threat which nuclear war poses to the life on the planet and                     
 the urgent task of preventing such a war. The resolution contain s a draft convention                      
 which could form the basis for an agreement. It received wide support with 125                             
 countries voting in its favour. A consensus document was submitted to the General                          
 Assembly during the year as the report of the UN Study on Verification undertaken in                       
 1989 through a joint initiative by India as part of the Six Nation appeal. The                             
 recommendations of this study focussed, inter-alia. on strengthening the ON role in the                    
 field of verification of disarmament agreements.                                                           
 Economic Issues                                                                                            
                                                                                     Top                    
 The year under review saw significant developments in the economic field. A number of                      
 important meetings took place, nearly all of which concluded with consensus agreements.                    
 The major events were: the Special Session of the General Assembly on International                        
 Economic Cooperation; meetings of the Economic and Social Council; the UN Conference on                    
 the Least Developed Countries; the meetings of the Ad Hoc Committee of the Whole on the                    
 International Development Strategy (IDS) for the fourth United Nations Develop- ment                       
 Decade; and the negotiations in the Second Committee of the 45th Session o f the                           
 General Assembly. Also, there were meetings at the UN of the Foreign Ministers of the                      
 Non-aligned countries and Grout) of 77 at the time of the 18th Special Session and the                     
 45th Session of the General Assembly.                                                                      
                                                                                                            
 The 18th Special Session of the General Assembly on International Economic Cooperation,                    
 in particular on Revitalisation of Economic Growth and Development of Developing                           
 Countries was held from April to May 1990 in New York. Developing countries felt that                      
 the Special Session could help to bring the focu s                                                         
 pg60                                                                                                       
 back on the central issues of poverty and development, in the context of the persisting                    
 stalemate in the North-South dialogue on economic issues. The Declaration, which was                       
 adopted by consensus, states that the most important challenge for the 1990s is the                        
 revitalisation of economic growth and social development in the developing countries                       
 which calls for sustained growth of the world economy and favourable external                              
 conditions.                                                                                                
                                                                                                            
 An Indian-delegation led by the then Minister for External Affairs, Shri I K Gujral and                    
 consisting of eminent economists and diplomats played a crucial role in the formulation                    
 of the framework for international cooperation adopted by the Special Session.                             
                                                                                                            
 At its Second Regular Session in July, Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC) focussed on                    
 some key issues: the world economy and the broad question of resource transfers and                        
 financial flows; the implementation of the Declaration adopted at the 18th Special                         
 Session of the General Assembly; the highlight of t he Session being the informal                          
 exchange of views on the evolution of East-West relations and its implications for the                     
 international monetary and financial sys tems including resource transfers to                              
 developing countries, and its impact on interna - tional trade.                                            
                                                                                                            
 Shri C R Gharekhan, India's Permanent Representative to the United Nations, was elected                    
 President of ECOSOC for the year. The President as wen as the rest of the Indian                           
 delegation played an important role in facilitating an exchange o f views on the needs                     
 of the developing countries in the new international situati on. The situation of the                      
 LDCs (Least Developed Countries) worsened despite the Substantial New Programme of                         
 Action adopted at the UN conference of LDCs held in 1981. A second conference was                          
 therefore convened in Paris in September 1990 from which the Paris Declaration and the                     
 Programme of Action (POA) for the LDCs for the 1990s emerged. The General Assembly                         
 endorsed both the Declaration and the POA. An Indian delegation led by India's                             
 Permanent Representative in Geneva attended the conference and helped in the                               
 formulation of the Paris Declaration.                                                                      
                                                                                                            
 The Chairman of the Ad Hoc Committee of the Whole for the preparation of the IDS                           
 (International Development Strategy) for the Fourth United Nations                                         
 pg61                                                                                                       
 Developments Decade, Mr Gamani Correa, prepared an excellent document for the                              
 Committee, which became the basis for the final consensus draft for submission to the                      
 45th Session of the General Assembly.                                                                      
                                                                                                            
 Among the ideas, concepts and recommendations contained in the IDS are: the                                
 interdependence of nations; the need to take steps to reverse the adverse trends of the                    
 1980s; the importance of a surge in the pace of economic growth i n developing                             
 countries; the importance of the responsiveness of the development process to social                       
 needs; the need for an improvement of the international economic system of money,                          
 finance and trade; the need for stability in the worl d economy and for sound macro                        
 economic management nationally and internation- ally; and above all, the need for                          
 strengthening international development coope ra- tion. It stresses the new                                
 opportunities for reversing the trends of the 1980s provided by the relaxation of                          
 international tensions and consequently, possibil ities for application of larger                          
 resources to the fight against world poverty. This echoes the elements in the                              
 Declaration of the 18th Special Session which even speaks of exploring the feasibility                     
 of channelling some of the reductions in mi litary expenditures, through financial                         
 mechanisms for development.                                                                                
                                                                                                            
 Among the important resolutions on economic matters that were adopted at the 45th                          
 Session of the Genera) Assembly were resolutions on the Report of ECOSOC which                             
 included, inter-alia, the US sponsored resolution on Entrepreneur- ship, and a G-77                        
 sponsored resolution initiated by India on the International Drinking Water Supply and                     
 Sanitation Decade; Trade and Development; Food and Agricultural problems; Industrial                       
 Development of Developing Countries; and resolutions on the World Summit for Children,                     
 World Food Council and the United Nations Population Fund under Operational Activities.                    
 The UNGA also adopted a resolution welcoming Uruguay's offer to host UNCTAD VIII at                        
 Punta dal Este from 21 September to 8 October 1991.                                                        
                                                                                                            
 The Indian delegation to the Second Committee emphasized, in the various negotiations                      
 that took place, the importance of addressing the developmental needs of developing                        
 countries in matters relating to commerce, development and economic cooperation. It was                    
 ensured that the resolutions adopted on economic issues adequately reflected the views                     
 of the developing countries. India participated actively in a large number of                              
 multilateral meetings on glo bal environmental issues held during the year. To                             
 sensitize important developing pg62                                                                        
                                                                                                            
 countries to India's concerns and with a view to evolving a developing country                             
 perspective on a whole range of such issues, the Government of India organized a                           
 Conference of Twenty select developing countries on Global Environmental Issues from 23                    
 to 25 April 1990 at New Delhi. India successfully promoted a series of amendments to                       
 the Montreal Protocol on Substances that deplete the ozone layer and was able to ensure                    
 that its concerns were taken into account through the amendments to the protocol                           
 adopted by the Second Meeting of States parties to the Montreal Protocol held in London                    
 in end June 1990. India also actively participated in and projected its concerns and                       
 interests at the First Substanti ve Session of the Preparatory Committee for the 1992                      
 UN Conference on Environ- ment and Development, the meetings to prepare for                                
 negotiations on conventions on climate change and bio-diversity, and in the                                
 consideration of environmental issues by the 45th UN General Assembly.                                     
                                                                                                            
 International preoccupations during 1990 centered around developments in the trading                       
 system, the consequences of the Gulf crisis and its impact on oil p rices as well as                       
 the transition and restructuring of countries in East Europe. As regards North-South                       
 cooperation, there were no major developments, despite a series of important                               
 conferences. In April 1990, at the Special Sessio n of the UN General Assembly, the                        
 developing countries were able to obtain important reaffirmation of the priority that                      
 the international community attaches to inte rna- tional cooperation for development.                      
 India played an active role in the negotiations which resulted in a consensus                              
 declaration. While the declaration embodies important principles for cooperation in the                    
 future, it is in the natur e of a conceptual document and does not embody specific                         
 commitments. This process was carried forward to some extent in the negotiations on the                    
 elaboration of an International Development Strategy for the 1990s.                                        
                                                                                                            
 Although all these meetings after protracted negotiations, resulted in consen - sus                        
 outcomes, it was found that the negotiating climate and the attitude to Nor th- South                      
 negotiations has changed considerably. The industrialised countries have on most                           
 occasions adopted an approach of focussing basically on domestic economic management in                    
 the developing countries, rather than on the interna- tional cooperation which had so                      
 far formed the sum and substance on the North- South dialogue. They also sought to                         
 bring in political overtones by emphasizing participatory governments, respect for                         
 human rights, and market orientation as basis of economic management. While these                          
 differences of perception were satisfactorily resolved in important meetings and                           
 conferences, some of the majo r                                                                            
 pg63                                                                                                       
 Concerns of developing countries in the area of international cooperation such as debt,                    
 financial flows, trade and commodity prices have not received the attenti on they                          
 deserve. While there was little tangible progress in economic negotiations, the                            
 international economic outlook remained uncertain. The developing countries in                             
 particular continued to face formidable difficulties. The debt crisis has conti nued to                    
 proliferate. No additional initiatives were taken during the past year to resolve the                      
 proliferation of the debt problem. In fact, there were no major developments in the                        
 international monetary and financial field. In the later ha lf of 1990, concerns began                     
 to increase about a possible recession in the world economy which would have an adverse                    
 impact on all parts and in particular upon the developing countries which have become                      
 even more vulnerable to such external shocks as well as the East European Countries                        
 which are in a process o f transition.                                                                     
                                                                                                            
 The consequences of the Gulf crisis sharpened these apprehensions. The Gulf crisis and                     
 the resultant increase in oil price has been particularly detrimenta l to the oil                          
 importing developing countries. For India the impact has been most severe because in                       
 addition to the impact of higher oil prices, the situation in the Gulf has led to                          
 disruption of exports, loss of remittances from Indian national s and huge expenses in                     
 repatriation of Indians.                                                                                   
                                                                                                            
 Developments in the international trading environment continue to dominate attention.                      
 The Uruguay Round of Multilateral Trade Negotiations approached its final scheduled                        
 phase. The Uruguay Round was called in a background of increasingly unsettled                              
 conditions in world trade and mounting protectionism in the industrialised countries.                      
 As the negotiations progress, the developing countries found that the issues of                            
 greatest interest to them were not being giv en the importance they deserve. Doubts                        
 regarding a satisfactory outcome from the negotiations increased after the failure of                      
 the Brussels Ministerial Meeting to narrow differences amongst powerful trading                            
 entities, in particular the United States on the one hand and the European Community                       
 and Japan on the other regarding the question of agricultural trade and subsidies. A                       
 failure of the Uruguay Round could lead to further disillusionment with the                                
 multilateral syste m and an increasing resort to managed trade as well as unilateral                       
 measures. A fragmentation and regionalisation of the international trading system has                      
 already appeared on the horizon and could have adverse repurcussions on the                                
 pg64                                                                                                       
 future world trade and prosperity which has to a large extent come to depend upon the                      
 free and open multilateral trading system. It was in the context of these and other                        
 fundamental developments taking place in the world economy that the initiative to form                     
 the Summit Level Group o n South-South Consultation and Cooperation (G-15) was taken at                    
 the Non-aligned Summit in Belgrade in September 1989. The Group is intended to provide                     
 a Forum for regular and indepth consultations amongst the leaders of an important group                    
 of developing countries. The first Summit meeting of the G-15 was held in Kuala Lumpur                     
 in June 1990. The G-15 Group has moved quickly towards institutionalising itself and in                    
 promoting South-South cooperation programmes. The Summit will now be held annually, the                    
 next scheduled in Caracas in June 1991. It has also been decided to set up a small                         
 permanent secretariat for the G-15. The Summit identified several specific projects for                    
 South-South cooperati on which have progressed satisfactorily in the short time since                      
 the Kuala Lumpur Summit.                                                                                   
 Administrative and Budgetary Matters                                                                       
                                                                                     Top                    
 The Indian delegation played an active role in the Fifth Committee and made efforts                        
 with other developing countries to encourage greater transparency and fairness in the                      
 determination of scale of assessments. Under a proposal put for ward by the Indian                         
 delegation, the member states would be able for the first time to send their                               
 representatives to the meetings of Committee on Contributions to explain their views on                    
 distribution of ad hoc relief against increases in the s cale of their assessment.                         
 Following India's efforts for the past three years, ad hoc re llef would now be                            
 distributed by the Committee on the basis of certain specified criteria instead of                         
 personal judgement and disposition of Committee members. On the initiative taken by the                    
 Indian delegation, there would be greater audit coverage of extra budgetary                                
 expenditures of the UN organizations and more transparency in recruitment of personnel                     
 against posts financed from the extra budgetary funds.                                                     
                                                                                                            
 The Indian delegation also took initiative in making recommendation to broaden the                         
 participation of member states in the UN peace keeping operations and in removal of                        
 inconsistencies in practices relating to travel arrangements for representatives of                        
 member states to attend meetings of inter-governmental bodie s.                                            
 pg65                                                                                                       
 Social and Humanitarian Issues                                                                             
                                                                                     Top                    
 India continued to play an active role in the consideration by the UN bodies such as                       
 the General Assembly, ECOSOC and the Commission on Human Rights, of social and                             
 humanitarian issues. India's stand on such issues was based on it s principled position                    
 on matters pertaining to human rights and social justice an d its deep and abiding                         
 commitment to the protection and promotion of human rights. At the 45th Session of the                     
 UN General Assembly, India played an important role in the deliberations of the Third                      
 Committee. India supported the adoption by the Third Committee and later by the General                    
 Assembly of the Convention on the Rights of the Migrant Workers and their Families.                        
 India also participated i n World Summit for Children held in New York on 30 September                     
 1990. The Indian delegation participated actively in the 42nd Session of the UN Sub                        
 Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities held in Geneva                     
 from 6 to 13 August 1990 and the 47th Session of the UN Human Rights Commission also                       
 held in Geneva from 28 January to 8 March 1991.                                                            
 Apartheid                                                                                                  
                                                                                     Top                    
 The year under review witnessed many developments in South Africa, where a process of                      
 change was set in motion. The decision of the South African authorities to release Dr                      
 Nelson Mandela and some other political prisoners, to unban political organizations, to                    
 lift the state of emergency, to ease media restrictions, to repeal the separate                            
 Amenities Act, to end racial segrega tion in public facilities and to establish                            
 contacts with the ANC were welcomed as steps in the right direction. But much more                         
 needs to be done for the complete eradication of apartheid and establishment of                            
 non-racial democracy in South Africa, on the basis of one man, one vote. India remained                    
 fully committed to the struggle against apartheid and continued to actively espouse                        
 this cause in various international fora, includi ng the United Nations.                                   
 pg66                                                                                                       
 India is the rapporteur of the UN Special Committee against apartheid. India played an                     
 important role in drafting the cluster of Resolutions on Apartheid adopted by the UNGA                     
 by an overwhelming majority.                                                                               
 Decolonisation                                                                                             
                                                                                     Top                    
 India continued to play an active role in the UN bodies relating to decolonisation.                        
 Namibia's independence on 21 March 1990 virtually marked the end of the colonial era.                      
 India played an important role at the United Nations towards the realization of this                       
 long awaited goal and actively participated in the United Nations Transit Assistance                       
 Group (UNTAG), the military component of which was headed by a retired Major General                       
 from India. India is now actively participating in the economic reconstruction of                          
 Namibia.                                                                                                   
 Narcotic Drugs Control                                                                                     
                                                                                     Top                    
 The 26th Session of the Sub Commission on Illicit Drug Trafficking and Related Matters                     
 in the Near and Middle East was held in Vienna on 24 and 25 January 1990. India was                        
 represented by Shri M M Bhatnagar, Director General, Narcotics Control Bureau (NCB),                       
 who was elected as the first Vice President of the Meeting. Shri M V N Rao, the former                     
 Chairman, Central Board of Excise and Customs, and the Secretary in the Ministry of                        
 Finance, attended two sessions of the International Narcotics Control Board in Vienna                      
 in May and October 19690. Shri Rao is a member of the INCB since 1990.                                     
 Election to UN Bodies and other International Organizations                                                
                                                                                     Top                    
 On 1 November 1990, India was elected by the United Nations General Assembly to the                        
 Security Council for the years 1991 and 1992 along with Ecuador , Zimbabwe, Austria and                    
 Belgium. India won by 141 votes. India is taking its place in the Security Council                         
 after a gap of five years.                                                                                 
 pg67                                                                                                       
 Shri R Srinivasan was elected Chairman of the Executive Board of the World Health                          
 Organization in May 1990. Shri M S Raman was elected Assistant Director General of                         
 Universal Postal Union in May 1990. Kumari Mira Seth, Secretary, Department of Women                       
 and Child Development, was elected First Vice Chairperson of the UNICEF Executive Board                    
 in June 1990.                                                                                              
 Activities of the Non-Aligned Movement                                                                     
                                                                                     Top                    
 The transformation in East-West relations has changed the context but not the relevance                    
 of the Non-Aligned Movement. During the cold war period, the Non-aligned countries                         
 pursued three major objectives. First, they sought to protect their own independence of                    
 action by staying clear of the two power blocs' confrontation. Secondly, they sought to                    
 create an 'area of peace' between the opposing military alliances and thereby promote                      
 the maintenance of world peace. Thirdly, they promoted creation of an equitable world                      
 order. Now the power blocs have crumbled and a new collaborative relationship between                      
 the Super Powers has emerged. However, the relevance of the Non- Aligned Movement in                       
 the changed international political scene cannot be questioned. It continues to be                         
 relevant in the struggle against poverty, inequality and discriminatory practices in                       
 the political, economic and social fields.                                                                 
                                                                                                            
 India actively promoted and pursued the agenda drawn up at the Belgrade Summit and                         
 participated in the various activities of the Non-Aligned Movement during the year.                        
 These were:                                                                                                
                                                                                                            
 (i) The meetings of the NAM Group of 18 on Namibia. Two observer missions went to                          
 Namibia before and during the elections. The Non- aligned countries' contribution to                       
 the deliberations in the Security Council on Namibia;                                                      
                                                                                                            
 (ii) Meetings of the Consultative Group on Cambodia;                                                       
                                                                                                            
 (iii) Meetings of the Committee of 9 for the Middle East and Palestine held in Tunisia                     
 and New York. The then Minister for External Affairs participated in the meeting in                        
 Tunisia; pg68                                                                                              
                                                                                                            
 (iv) The Summit of the Group of 15 in Kuala Lumpur. The former Prime Minister attended                     
 the Summit;                                                                                                
                                                                                                            
 (v) Ministerial Meeting in New York before the Special Session of the General Assembly                     
 on economic matters. The then External Affairs Minister attended;                                          
                                                                                                            
 (vi) A Ministerial Meeting of Algeria, India and Yugoslavia held in Belgrade with a                        
 view to finding a peaceful solution to the Gulf crisis. The initiative for the Meeting                     
 was taken by the then External Affairs Minist er who also attended it;                                     
                                                                                                            
 (vii) A Ministerial Meeting in New York prior to the 45th UNGA Session,                                    
                                                                                                            
 (viii) The Third Conference of the Ministers of Information of Non-aligned countries                       
 held in Havana. The then Minister for Information and Broadcasting attended it. The                        
 Conference drew up a programme of work for cooperation in the field of information; and                    
                                                                                                            
 (ix) The Fourth Conference of the Ministers of Labour of Non-aligned countries held in                     
 Tunis. The member states of the Non-Aligned Movement held a number of meetings during                      
 the 45th UNGA to coordinate their positions on the various issues that came up in the                      
 Session. Indian delegates participated in these consultations an d, in most cases,                         
 provided valuable inputs.                                                                                  
                                                                                                            
 The then External Affairs Minister got in touch with his Yugoslav counterpart in order                     
 to activate the Non-Aligned Movement in seeking an end to the hostilit ies and two of                      
 them met in Belgrade on 23 January. Following this meeting, a meeting at the level of                      
 Foreign Ministers of 15 countries (Malaysia, Sri Lanka, Yugoslavia, Ghana, Zimbabwe,                       
 Zambia, Algeria, Egypt, Indonesia, Iran, Cuba, Venezuela, Argentina, Cyprus and India)                     
 and PLO representative was held in Belgrade on 12 February 1991. The Deputy Minister                       
 for External Affairs held discussions in Algiers, Harare, Paris and London on the                          
 Indian initiative. Both in Algiers and Harare there was support to India's initiative.                     
 pg69                                                                                                       
 Commonwealth                                                                                               
                                                                                     Top                    
 The Fifth meeting of the Commonwealth Committee of Foreign Ministers on Southern Africa                    
 held in Abuja (Nigeria) from 15 to 17 May 1990 was attended by the Foreign Ministers of                    
 Australia, India, Canada, Guyana, Zambia, Zimbabwe, Nigeria, Tanzania and Malaysia.                        
 India was represented by the then Minister of State for External Affairs, Shri Hari                        
 Kishore Singh. Canada is the Chairman of the Committee. A review of the current                            
 situation in and prospects for Southern Africa and developments relating to sanctions                      
 dominated the agenda. The Committee adopted the "Abuja Commitment" concerning the                          
 situation in South Africa, which elaborated the firm commitment of the Commonwealth to                     
 continuation of sanctions, and Commonwealth's desire that democratisation must be based                    
 on the principle of universal 'adult suffrage' which would lead to the establishment of                    
 a non-racial, democratic and non-fragmented South Africa. In keeping with her                              
 commitment to the global struggle to abolish apartheid, India offered to host the next                     
 meeting of the Committee. The dates will be decided in consultation with the Chairman                      
 of the Committee.                                                                                          
                                                                                                            
 The Commonwealth Summit at Kuala Lumpur, 1989 had set up a Summit Level Group to review                    
 the role of the Commonwealth in the 1990s and beyond. The group comprises Heads of                         
 Government of Malaysia (Chairman), Australia, Britain, Canada, Cyprus, India, Nigeria,                     
 Papua New Guinea, Trinidad & Tobago an d Zimbabwe. The main mandate of the Group                           
 related to the following issues:                                                                           
                                                                                                            
 (i) Possible future roles for the Commonwealth and review of the Commonwealth                              
 Secretariat;                                                                                               
                                                                                                            
 (ii) Commonwealth assistance for promoting and strengthening democratic processes and                      
 institutions in member countries; and                                                                      
                                                                                                            
 (iii) Commonwealth membership India participated actively in the three meetings of the                     
 Working Group of Officials of the Appraisal Group. The First Meeting of the Group was                      
 held in London on 15 and 16 March 1990. The documents circulated at the Meeting                            
 pg70                                                                                                       
 included a comprehensive paper prepared by the Commonwealth Secretariat, and written                       
 submissions by Malaysia, Canada and Britain. Seven priority areas were identified,                         
 including Southern Africa, environment, drugs and education. The Second Meeting of the                     
 Working Group was held in London between 29 and 31 August 1990. The agenda of the                          
 Second Meeting was based on a consolidated paper prepared by the Secretariat. The Group                    
 also examined the studies commissioned at the first meeting. Submissions were also                         
 made, inter- alia, by the Commonwealth Human Rights Initiative and the Commonwealth                        
 Working Group on Sports. The Third Meeting was held in Kuala Lumpur on 1 and 2 December                    
 1990 and adopted a Report on the role of the Commonwealth in the 1990's and beyond. It                     
 also approved a draft Declaration to be adopted by the CHOGM in Harare in October 1991.                    
                                                                                                            
 The Meeting of the High Level Appraisal Group at the level of Heads of State will now                      
 be held in Harare on 15 October 1991. The Commonwealth Senior Officials' Meeting took                      
 place in Papua New Guinea from 26 to 28 November 1990 to prepare for the Heads of                          
 State/Government Meeting in Harare from 16 to 22 October 1991. India participated                          
 actively in the meeting, to draw up the agenda of CHOGM, Harare, and finalize a                            
 consensus on various aspects of the functioning of the Commonwealth.                                       
                                                                                                            
 An emergency meeting of the Commonwealth Committee of Foreign Ministers on South Africa                    
 was held in London on 16 February 1991. The then External Affairs Minister participated                    
 in the meeting. The meeting reviewed the Common- wealth consensus on sanction, in the                      
 context of President De Klerk's address to the South African Parliament on 1 February                      
 1991 endorsing the concept of a mult i- party conference on Constitutional                                 
 negotiations. Notwithstanding welcome developments in South Africa, the Foreign                            
 Ministers noted that there had as yet been very little change on the ground and that                       
 there had been more promises tha n concrete action by the South African Government.                        
 Conferences                                                                                                
                                                                                     Top                    
 During the year under review, the Conference Cell continued to play its role of                            
 providing logistical support and managerial assistance for all the internati onal                          
 pg71                                                                                                       
 conferences convened by the Ministry of External Affairs. It also provided such                            
 facilities to other Ministries of the Government of India. Many conferences, workshops                     
 and memorial lectures were successfully organized by the Division during the year. The                     
 following major international conferences were held during this period:                                    
                                                                                                            
 (i) Meeting of Select Developing Countries on Global Environ- mental Issues was held in                    
 New Delhi from 23 to 26 April 1990. The meeting was attended by more than 100 delegates                    
 from developing countries;                                                                                 
                                                                                                            
 (ii) 23rd Annual Meeting of the Board of Governors of the Asian Development Bank was                       
 held in New Delhi from 2 to 5 May 1990. The meeting was attended by more than 4000                         
 foreign delegates. The work of the Division was much appreciated by the visiting                           
 dignitaries of Asian Development Bank ant; the Ministry of Finance;                                        
                                                                                                            
 (iii) The Global Consultation on Safe Water and Sanitation for the 1990's was held in                      
 New Delhi from 10 to 14 September 1990. The Conference was attended by more than 2000                      
 foreign delegates; and                                                                                     
                                                                                                            
 (iv) The Division was the nodal point for all the logistical support for the National                      
 Reception Committee for Dr Nelson Mandela. The Division organized many meetings of the                     
 National Reception Committee and its Working Group, under the chairmanship of the                          
 former Prime Minister and the then External Affairs Minister. The finale was the                           
 organization of People's Reception for Dr Mandela at Indira Gandhi Stadium on 15                           
 October 1990 which involved a very massive effort on the part of the Division. The                         
 Division also organized several SAARC Meetings in New Delhi and Bombay. The Division                       
 continued to share its experience and expertise with other Ministries. Its equipment                       
 was loaned to many Government agencies, free of cost. An illustrative list of the                          
 Conferences/Functions arranged by the Division is given in Appendix XIV.                                   
 pg72                                                                                                       
 International Law: Development and Activities                                                              
                                                                                     Top                    
 The United Nations General Assembly (Sixth Committee) at its 45th Session considered 13                    
 agenda items during its deliberations from 21 September to 28 November 1990. The                           
 important among these related to the work of the International Law Commission (ILC),                       
 the United Nations Commission on Interna- tional Trade Law (UNCITRAL), the drafting of                     
 a Code of Crimes against the peace and security of mankind including the establishment                     
 of an International Crimina l Court, the peaceful settlement of disputes between the                       
 States and the UN Decade of International Law Regarding the work of the International                      
 Law Commission, th e Indian delegation noted the progress made by the Commission on                        
 finalizing draft articles on the non-navigational use of international rivers, the                         
 jurisdictiona l immunity of States and their property and on draft Code of Crimes                          
 against peace and security of mankind. It is expected that on the items of                                 
 international rive rs and jurisdictional immunities, the Commission would be able to                       
 complete the fir st reading of a set of draft articles by the end of its next session                      
 to be held in 1991. On the observance of the UN Decade of International Law, India                         
 participated in a fruitful exchange of views held at the UN wherein the role of                            
 International L aw in the maintenance of International peace and security was                              
 discussed.                                                                                                 
                                                                                                            
 An Indian delegation participated in the 29th Session of the Legal Sub Committee of the                    
 UN Committee on Peaceful Use of Outer Space which was held in Geneva from 2 to 20 April                    
 1990. The Sub Committee discussed the issues concerning the development of the draft                       
 principles on Nuclear Power Sources (NPS), Geo Stationary Orbit (GSO) and definition                       
 and delimitation of Outer Spac e and Outer Space benefits taking into account the needs                    
 of the developing countries. Consensus was reached on various principles dealing with                      
 the guidelines and standards for safe use in NPS in Space Objects. On other aspects ,                      
 the discussions held have yet to achieve areas of agreement.                                               
                                                                                                            
 An Indian delegation participated in two sessions (March and October 1990) of the                          
 Standing Committee of the Vienna Convention on Civil Liability for Nucle ar Damage,                        
 1963, which were held in Vienna under the auspices of the International Atomic Energy                      
 Agency (IAEA). At the second session, the Standing Committee established a Drafting                        
 Committee to draft texts for the revision of the Vienna Convention which provides for                      
 Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage within certain financial limits. It is expected that                    
 further meetings would be held to achieve consensus on most of the issues before an                        
 international conference is convened to revise the Vienna Convention on Civil Liability                    
 for Nuclear Damage.                                                                                        
 pg73                                                                                                       
 India participated in the 29th Annual Session of Asian African Legal Consulta - tive                       
 Committee (AALCC) which was held in Beijing from 12 to 17 March 1990. As in the past,                      
 the AALCC provided a forum for the Legal Experts of the two continents to come together                    
 to exchange views on several contemporary legal problems. These included the status and                    
 treatment of refugees, law of the sea, definition of terrorism to distinguish it from                      
 liberation struggle, Geneva Conv en- tion on law of war and deportation of                                 
 Palestinians, legal regime concerning transboundary movement of hazardous wastes and                       
 their disposal and extradition. Views were also exchanged on legal problems concerning                     
 international trade law being discussed in UNCITRAL and in other forums.                                   
                                                                                                            
 A meeting of legal experts was held in Colombo from 29 January to 1 February 1990 to                       
 draft the text of the SAARC Convention on Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances.                      
 The convention set out the acts which the member states were required to declare as                        
 offences and to make them punishable as grav e offences under their domestic law. It                       
 required them to cooperate in the investigation, prosecution and prevention of drug                        
 offences and set out in detai l the measures of mutual legal assistance to be afforded                     
 to one another as well as matters regarding extradition of drug offences. The                              
 convention also provided that the plea that the offence was a political one could not                      
 be a ground for de nial of extradition of an alleged drug offender. The convention was                     
 signed on behalf of India and other SAARC member states on 23 November 1990 at the                         
 Fifth SAARC Summit at Male. It will enter into force upon ratification by the member                       
 states .                                                                                                   
 pg74                                                                                                       
 Foreign Economic Relations                                                                                 
                                                                                     Top                    
 FOREIGN ECONOMIC RELATIONS THROUGH                                                                         
                                                                                                            
 the Indian Technical and Economic Cooperation (ITEC) programme and Special Commonwealth                    
 African Assistance Programme (SCAAP) administered by the Ministry of External Affairs,                     
 the Government of Ind ia continued to expand and intensify economic and technical                          
 cooperation with fellow developing countries bilaterally as well as through regional                       
 organizatio ns such as Southern African Development Cooperation Council (SADCC) and                        
 Economic Commission for Africa (ECA) during the year under review. Fresh assistance in                     
 the form of project aid, training, techno-economic survey s and deputation of Indian                       
 experts was made available to Afghanistan, Vietnam, Zimbabwe and Zambia during the                         
 year. A number of ongoing projects under the ITEC Programme, including feasibility                         
 reports and equipment supplies, were eith er completed or continued, particularly in                       
 respect of Mauritius, Vietnam, Cambodia , Ethiopia and Afghanistan.                                        
                                                                                                            
 Construction of a 300-bed Gynaecological and Obstetrics hospital, additional industrial                    
 sheds, cooperation in agriculture, cartography, meteorology and tour ism were the major                    
 new areas identified for project assistance and equipment supplying to Afghanistan. In                     
 addition, deputation of 35 experts and training of 50 nominees were agreed upon; In                        
 respect of Zambia also, India agreed to consider the setting up of a pilot agricultural                    
 tool making unit, apart from deputing up to 20 ITEC experts and training of 40 Zambian                     
 nominees in various fields. In Zimbabwe's case a protocol of cooperation in sericulture                    
 was signed and an agreement to depute 5 experts and earmark 10 training slots was                          
 reached. During the Indo-Vietnamese joint Commission Meeting, the then External Affairs                    
 Minister, Shri I K Gujral formally handed over to Vietnam the Rice Research and                            
 pg75                                                                                                       
 Buffalo and Forage Research Centres set up with India's assistance and gave an                             
 assurance for assistance in setting up of a Scientific Laboratory and Training of 90                       
 Vietnamese in India in various technical fields. The fifth phase of the Angkor Vat                         
 Restoration Project was approved in respect of Cambodia. About 369 nominees (including                     
 86 from the previous year) from developing countries were trained under ITEC programme                     
 for a period ranging from six months to 1 1/2 years. Under SCAAP, 437 nominees from the                    
 developing countries were admitted in various technical courses. The training courses                      
 ranged from sm all scale industries to hotel management, computerisation, manpower,                        
 foreign trade, diplomacy, audit and legislature drafting. Non-civilian trainees                            
 numbered 330. Requests for ITEC experts from over 33 developing countries were enter-                      
 tained. About 80 new long term experts were selected for deputation and over 60 cases                      
 were under process.                                                                                        
                                                                                                            
 Relief supplies were sent to Jordan, Ivory Coast, Trinidad & Tobago, the Philippines,                      
 Tanzania and Angola. Familiarisation cum study visits from Jordan, Afghanistan and                         
 Suriname were received. Commitment of India's continued assistance in economic and                         
 technical fields was reiterated at the TCDC Programming exercises in respect of                            
 Indonesia and Ghana, in July and October 1990 respectively. An Economic Coordination                       
 Unit (ECU) was set up during the year in order to monitor the major international                          
 developments, examine their likely impact and attempt to coordinate India's actions and                    
 responses. In the first phase, the EC U was mandated to deal with "Europe 1992,"                           
 Indo-Japan economic relations, strategies and options, India's economic interests in                       
 East Europe, prospects an d responses, economic challenges in the context of ongoing                       
 changes in the USSR, t he oil scenario in the 1990s and matters relating to the                            
 transfer of hi-tech. ECU pursued its mandate in consultation with other concerned                          
 departments of the Government. It was also in touch with eminent economists, research                      
 institutes, apex economic organizations etc.                                                               
 pg76                                                                                                       
 Policy Planning And Research                                                                               
                                                                                     Top                    
 POLICY PLANNING AND RESEARCH                                                                               
 DURING the year under review, the Policy Planning Division interacted with other                           
 Divisions of the Ministry. It also participated in inter-Ministerial and                                   
 inter-Departmental meetings, in particular, the joint Intelligence Committe e. The                         
 Division has initiated steps to enlarge the areas of contacts with the academic                            
 circles, the UGC and the affiliated Area Study Centres of various Universities. Methods                    
 to utilise the academic inputs are being evolved. The Division was associated with                         
 several non-governmental organizations in arranging various Conferences and Seminars on                    
 current international issues. Several of them were financed by the Division. The                           
 Historical Division being the Research Wing of the Ministry interacts wit h various                        
 Territorial Divisions in the preparation of Notes, Research Papers and Backgrounders on                    
 issues relating to international developments. The Division rendered all possible help                     
 to the Indian Missions abroad whenever any specific information or documents on                            
 international relations were required.                                                                     
                                                                                                            
 The Division coordinates with the concerned Territorial Divisions and deals with                           
 requests from Research Scholars for access to the records of the Governmen t of India                      
 relating to the restricted areas or the Closed Period as laid down in the Access Rules.                    
 The Division further scrutinises the excerpts of the Closed Perio d records submitted                      
 by the Research Scholars and accords final clearance after du e consultation with the                      
 concerned Territorial Divisions. The Division undertakes the task of examining the                         
 inaccurate depiction of India's international boundaries in all foreign publications,                      
 private as well a s                                                                                        
 pg77                                                                                                       
 official, and maintains contacts with Missions abroad for taking up the matter with the                    
 publishers or the Government authorities for proper presentation and necessary                             
 corrective measures. The Division closely coordinates with the Survey of India and the                     
 Ministry of Defence on the question of supply of map sheets to various Government and                      
 semi- Government agencies for use in their official work. On India's boundary problems,                    
 the Division extended necessary assistance to the particular needs of the related                          
 Territorial Divisions. To support the research efforts, a well stocked Library is                          
 maintained with ov er one hundred thousand books and documents in its collection.                          
 During 1990 alone, 1900 books, 135 maps, 650 pamphlets and 54 reels of microfilm were                      
 added. The Library subscribes to 610 periodicals (489 foreign and 121 Indian), besides                     
 41 daily newspapers (28 foreign and 13 Indian). Library is equipped with in-house                          
 computer system with seven terminals; a microfilm/fiche reader printer and a plain                         
 paper photocopier.                                                                                         
                                                                                                            
 Documentation/Bibliographic Services as well as other library operations and services                      
 were computerised using an integrated software package developed in India. Information                     
 about books and selected periodical articles received in library since 1986 is                             
 available on-line through each terminal. All new docu- ments received in                                   
 Library--books, maps, microforms, selected articles from peri od- icals etc--were fed                      
 into the in-house computer system to create database on Foreign Affairs. Using this                        
 database, the Library provides Current Awareness Service and Bibliographical Services.                     
 In addition, the Library regularly issued a monthly Chronicle of Events, a Foreign                         
 Affairs Documentation Bulletin and an annotated monthly list of books added to the                         
 library. Library users including Research Scholars can have access to on-line computer                     
 based information held in Library in different databases through Foreign Affair s                          
 Information Retrieval System (FAIRS). Photocopying and Computer Print-out facilities                       
 are also available to all Library users including Research Scholars.                                       
 pg78                                                                                                       
 External Publicity                                                                                         
                                                                                     Top                    
 EXTERNAL PUBLICITY THE External Publicity Division is charged with the task of                             
 projecting India's foreign policy and aspects of Indian life while countering adverse                      
 publicity overseas. To this end, this Division, during the year under review, w as                         
 actively engaged in the dissemination of daily information on developments in India to                     
 its Missions abroad; projecting the scientific, industrial and technol ogical                              
 developments in India through articles and documentaries and providing material to the                     
 Missions abroad to enable them to effectively advocate India's stand on issues of                          
 international import and developments within India itself The Division regularly                           
 briefed the foreign and Indian media about India's policies. Stress was laid on the                        
 coverage of important international events and developments in the region particularly                     
 the situation in the Gulf, and in neighbouring countries and India's policy towards                        
 them. The Missions in foreign countries were supplied with information on the communal                     
 situation in India; th e extremely successful Indian effort in evacuating its nationals                    
 following the Ir aqi troops entry into Kuwait; India's efforts to foster an environment                    
 of peace and development in the region; the Indian contribution to making the SAARC an                     
 effective instrument of regional development and the Government's policy to tackle the                     
 situation in Jammu and Kashmir and Punjab etc.                                                             
                                                                                                            
 In order to acquaint the foreign media and Press with developments in India, the Press                     
 Relations Section of the Division organized interviews for the foreig n media with                         
 dignitaries such as the Indian Prime Minister, Cabinet Ministers and others. The Press                     
 Relations Section also provided the necessary assistance to Indian journalists who were                    
 visiting other countries to cover foreign policy is sues; it coordinated the approval                      
 of documentary films made by foreign film companies                                                        
 pg79                                                                                                       
 and also provided the necessary media coverage for all foreign delegations visiting                        
 India as well as for foreign visits of VVIPs from India including cove rage of the                         
 Fifth SAARC Summit held at Mate in November 1990. During the period from Apr 01, 1990                      
 to 31 January 1991, one hundred eighty four documentaries were approved by the Press                       
 Relations Section of the Division. Foreign journalists from Afghanistan, Pakistan,                         
 Hungary, the Philippi - nes and Indonesia were provided hospitality. In addition, ten                      
 scholar journal- ists visited India during January 1991 on full hospitality granted by                     
 the Divis ion. Of the VVIPs visits to India, among others, the Press Relations Section                     
 was extensively involved in the coverage of the visits of Prime Minister of Japan                          
 between April and May 1990; Bangladesh Foreign Minister in May 1990; Prime Minister of                     
 Nepal in June 1990; Minister of Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan in June 1990; Mrs                           
 Brundtland as Chairperson of World Commission on Environ- ment and Development in                          
 September 1990, Cambodian Prime Minister in October 1990; Dr Nelson Mandela in October                     
 1990; King of Bhutan in November 1990; and the President of Nauru in December 1990.                        
                                                                                                            
 The activities of the anti-nationalist elements overseas were closely moni- tored and                      
 efforts were made to counter adverse publicity in the foreign Press and media generated                    
 by organizations and individuals supporting the extremist and secessionist elements in                     
 Punjab and Jammu and Kashmir. Special briefings were held on the then External Affairs                     
 Minister's visit to Sri Lanka, China, Belgrade and Iran; Deputy Minister for External                      
 Affairs' visit to Algiers and Harare; Foreign Secretary's visit to Malaysia and Iran;                      
 Secretary(East)'s visit to Cambodia; as also visits of the Presidents of Maldives,                         
 Germany and Romania; and the Vice Chairman of the Council of Ministers of Vietnam to                       
 India in January 1991. In order to keep foreign audiences acquainted with the                              
 multi-faceted character of India, the Division undertook the production of quality                         
 documen- taries. During the year, subjects like Muslims in India, Christianity in India                    
 and Information on Technology in India were covered. A documentary 'Figures of Thought'                    
 portraying the life and work of three noted contemporary painters was completed. The                       
 documentary received excellent reviews in the national media and was assessed by the                       
 film critics as a highly creative work o f art. The film was also selected for the                         
 Panorama Section in the International Film Festival held in Madras in January 1991.                        
 Similarly, documentaries on                                                                                
 pg80                                                                                                       
 Bharatnatyam dance produced by the noted exponent of Bharatnatyam Leela Samson and on                      
 Odissi dance by Guru Kelucharan Mahapatra are in the pipeline. To coincide with the                        
 historic visit of Dr Mandela, the Division organized the production of a documentary on                    
 Dr Mandela's life which was telecast during his stay in India. The Division also                           
 arranged for the telecast of documentaries on India in other countries under the                           
 Cultural Exchange Programme on the occasions of Indian Independence and Republic Days.                     
 A Photo Exhibition on the late Vietnamese President Ho Chi Minh was organized in April                     
 1990 to celebrate his birth centenary. The Division continue d to supply Missions                          
 abroad with feature films and documentaries on India for telecast by local television                      
 stations as well as screening by Missions to local audiences. Photographs of national                      
 leaders and personalities were sent to Missions to be utilised by the local media for                      
 their magazines and journals and for special supplements on India.                                         
                                                                                                            
 The Division continued to assist Indian Missions with material to be publishe d in                         
 'house journals' in different languages which were locally distributed by th e Missions                    
 to provide uptodate information on developments of significance in Ind ia. In addition,                    
 the Division launched the Urdu and Arabic editions of its prestigi ous magazine 'India                     
 Perspectives,' The Division also brought out a book on 'Muslims in India' in English,                      
 Urdu and Arabic which was highly appreciated by recipients i n many countries and the                      
 Division received a number of demands for additional copies. The 'Muslims in India' is                     
 the first in a planned series of books on dif ferent communities in India aimed at                         
 projecting their contribution to the creation of a modem, secular India.                                   
 pg81                                                                                                       
 Indians Overseas                                                                                           
                                                                                     Top                    
 INDIANS OVERSEAS                                                                                           
 IT is estimated that there are about 12 million persons of Indian origin residing in                       
 different parts of the world. These include those who continue to retain Indian                            
 citizenship. It has been the consistent policy of the Government of India that persons                     
 of Indian origin who have taken foreign citizenship should identity themselves wit h                       
 and integrate in the country of their domicile. The Government naturally remains alive                     
 to the interests and general welfare of the Overseas Indians and encourages cultural                       
 contacts with them.                                                                                        
                                                                                                            
 Indian citizens residing abroad are primarily the concern of the Government of India                       
 and the Government continues to exercise due care for their safety and welfare and                         
 takes all necessary steps in this regard. It was in keeping with th is obligation and                      
 keeping in view the wishes of the Indian community that the Government organized the                       
 evacuation of nearly 1.5 lakh Indians from Kuwait and Iraq following the Iraqi                             
 occupation of Kuwait on Aug 02, 1990, the work being coordinated by the Special                            
 Coordination Unit and the Overseas Indians Division. The Division has been created in                      
 the Ministry with a view to develop social, economic, and cultural contacts between                        
 India and the Overseas Indians. Mis- sions have been instructed to maintain close                          
 contacts with Overseas Indians and render all possible assistance. The Division                            
 disseminates information about matters of interest to Overseas Indians through Missions                    
 abroad. It also represents the Ministry in inter-ministerial deliberations involving                       
 NRI affair s. In addition, the Division is trying to develop a database on Overseas                        
 Indians.                                                                                                   
 pg82                                                                                                       
 As the nodal point for all matters pertaining to Overseas Indians, the Divisi on                           
 coordinated arrangements for assistance by the Government of India and the Stat e                          
 Government of Andhra Pradesh to the Mauritian National Organizing Committee in holding                     
 the Third World Telugu Conference. The conference was held in Port Louis, Mauritius,                       
 from 9 to 12 December 1990.                                                                                
 pg83                                                                                                       
 Protocol                                                                                                   
                                                                                     Top                    
 PROTOCOL                                                                                                   
 DURING the year under review, the Heads of Mission of the following 25 countries left                      
 India on completion of their tenure (up to Dec 14, 1990): Venezuela, Nicaragua, Chile,                     
 Italy, Sudan, Argentina, Romania, Guyana, Norway , Holy See, Mexico, Colombia, Liberia,                    
 Japan, Bulgaria, Canada, Spain, Lebanon, Australia, Pakistan, Jordan, Federal Repubilc                     
 of Germany, Czech and Slovak Federal Republic, Panama and the Netherlands. During the                      
 same period, the Heads of Mission of the following 20 countries presented their                            
 credentials to the President of India (up to 14 December 1990): Guinea, Morocco, Italy,                    
 Venezuela, Chile, Sudan, Mexico, Argentina, Spain, Guyana, Lebanon, Kenya, Ireland,                        
 Japan, Norway, Pakistan, Holy See, Australia, Brunei Darussalam and Federal Republic of                    
 Germany. India decided to grant diplomatic status to the office of the African Nationa                     
 l Congress in New Delhi. A list of Heads of State/Government who visited India during                      
 1990-91 is at Appendix XV.                                                                                 
 pg84                                                                                                       
 Passport And Consular Services                                                                             
                                                                                     Top                    
 PASSPORT AND CONSULAR SERVICES                                                                             
 DURING the year 1990, several innovative measures were introduced by the Consular,                         
 Passport and Visa (CPV) Division to rationalise, simplify and further streamline the                       
 functioning of the passport offices in India and consular sectio ns of the Indian                          
 Missions/Posts abroad. These measures were initiated to maintain a time schedule in                        
 issue of passport and render prompt and efficient service in a ll types of cases by the                    
 passport offices to the public all over India. The visa p olicy was also amended                           
 considerably. One of the various recommendations made by the All India Passport                            
 Officers' conference held from 14 to Feb 16, 1990 in New Delhi pertained to the                            
 handling of Mission's references by opening a separate d esk in the passport offices.                      
 The conference also recommended simplification of the procedures in general. These have                    
 been implemented.                                                                                          
                                                                                                            
 A new verification system to issue passports expeditiously was introduced from 1 June                      
 1990. Under this system, any Government servant/employee of the Public Sector                              
 Undertaking applying for passport through the Head of Department with No Objection                         
 Certificate (NOC), any sitting or former MP/MLA/MLC, any child below 15 years of age,                      
 and any person who applies for a passport with a prescribed, verification certificates                     
 signed by a competent officer can be give n passport without prior verification. In all                    
 other cases, passport is to be issu ed after four weeks of waiting for the police/CID                      
 verification reports. This syste m has proved very useful in cutting down delay in                         
 issue of passports all over Ind ia. It has also been decided that from 16 August 1990                      
 all international passports will continue to be in force for 10 years at a stretch and                     
 a fresh passport val id for 10 years is to be issued on final expiry of a passport                         
 after 10 years from the date of its issue, without conducting any prior police                             
 verification.                                                                                              
 pg85                                                                                                       
 Other procedures streamlined relate to:                                                                    
 (a) Waiver of Submission of NOC by Government servants/ employees holding passports for                    
 ten years;                                                                                                 
 (b) Acceptance of application for renewal of passports earlier than one year of the                        
 expiry of its initial validity;                                                                            
 (c) Issue of police clearance certificates for Kuwait repatriates;                                         
 (d) Abolition of the system of affixing thumb impression by literate persons on                            
 passport application form;                                                                                 
 (e) Acceptance of notarised affidavit as proof of date of birth and marital status of                      
 ladies (acceptance of a. couple's photograph and sworn affidavit/marriage certificate);                    
 and                                                                                                        
 (f) In a bid to further simplify the passport application forms, their number has been                     
 reduced from 4 to 2. Separate forms have been prescribed for India and Missions.                           
                                                                                                            
 As a part of the programme of expansion of Computerisation, Regional Passport Office,                      
 Delhi was computerised by installation of 436 computers. The Government of India made                      
 various relaxations in 1990 relating to the grant of visas to foreign nationals.                           
 Accordingly, tourists can avail of six mon ths multi-entry visas. Foreigners who are                       
 frequent visitors and foreigners, of Indi an origin can be granted five years                              
 multi-entry visas also. Efforts are being made for the issue of visas on the same day                      
 or maximum by the next working day.                                                                        
                                                                                                            
 Visa fees for foreign nationals vary from country to country, as the prime                                 
 consideration is reciprocity. Recently, in order to promote tourism, visa fees for the                     
 nationals of Federal Republic of Germany, Italy, the Netherlands, Spain, Fr ance, the                      
 USA and the UK were unilaterally reduced for one year on an experimental basis.                            
 pg86                                                                                                       
 As a gesture to elder persons, the Government of India introduced a scheme of giving                       
 gratis visa for persons above 65 years of age. In addition, a new mode of payment of                       
 visa fees was introduced for the convenience of visa seekers. Thus, payments can now be                    
 made by cheques, credit cards and traveller cheques as well. The Government of India                       
 have recently liberalised Landing Permit facilities t o foreigners with certain                            
 exceptions.                                                                                                
                                                                                                            
 Prevention of Photo substitution and other types of forgeries is one of the prime                          
 concerns of a Passport Issuing Authority. In order to minimise such forgeries in Indian                    
 passports, the More Secured Passports (MSPs) were introduce d in 1990. About 400 cases                     
 of passport forgery were detected. Concerned Passport Officers were asked to initiate                      
 necessary action in all cases. These cases rela te to passports issued before the                          
 introduction of the MSPs.                                                                                  
                                                                                                            
 About 400 cases for issue of Identity Certificate were processed and approval conveyed                     
 to the Passport Officers. Fifty cases of South Africa endorsements on Indian Passports                     
 including visits of cultural/Press groups were also processed. Twenty eight appeals,                       
 were received during the year of which seven were decided. Ten appeals of previous                         
 years were also decided.                                                                                   
                                                                                                            
 Over 1100 complaints in respect of delay in issue of passports by various Passport                         
 Officers were reported of which over 600 cases were settled. Two hundred twenty five                       
 cases of renewal and 50 cases of fresh recognition of Travel Agencies were approved.                       
 During 1990, one thousand twenty four cases of deportation of Indian nationals by                          
 Foreign Governments were brought to the notice of the Government Of India. Indian                          
 Missions and Posts abroad repatriated 86 Indian nationals on Government cost. During                       
 the year, approximately 4726 Indian nationals were arrested in foreign countries. All                      
 possible consular assistance was rendered to them and in some cases their release and                      
 return to India was facilitated.                                                                           
 pg87                                                                                                       
 Five hundred thirty one cases of death of foreign nationals in India were als o                            
 handled. About 905 cases of death compensation in respect of Indian nationals died                         
 abroad were processed. One lakh three thousand one hundred eighty one documents                            
 received from the public for submission to foreign authorities were                                        
 attested/authenticated by the Division. The work relating to the administration of the                     
 passport offices was made more accountable. According to the suggestion made by the All                    
 India Passport Officers' conference, a new transfer policy has been evolved modifying                      
 the guidelines of 1982, keeping in view the welfare of all the officials especially                        
 those of group 'C'. Passport, offices at Srinagar, Bareilly, Trichy, Patna, Panaji,                        
 Lucknow and Guwahati were inspected during the year. The then External Affairs Minister                    
 visited and inspected RPO Bombay and PLO Trivandrum. During the year 1,538,783 new                         
 passports were issued. Appendix VII details the input-output figures in respect of                         
 passports and miscellaneous services. Appendix VIII gives the revenue-expenditure                          
 figures. In addition, a total of 1425 Diplomatic and 4651 official passports were                          
 issued. Seven thousand two hundred eighty miscellaneous services were also rendered.                       
 All the 22 Passport Offices and two Passport Liaison Offices functioned normally except                    
 the Passport Office in Srinagar which was gutted by fire during February 1990.                             
 Presently the work of that office is being looked after by the Regional Passport                           
 Office, Delhi.                                                                                             
                                                                                                            
 The recognition to travel agencies started by ex-servicemen has been liberalised with a                    
 view to assisting their prompt rehabilitation. Provisional recognition could be granted                    
 without their meeting the existing criteria of off ice space, telephone, number of                         
 employees etc for a period of one year; but they ha ve to fulfil the criteria before                       
 the expiry of the provisional recognition period.                                                          
 pg88                                                                                                       
 Administration And Organization                                                                            
                                                                                     Top                    
 ADMINISTRATION AND ORGANIZATION SHRI V C Shukla assumed charge as Minister for External                    
 Affairs on Nov 21, 1990. His resignation was accepted on 21 February 1991. Shri                            
 Digvijay Singh, Deputy Minister for Finance assumed additional charg e of Deputy                           
 Minister for External Affairs on 28 November 1990. Earlier, Shri I K Gujral and Shri                       
 Hari Kishore Singh demitted charge as Minister for External Aff airs and Minister of                       
 State respectively on 10 November 1990. Shri Hari Kishore Singh had taken over as                          
 Minister of State on 23 April 1990. Shri Muchkund Dubey assumed charge as Foreign                          
 Secretary on 19 April 1990 consequent on the voluntary retirement from service of Shri                     
 S K Singh, earlier Foreign Secretary. Shri L L Mehrotra, formerly High Commissioner of                     
 India in Sr i Lanka, was appointed Secretary (East) in the Ministry of External Affairs                    
 on 6 June 1990. Shri A N D Haksar relinquished charge of the post of Dean, Foreign                         
 Servic e Training Institute on 24 August 1990 to take up a diplomatic assignment                           
 abroad. Shri K Doshi succeeded Shri A N D Haksar as Dean, FSTI. Shri A K Banerjee,                         
 Secretary and Financial Advisor retired on superannuation on 31 October 1990. Following                    
 the declaration of independence of Namibia, a High Commission of India was established                     
 in Windhoek and commenced functioning on 25 March 1990 with Shri S S Mukherjee as                          
 India's first High Commissioner to Namibia. With the unification of Germany, India's                       
 Consulate General in west Berlin was closed. An office of the Embassy of India in                          
 Germany was opened in Berlin, replacing the Indian Embassy to the erstwhile GDR.                           
 pg89                                                                                                       
 Consequent on the unification of Yemen, the Embassy of India in Aden was closed and                        
 replaced by a Consulate General. The Ministry now has 140 Resident Missions/Posts                          
 abroad manned by officials from India.                                                                     
                                                                                                            
 The total sanctioned strength of the IFS and IFS(B) at Headquarters and India n                            
 Missions/Posts abroad is 3436. The Cadre-wise strength is at Appendix IX. The list of                      
 officers in this Ministry qualified in various foreign languages is at Appendix X.                         
                                                                                                            
 The momentum with regard to acquisition of property and construction projects for                          
 Indian Missions abroad was maintained. The Ministry completed transactions for the                         
 purchase of built-up property for Chanceries at Lima and Cairo. The Ministry also                          
 purchased a plot of land for the campus of the Foreign Service Training Institute in                       
 Delhi and built-up property for the office of the Regional Passport Office in Madras. A                    
 proposal for the purchase of built-up properties in Tehran is under active                                 
 consideration. Construction work in the Chancery cum residence project at Lagos has                        
 been substantially completed. Construction of the office cum residence building for the                    
 Permanent Mission of India at New York, Chancery and staff residences in Kuala Lumpur                      
 and Chancery cum residence at Dubai are at an advanced stage of progress and scheduled                     
 for completion during 1991. The project comprising the Chancery, Embassy residence and                     
 staff residences at Kuwait was substantially completed in July 1990.                                       
                                                                                                            
 Administrative inspection of Indian Missions in Mogadishu, Khartoum, Kinsh- asa,                           
 Rangoon, Tunis, Algiers, Rabat, Kuala Lumpur, Singapore, Male, Colombo, Amman and                          
 Tehran took place during the year. Computers were provided to the Mission in Saudi                         
 Arabia for streamlining the handling of Haj work.                                                          
 pg90                                                                                                       
 Foreign Service Training Institute                                                                         
                                                                                     Top                    
 FOREIGN SERVICE TRAINING INSTITUTE THE training activities of the Foreign Service                          
 Training Institute (FSTI) increased manifold during the year under, review. Among the                      
 important courses organized were the 26-module Professional Course in Diplomacy and                        
 International Relations for IFS Probationers, a Refresher Course of Commercial Officers                    
 abroad, a Familiarisation Programme for resident Foreign diplomats, th e Basic                             
 Professional Course for IFS(B) Personnel and three training programmes in the use of                       
 computers for Ministry of External Affairs officials. In all, 29 cou rses were                             
 conducted. A Foreign language training programme for IFS Probationers was launched from                    
 January 1991.                                                                                              
                                                                                                            
 During the year under review, FSTI organized the following training courses:                               
 (i) Professional Course in Diplomacy and International Relations for IFS                                   
 Probationers--2 courses;                                                                                   
 (ii) Orientation Programme for Spouses--2 courses;                                                         
 (iii) Refresher Course for Commercial Officers abroad--2 courses;                                          
 (iv) Orientation Programme for State/UT Protocol Officers--1 course;                                       
 (v) Programme on Crises Management--1 course;                                                              
 pg91                                                                                                       
                                                                                                            
 (vi) Familiarisation Programme for Resident Foreign Diplomats--2 courses,                                  
 (vii) Programme for Senior Diplomats from Commonwealth Countries--1 course;                                
 (viii) Orientation Programme for IOC officials--1 course;                                                  
 (ix) Refresher Course for SOs and Assistants--1 course;                                                    
 (x) Basic Professional Course for IFS(B) Personnel being posted abroad--3 courses;                         
 (xi) Induction Course for newly recruited Assistants--1 course;                                            
 (xii) Induction Course for newly recruited Stenographers--1 course;                                        
 (xiii) Computer Course for Senior Ministry of External Affairs Officers--2 courses; and                    
 (xiv) Basic Data Management Course through Computers--9 courses;. UNDTCD and the                           
 Government of India have signed an agreement in terms of which the former will provide                     
 funds to the extent of US $ 663,100 to FSTI for strengthening and enhancing its                            
 capabilities in training and development progra m- mes for the upgradation of the                          
 capacity of its trainers. The funds will also be used for updating curriculum designs                      
 for multi-level training, preparation of i n- depth training packages/materials in                         
 selected areas to augment the quality of training at all levels to meet the current and                    
 future needs of the Government.                                                                            
                                                                                                            
 The second meeting of the FSTI Advisory Committee was held in April under the                              
 Chairmanship of the then Minister for External Affairs. The Committee reviewed the                         
 functioning of FSTI and approved several measures. A 6-acre plot of land has been                          
 purchased by the Ministry of External Affairs in the old JNU Campus for FSTI.                              
 Construction of the Office Buildings, Hostels and ancillaries is to commence soon.                         
 pg92                                                                                                       
 FSTI continued to maintain contacts with other training institutions both in India and                     
 abroad. In September 1990, the Dean attended the Conference of the Association of                          
 Diplomatic Academies and Institutes of International Relations i n Cairo.                                  
 pg93                                                                                                       
 Use Of Hindi In Official Work                                                                              
                                                                                     Top                    
 USE OF HINDI IN OFFICIAL WORK HINDI Section of this Ministry is responsible for the                        
 implementation of Official Language policy of the Government of India at the                               
 Headquarters, Regional Passport Offices located in India and Missions/Posts abroad and                     
 also f or propagation of Hindi abroad. In addition, it caters to the entire translation                    
 w ork from English to Hindi and vice versa of the Ministry. During the year under                          
 review, the Ministry reconstituted its Hindi Advisory Committee and organized i ts                         
 first meeting on Sep 30, 1990. There is an Official Language Implementa- tion Committee                    
 also in the Ministry and during the year its meetings were held and action taken on the                    
 decisions adopted therein. During the year, the Ministry implemented various schemes of                    
 progressive use of Hindi at the Headquarters. Three workshops for those who have                           
 attained the working knowledge of Hindi were organized to remove their hesitation in                       
 doing their official work in Hindi.                                                                        
                                                                                                            
 Twenty seven sections were inspected with a view to review the progress made by them in                    
 the implementation of official language policy of the Govern- ment. During the                             
 inspection, deficiencies were pointed out and defaulting sections were ordered to                          
 remove them. Six typists were nominated for Hindi Typing Training and five officers                        
 were also sent for Hindi training. In compliance of the Department of Official                             
 Language's instructions, Hindi Week was observed and various competitions were                             
 organized. Special Consultation Cell was set up at Akbar Bhawan during the week to                         
 remove the problems faced by the employees intending to do their official work in                          
 Hindi.                                                                                                     
 pg94                                                                                                       
 The Ministry introduced a Rajbhasha running shield scheme for its Regional Passport                        
 Offices located in India to encourage them to do maximum work in Hindi during the year.                    
 The scheme carries a running shield and a cash award of Rs 1000 as First Prize, a cup                      
 with a cash prize of Rs 750 as Second Prize and a cup with a cash prize of Rs 500 as.                      
 Third Prize. As a result, Passport Offices in Ahmedabad, Bhopal, Jaipur and Delhi gave                     
 good performances. Passport Office at Ahmedabad is doing nearly cent percent of its                        
 official work in Hindi. The Committee of Parliament on Official Language visited                           
 Passport Offices at Calcut ta and Ahmedabad and also the Indian Council for Cultural                       
 Relations. The quarterly progress reports regarding progressive use of Hindi received                      
 from Passport Offices were reviewed and deficiencies pointed out. They were advised to                     
 adhere to the rules. In discharge of its obligation regarding propagation of Hindi                         
 abroad, the Ministry processed the demands received from the Governmental and Non-                         
 Governmental bodies, and individuals engaged in the propagation of Hindi abroad and                        
 sent the required Hindi teaching aid material, Hindi typewriters etc to the m through                      
 Indian Missions free of cost. In addition, the Ministry proposes to donate a kit of                        
 Hindi teaching aid material to 100 Universities/Institutions te aching Hindi abroad.                       
 The proposal was approved by the Finance Division of the Ministry and the material is                      
 expected to be despatched shortly.                                                                         
                                                                                                            
 During the year, the Missions abroad were requested to explore the possibilities for                       
 the propagation of Hindi in the country of their accreditatio n. Embassy of India,                         
 Seoul organized debates in the Hangcook University of foreign studies and the foreign                      
 participants were suitably rewarded. Besides, the Missions in Port Louis, London,                          
 Kathmandu, Port of Spain, Paramaribo and Georgetown were doing good work. Hindi classes                    
 for children continued to be held in the Missions and this scheme produced good                            
 results. As in the past, OSD (Hindi) was sent to New York to help the members of the                       
 Indian delegation to the UN General Assembly intending to speak in Hindi during the                        
 year. He also visited Guyana and Trinidad & Tobago with a view to explore the                              
 possibilities of propagation of Hindi in these countries.                                                  
 pg95                                                                                                       
 Cultural Relations                                                                                         
                                                                                     Top                    
 CULTURAL RELATIONS THE Indian Council for Cultural Relations (ICCR) which was                              
 established in 1950 with the basic objectives of establishing and strengthening                            
 cultural relations and exchanges between India and other countries continued to work                       
 steadily during the year under review. The Council while maintaining traditional and                       
 historical ties with all countr ies in the field of culture, continued to make special                     
 efforts to strengthen its interaction with and the projection of culture in Asia,                          
 Africa and Latin Americ a. Among the highlights of this year's activities, the ICCR, in                    
 association with the Sangeet Natak Akademi, convened the India International Puppetry                      
 Festival in September 1990 which consisted of performances, workshops, symposium and                       
 exhibitions of puppets and masks from 26 countries in six continents. The groups                           
 visited over 25 cities in India. ICCR in collaboration with the Sangeet Natak Akademi                      
 also convened the India International Dance Festival with eminent dancers and                              
 choreographers conducting performances, lecture demonstrations and a special workshop                      
 for Indian dance students. The participants were drawn from 24 countries and they                          
 interacted with their Indian counterparts. They also presented over 50 shows in various                    
 Indian cities and towns. A symposium was held on "International Trends in Puppetry" and                    
 a seminar on "Dance : Plural Vocabularies on Movement" to coincide with these two                          
 festivals. A workshop on "Towards on Open Technique" was also organized during the                         
 Dance Festival, conducted by Mr Charles Reinhart, Director, American Dance Festival,                       
 USA. A number of foreign and Indian experts participated in these events.                                  
 pg96                                                                                                       
 Both these festivals were the first of their kind to be held in India on this scale.                       
 Their emphasis on interactive activities between Indian and foreign maestros and                           
 experts, and the participation of countries from Asia, Africa and Latin America on                         
 large scale have been widely acclaimed and welcomed by participants and the press                          
 alike. This year, Africa Day was celebrated on May 25, 1990 with a special African                         
 Festival called The Arts of Africa 1990 involving performing groups from 6 countries                       
 and exhibitions from 5 countries of Africa. Special invitees on the occasion were Mr                       
 Alfred Nzo, Secretary General of the African National Congress and Mr J W Wentworth,                       
 Minister of Education and Culture from Namibia. It was the biggest presentation of                         
 events from Africa to be seen in India. The response to and public participation in                        
 these events were enthusiastic and heartwarming.                                                           
                                                                                                            
 The Council also organized a series of events entitled Switzerland in India 1991                           
 (February-March 1991) in reciprocity to the India in Switzerland events held in 1987.                      
 These included visits by three performing arts groups, four exhibitions, a film                            
 festival and a poets' and writers' symposium. Special guest s included Swiss Senator                       
 Rosemarie Simmon, noted artist Hans Erni and photo- grapher Rene Burri. The Council                        
 also organized a series of concerts under the Parivar Parampara and Guru Shishya                           
 Parampara, a festival of Chhau dances and special performances on the occasion of                          
 important seminars, conferences and VIP gatherings. It may be noted that in keeping                        
 with our special interest in inviting groups from priority areas, the Council received                     
 15 groups from Asia, 10 from Africa, 8 from Latin America and 2 from West Asia. This                       
 was close to 50% of the total number of foreign groups visiting India during the period                    
 under review. The 1990 Maulana Abul Kalam Azad Memorial Lecture was delivered by Nobel                     
 Laureate Sir Andrew Huxley on 19 March 1991 on the theme "Science : A Supra-National                       
 Activity." The winners of the 1989 Maulana Azad Eassay Competition on "Secularism and                      
 Nationalism" were given prizes on 8 September 1990 by the Vice President of India at                       
 the closing ceremony of the Maulana Azad Centenary celebrations.                                           
 pg97                                                                                                       
 ICCR organized a civic reception and a cultural programme in honour of Dr Nelson                           
 Mandela at Indira Gandhi Stadium in Delhi on 15 October 1990 which was well attended                       
 and televised nation-wide. The 1989 Jawaharlal Nehru Award for International                               
 Understanding has been conferred on Mr Robert G Mugabe, President of Zimbabwe and will                     
 be awarded to him on his visit to India. During the period under review, the Council                       
 sponsored 63 cultural troupes to participate in important international festivals and                      
 to give individual perform ances at the invitations of foreign governments as well as                      
 private institutions. A ma jor effort was made to participate effectively in the                           
 "Ramayana Festival" held in Mauritius in August 1990 with not only performing arts but                     
 also several delegat es and an exhibition on Ramayana Crafts. The artists sent abroad                      
 included prominent dancers such as Sanjukta Panigrahi, Sonal Mansingh and                                  
 Vyjayanthimala Bali in various classical disciplines such as Bharatnatyam, Kuchipudi,                      
 Manipuri , Kathak and Odissi. Similarly, eminent musicians such as Ustad Amjad Ali                         
 Khan, D r L Subramaniam, Maharajapuram Santhanam, Hari Prasad Chaurasia and Arvind                         
 Parikh were sponsored to various countries. Popular music group of Usha Uthup and Remo                     
 Fernandes were also sponsored in addition to folk music and folk dance groups from                         
 Punjab, Himachal Pradesh, Sikkim, Rajasthan etc. Special efforts were made to project                      
 Indian theatre abroad by sending the theatre groups of Rattan Thiyam, Dinesh Thakur and                    
 the Yaksharanga Kendra group led by Kota Shiva Rama Karanth. The Council has been                          
 responsible for the welfare of foreign students studying in India. In June 1990 all                        
 work of scholarships for foreign students, which was being dealt with by the Department                    
 of Education, Ministry of Human Resource Development, was handed over to the Council.                      
 About 1800 government scholars studying under various scholarships schemes now come                        
 under the direct purview of the Council. ICCR has already initiated several steps to                       
 streamline the handling of this work, including computerization of all foreign students                    
 data, enhancing substantially the stipend for all foreign student scholarship holders ,                    
 strengthening the role of Foreign Students Advisors at the Universities and the role of                    
 ICCR's Regional Directors in handling foreign students work.                                               
                                                                                                            
 The Council organized a number of programmes for the welfare of foreign students during                    
 the year under review. There was one summer camp in Shimla- Kulu-Manali and the second                     
 covering Ooty-Mysore-Bangalore. Over 65 foreign                                                            
 pg98                                                                                                       
 students from different countries paritcipated in these two camps. Five study tours                        
 were organized to Bombay and Goa during the December vacations. Over 225 foreign                           
 students from various countries participated in these study tours. Foreign Students Day                    
 was celebrated on 11 November 1990 in Delhi and all the Regional Offices for the                           
 benefit of foreign students studying in India. For promoting greater awareness and                         
 appreciation of Indian cultural heritage abroad, the Council has established Indian                        
 Cultural Centres in Georgetown (Guyana), Jakarta (Indonesia), Moscow (USSR), Port Louis                    
 (Mauritius) and Paramaribo (Suriname). The Centre at Fiji was closed in May 1990 along                     
 with the closure of the Indian Embassy, Indian music, dance and languages are taught at                    
 these Centres by Indian teachers deputed by the Council. The Centre at Moscow also                         
 conducts courses in Yoga with the help of teachers deputed from India. These Centres                       
 maintain libraries and reading rooms, organize lectures, symposia, exhibitions, essay                      
 competitions, performances of dance and music, staging of plays, screening of films and                    
 publication of news bulletins. The Centres are expected to develop and maintain                            
 contacts with a wide cross section of local citizens including students, teachers,                         
 scholars and cultural personali ties. Books, cassettes, video tapes and musical                            
 instruments etc have been sent to these cultural centres. Separately under various                         
 schemes, the Council sends abroad Visiting Professors for teaching Indology, Indian                        
 languages and allied subjects. During the period under review over 21 academics were in                    
 position abroad. The major exhibitions sent abroad during the year were "Splendours of                     
 Indian Textiles" compiled by Shri Martand Singh to China, and exhibition of textiles,                      
 handicrafts and books on Ramayana to Mauritius on the occasion of International                            
 Ramayana Conference, and paintings and graphics by M F Hussain and Shamshad Hussain to                     
 Egypt. Some of the exhibitions that were received by ICCR were the Art of Chinese                          
 Carvings, Sculptures from Zimbabwe, Makonde Carvings from Tanzania, Coptic Art from                        
 Ethiopia and Arts and Crafts of Namibia. An exhibition from African countries was                          
 organized to coincide with the Africa Day celebrations. "PUTUL" an exhibition of Indian                    
 and foreign puppets was organized by the Council in collaboration with the Sangeet                         
 Natak Akademi. A large number of puppets were received for display from abroad.                            
 pg99                                                                                                       
 The Council co-sponsored an exhibition titled "Yankee Traders and Calcutta Merchants"                      
 under the aegis of the Indo-US Sub Commission on Education and Culture. An exhibition                      
 of Design from Sweden was also circulated in India during this period. As in the                           
 previous years, the Council sent out scholars, writers, intellectua ls, academicians                       
 and persons from different walks of life during the year. Emphasis were again put on                       
 the developing and neighbouring countries. Out of 117 persons sponsored by ICCR during                     
 the year, 20 were sent to Asia, 30 to Africa, 4 to Austrlia, 4 to Latin America, 13 to                     
 USA and Canada and 46 to European countries. To highlight the Outgoing Visitors                            
 Programme, the Council sent 13 scholars to participate in VIII World Sanskrit                              
 Conference held in Vienna, 15 scholars to participate in the International Ramayana                        
 Conference held in Maurit ius, 7 scholars to attend the 33rd International, Congress of                    
 Asian and North Africa n Studies held in Toronto and 6 scholars to participate in the                      
 Ramayana Conferenc e held in Suriname. Similarly, of the 91 Incoming Visitors received                     
 by ICCR under our disting- uished Visitors Programme, 37 persons were from Asia, 7 from                    
 Africa, 2 from Lat in America, 1 from Australia, 7 from USA and Canada and 37 from                         
 European countries. One of the highlights of this year's publication programme of the                      
 Council was the special release function arranged by the Ministry of Human Resource                        
 Development for its 4 volume publication India's Maulana (in English, Urdu and Hindi)                      
 commemorating Maulana Abut Kalam Azad's contributions to education, culture and                            
 international understanding. These volumes were brought out in commemoration of the                        
 centenary of Maulana Abul Kalam Azad's birth. This decision was in consistent with an                      
 announcement made by Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru on 24 February 1959 that a collection of                      
 the well-known writings and speeches of Maulana Azad representing his views on various                     
 matters will be published by the Government of India. The Publication Division of the                      
 Council continued to publish quarterly journals Indian Horizons and Africa Quarterly in                    
 English; Gagananchal in Hindi; Thaqafatul Hindi in Arabic; Recontre avec 1' Inde in                        
 French and Papeles de la I ndia in Spanish During this period, the following books were                    
 published; India and World Literature, Indian Music (reprint); Science, Socialism and                      
 Humanism and                                                                                               
 pg100                                                                                                      
 Discovery of India (Vietnamese edition) The following tides are under active                               
 preparation: Buddhism and National Cultures; Jawaharlal Nehru: An Anthology (Arabic                        
 edition); Continual Renewal; Directory of Cultural Organizations in Ind ia; and Theatre                    
 in Asia. The Council participated in International Book Fairs and Book Exhibitions in                      
 Egypt, Singapore and Malaysia through the National Book Trust. The presentation section                    
 coordinated the purchase of books and objects of art which were sent through our                           
 Missions to cultural and educational institutio ns abroad. Major presentations included                    
 the sending of several sets of books on the Ramayana in different Indian languages to                      
 Mauritius. As part of the ongoing programme on streamlining and modernising the work of                    
 the Council, the archives of video and audio recordings of the performing art and                          
 artistes and maintenance of valid records and data bank of performances has been                           
 undertaken and is going apace. Special video films were produced during the year on the                    
 Arts of Africa, the India International Puppetr y Festival and the India International                     
 Dance Festival. Extracts from these audio- visual materials were utilised by                               
 Doordarshan to ensure public access to these events. The Council's library continued to                    
 offer its services to its readers and research scholars. The library now has over                          
 75,000 volumes and had more than 5000 visitors this year. Several leading scholars                         
 utilised the library's services and have acknowledged its contribution in their                            
 publication. The library has started the preparation of a descriptive catalogue of                         
 Maulana Abul Kalam Azad's collection of documents presented to the ICCR. The Africa                        
 Section of the Library was retrieved from Patiala House and now offers oppor- tunities                     
 for research in African Studies. The Computer Section, which began as a part of the                        
 library has become operational and programmes have been developed for an Artist's Data                     
 Bank and Foreign Students Data Bank which will be essential for speedy information                         
 retrieval and safe data storage. The Council provides the Secretariat of the Indo-US                       
 Sub Commission and also coordinates with other departments/organizations. The joint                        
 Committee                                                                                                  
 pg101                                                                                                      
 meetings on Cultural Heritage, and Endeavour and Media were held on 29 and 30 November                     
 and 3 and 4 December 1990 respectively. The Council hosted a full meeting of the                           
 Indo-US Sub Commission on Education and Culture at Azad Bhawan on 29 and 30 March 1990.                    
 The Council continued to supervise the work of Foreign Cultural Centres in India,                          
 especially those operating in places where there was no official represe nta- tion of                      
 the country concerned. Thus the Council supervises the operations of British Council                       
 libraries in Ahmedabad, Bangalore, Bhopal, Lucknow, Patna, Ranchi, Trivandrum and                          
 Hyderabad; the Affiance Francaise in Ahmedabad, Banga- lore, Bhopal, Bombay, Calcutta,                     
 Chandigarh, Goa, Hyderabad, Madras, Pondicherry , Pune, Trivandrum and Delhi; the Max                      
 Mueller Bhawan in Bangalore, Bombay, Hyderabad, Pune, Madras, Calcutta and Delhi; and                      
 the House of Soviet Culture in Trivandrum. The Council provides administrative support                     
 to these foreign centres and also collaborates with them whenever possible in                              
 organizing cultura l programmes. The Council functions from its Headquarters in New                        
 Delhi and seven Regional Offices. The Regional Offices located at Bombay, Bangalore,                       
 Chandigarh, Calcutta, Lucknow, Madras and Trivandrum have been active in promoting its                     
 work in places other than Delhi. There has been active interest shown by the Government                    
 of Andhra Pradesh in opening of a new ICCR Regional Office in Hyderabad and rent free                      
 premises have been offered. Construction work on ICCR's prestigious Calcutta Cultural                      
 Complex cum Regional Office project with Charles Correa as Architect is to commence                        
 soon.                                                                                                      
 pg102                                                                                                      
 Appendix I Division-wise List of Countries                                                                 
                                                                                     Top                    
 APPENDIX I                                                                                                 
                                                                                                            
 Ministry of External Affairs -- Division-wise List of Countries                                            
      AFRICA DIVISION                                                                                       
 1    Angola                                                                                                
 2    Benin                           38  Tanzania                                                          
 3    Botswana                        39  Togo                                                              
 4    Burkina Faso                    40  Uganda                                                            
 5    Burundi                         41  Zaire                                                             
 6    Cameroon                        42  Zambia                                                            
 7    Cape Verde Islands              43  Zimbabwe                                                          
 8    Central African Republic                                                                              
 9    Chad                                AMS DIVISION                                                      
 10   Comoros                                                                                               
 11   Congo                           1   Canada                                                            
 12   Equatorial Guinea               2   United States of America(including Bahamas)                       
 13   Ethiopia                                                                                              
 14   Gabon                                                                                                 
 15   Gambia                              BM DIVISION                                                       
 16   Ghana                                                                                                 
 17   Guinea                          1   Bangladesh                                                        
 18   Guinea Bissau                   2   Myanmar                                                           
 19   Cote d' Ivoire                                                                                        
 20   Kenya                               EAST ASIA DIVISION                                                
 21   Lesotho                         1   People's Republic of China                                        
 22   Liberia                         2   Hongkong                                                          
 23   Madagascar                      3   Japan                                                             
 24   Malawi                          4   Democratic People's Republic of Korea                             
 25   Mali                            5   Republic of Korea                                                 
 26   Mauritius                       6   People's Republic of Mongolia                                     
 27   Mozambique                                                                                            
 28   Namibia                                                                                               
 29   Niger                               EE DIVISION                                                       
 30   Nigeria                         1   People's Socialist Republic of Albania                            
 31   Rwanda                          2   Republic of Bulgaria                                              
 32   Sao Tome & Principe             3   Czech & Solvak Republic                                           
 33   Senegal                         4   Republic of Hungary                                               
 34   Seychelles                      5   Republic of Poland                                                
 35   Sierra Leone                    6   Romania                                                           
 36   South Africa                    7   Union of Soviet Socialist Republics                               
 37   Swaziland                       8   Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia                          
 A-3                                                                                                        
      EW DIVISION                         LAC DIVISION                                                      
 1    Austria                         1   Antigua & Barbuda                                                 
 2    Belgium                         2   Argentina                                                         
 3    Cyprus                          3   Barbados                                                          
 4    Denmark                         4   Belize                                                            
 5    Finland                         5   Bolivia                                                           
 6    France                          6   Brazil                                                            
 7    Germany, Federal Republic of    7   Chile                                                             
 8    Gibraltar                       8   Colombia                                                          
 9    Greece                          9   Costa Rica                                                        
 10   Holy See, The                   10  Cuba                                                              
 11   Iceland                         11  Commonwealth of Dominica                                          
 12   Ireland                         12  Dominican Republic                                                
 13   Italy                           13  Ecuador                                                           
 14   Liechtenstein                   14  El Salvador                                                       
 15   Luxembourg                      15  Grenada                                                           
 16   Malta                           16  Guatemala                                                         
 17   Monaco                          17  Guyana                                                            
 18   Netherlands                     18  Haiti                                                             
 19   Norway                          19  Honduras                                                          
 20   Portugal                        20  Jamaica                                                           
 21   San Marino                      21  Mexico                                                            
 22   Spain                           22  Nicaragua                                                         
 23   Sweden                          23  Panama                                                            
 24   Switzerland                     24  Paraguay                                                          
 25   Turkey                          25  Peru                                                              
 26   United Kingdom of Great Britain 26  St Christopher and Nevis                                          
      and Northern Ireland            27  St Lucia                                                          
                                      28  St Vincent and the Grenadines                                     
      GULF DIVISION                   29  Suriname                                                          
 1    Bahrain                         30  Trinidad & Tobago                                                 
 2    Iraq                            31  Uruguay                                                           
 3    Kuwait                          32  Venezuela                                                         
 4    Oman                                NORTHERN DIVISION                                                 
 5    Qatar                                                                                                 
 6    Saudi Arabia                    1   Bhutan                                                            
 7    Republic of Yemen               2   Nepal                                                             
 8    United Arab Emirates                                                                                  
      SOUTHERN DIVISION                                                                                     
      IAP DIVISION                    1   Australia                                                         
 1    Afghanistan                     2   Brunei                                                            
 2    Iran                            3   Cambodia                                                          
 3    Pakistan                        4   Fiji                                                              
      A-4                                                                                                   
      SOUTHERN DIVISION--Contd.           SM DIVISION                                                       
 5    Indonesia                       1   Sri Lanka                                                         
 6    Kiribati                        2   Maldives                                                          
 7    Laos                            3   Indian Ocean                                                      
 8    Malaysia                            WANA DIVISION                                                     
 9    Nauru                                                                                                 
 10   New Caledonia                   1   Algeria                                                           
 11   New Zealand                     2   Djibouti                                                          
                                      3   Egypt                                                             
 12   Papua New Guinea                4   Israel                                                            
 13   Philippines                     5   Jordan                                                            
 14   Western Samoa                   6   League of Arab States                                             
 15   Singapore                       7   Lebanon                                                           
 16   Society Islands                 8   Libya                                                             
 17   Solomon Islands                 9   Mauritania                                                        
 18   Thailand                        10  Morocco                                                           
                                      11  Palestine                                                         
 19   Tonga                           12  SADR (Sahrawi Arab Democratic                                     
 20   Tuvalu                              Republic)                                                         
 21   UN Trust Territories in South   13  Somalia                                                           
      Pacific                                                                                               
 22   Vanuatu                         14  Sudan                                                             
 23   Vietnam                         15  Syria                                                             
 16   Tunisia                                                                                               
      A-5                                                                                                   
 Appendix II Treaties/Conventions/Agreements                                                                
                                                                                                            
 APPENDIX II                                                                                                
                                                                                                            
 Treaties/Conventions/Agreements concluded or renewed by India with                                         
 other countries in 1990.*                                                                                  
  Sl   Title of Convention/        Date of      Date of        Date on                                      
                                                                                                            
  No   Treaty/Agreement etc        Signature    Ratification,  which                                        
                                                                                                            
                                                Accession      entered                                      
                                                               into                                         
                                                                                                            
                                                or             force                                        
                                                                                                            
                                                Acceptance                                                  
                                                                                                            
  (1)  (2)                         (3)          (4)            (5)                                          
                                                                                                            
       MULTILATERAL                                                                                         
                                                                                                            
       Apartheid in Sports                                                                                  
                                                                                                            
  1    International Convention    Apar-Sep     12.10.1990                                                  
       against                     12, 1990                                                                 
                                                                                                            
       theid in Sports                                                                                      
                                                                                                            
       European Economic Com-                                                                               
                                                                                                            
       munity                                                                                               
                                                                                                            
  2    Agreement between India     10.11.1989   10.11.1989                                                  
       and the Euro-                                                                                        
                                                                                                            
       pean Economic                                                                                        
       Community-Streng-                                                                                    
                                                                                                            
       thening of Veterinary                                                                                
       Services for Lives-                                                                                  
                                                                                                            
       tock Disease Control                                                                                 
                                                                                                            
       Hazardous Wastes                                                                                     
                                                                                                            
  3    Basel Convention on the     15.3.1990                                                                
       Control of                                                                                           
                                                                                                            
       Transboundary Movement of                                                                            
       Hazardous                                                                                            
                                                                                                            
       Wastes and their Disposal                                                                            
                                                                                                            
       Integrated Circuits                                                                                  
                                                                                                            
  4    Treaty on Intellectual      25.6.1990                                                                
       Property in re-                                                                                      
                                                                                                            
       spect of Integrated                                                                                  
       Circuits                                                                                             
                                                                                                            
       International Coffee                                                                                 
       Agreement                                                                                            
                                                                                                            
  5    Extension of the                                                                                     
       international                                                                                        
                                                                                                            
       Coffee Agreement,1983 Jute  29.9.1989    27.3.1990      27.3.1990                                    
       Agreement                                                                                            
                                                                                                            
  6    International Agreement on                                                                           
       jute                                                                                                 
                                                                                                            
       and jute Products, 1989     28.8.1990    17.9.199       17.9.1990                                    
                                                                                                            
       Narcotic Drugs                                                                                       
       Psychotropic                                                                                         
                                                                                                            
       Substances                                                                                           
                                                                                                            
  7    United Nations Convention                               27.3.1990                                    
       against Illicit                                                                                      
                                                                                                            
       Traffic in Narcotic Drugs                                                                            
       and Psychot-                                                                                         
                                                                                                            
       ropic Substances                                                                                     
                                                                                                            
       *This list is not                                                                                    
       exhaustive.                                                                                          
                                                                                                            
                                   A-6                                                                      
                                                                                                            
  (1)  (2)                         (3)          (4)            (5)                                          
                                                                                                            
                                                                                                            
  8    SAARC Convention on         23.11.1990                                                               
       Narcotic Drugs                                                                                       
                                                                                                            
       and Psychotropic                                                                                     
       Substances                                                                                           
                                                                                                            
       Oil Pollution Compensation                                                                           
                                                                                                            
       Fund                                                                                                 
                                                                                                            
                                                                                                            
  9    International Convention                                                                             
       on the                                                                                               
                                                                                                            
       Establ-                     10.7.1990    8.10.1990                                                   
                                                                                                            
       ishment of an                                                                                        
       International Fund for                                                                               
                                                                                                            
       Compensation for the                                                                                 
       Pollution Damage,                                                                                    
                                                                                                            
       1971 and its 1976 Protocol                                                                           
                                                                                                            
       United Nations Development                                                                           
                                                                                                            
       Programme                                                                                            
                                                                                                            
                                                                                                            
  10   Agreement between India     15.2.1990    15.2.1990                                                   
       and the Un-                                                                                          
                                                                                                            
       ited Nations Development                                                                             
       Programme                                                                                            
                                                                                                            
       regarding Project No.                                                                                
       IND/90/004-                                                                                          
                                                                                                            
       Upgrading Research &                                                                                 
       Training Capacity                                                                                    
                                                                                                            
       of the W Bahadur Shashtri                                                                            
       National                                                                                             
                                                                                                            
       Academy                                                                                              
                                                                                                            
  11   Agreement between India     22.2.1990    22.2.1990                                                   
       and the Un-                                                                                          
                                                                                                            
       ited Nations Development                                                                             
       Programme                                                                                            
                                                                                                            
       regarding the Project No.                                                                            
       IND/109/A/                                                                                           
                                                                                                            
       01/01--Development of                                                                                
       Gemstone Re-                                                                                         
                                                                                                            
       sources of Orissa State                                                                              
                                                                                                            
  12   Agreement between India     28.2.1990    28.2.1990                                                   
       and the Un-                                                                                          
                                                                                                            
       ited Nations Development                                                                             
       Programme                                                                                            
                                                                                                            
       regarding the Project No.                                                                            
       IND/89/133/                                                                                          
                                                                                                            
       A/01/37--Process & Product                                                                           
       Develop-                                                                                             
                                                                                                            
       ment Centre for Essential                                                                            
       Oils, Kannauj                                                                                        
                                                                                                            
       (UP)                                                                                                 
                                                                                                            
  13   Agreement between India     1.3.1990     1.3.1990                                                    
       and the Un-                                                                                          
                                                                                                            
       ited Nations Development                                                                             
       Programme                                                                                            
                                                                                                            
       regarding Project No.                                                                                
       DP/IND/90/005/                                                                                       
                                                                                                            
       A/01/37--Development of                                                                              
       Tech-                                                                                                
                                                                                                            
       nologies for Utilization                                                                             
       of Blue Dust &                                                                                       
                                                                                                            
       Kimberlite Waste Material                                                                            
                                                                                                            
  14   Agreement between India     1.3.1990                    1.3.1990                                     
       and the Un-                                                                                          
                                                                                                            
       ited Nations Development                                                                             
       Programme                                                                                            
                                                                                                            
       regarding Project No.                                                                                
       IND/90/006-                                                                                          
                                                                                                            
       Upgrading Training                                                                                   
       Capabilities of                                                                                      
                                                                                                            
       National institute of                                                                                
       Design                                                                                               
                                                                                                            
  15   Agreement between India     27.4.1990                   27.4.1990                                    
       and the Un-                                                                                          
                                                                                                            
       ited Nations Development                                                                             
       Programme                                                                                            
                                                                                                            
       regarding Project No.                                                                                
       IND/90/007/A/                                                                                        
                                                                                                            
       01/12-- Phytotron Facility                                                                           
       at Indian                                                                                            
                                                                                                            
       Agricultural Resources                                                                               
       Institute                                                                                            
                                                                                                            
       A-7                                                                                                  
                                                                                                            
                                                                                                            
  (1)  (2)                         (3)          (4)            (5)                                          
                                                                                                            
                                                                                                            
  16   Agreement between India                  30.4.1990                                                   
       and the Un-#30.4.1990                                                                                
                                                                                                            
       ited Nations Development                                                                             
       Programme                                                                                            
                                                                                                            
       regarding Project No.                                                                                
       IND/90/008/A/                                                                                        
                                                                                                            
       01/01-- Automated                                                                                    
       Operation of Irriga-                                                                                 
                                                                                                            
       tion Canal Systems                                                                                   
                                                                                                            
  17   Agreement between India     23.5.1990                   23.5.1990                                    
       and the Un-                                                                                          
                                                                                                            
       ited Nations Development                                                                             
       Programme                                                                                            
                                                                                                            
       regarding Project No.                                                                                
       DP/IND/90/                                                                                           
                                                                                                            
       014--Establishment of a                                                                              
       Centre for                                                                                           
                                                                                                            
       Electronics Design &                                                                                 
       Technology on                                                                                        
                                                                                                            
       Process Control &                                                                                    
       Instrumentation                                                                                      
                                                                                                            
  18   Agreement between India     24.5.1990                   24.5.1990                                    
       and the Un-                                                                                          
                                                                                                            
       ited Nations Development                                                                             
       Programme                                                                                            
                                                                                                            
       regarding Project No.                                                                                
       DP/IND/90/18-                                                                                        
                                                                                                            
       Assistance to the Centre                                                                             
       for VLSI Design                                                                                      
                                                                                                            
       & Prototyping                                                                                        
                                                                                                            
  19   Agreement between India     21.6.1990                   21.6.1990                                    
       and the Un-                                                                                          
                                                                                                            
       ited Nations Development                                                                             
       Programme                                                                                            
                                                                                                            
       regarding Project No.                                                                                
       IND/90/010-                                                                                          
                                                                                                            
       Programme for the                                                                                    
       Improvement of the                                                                                   
                                                                                                            
       Glass Industry, Firozabad                                                                            
       (PIGI)                                                                                               
                                                                                                            
  20   Agreement between India     22.7.1990                   22.7.1990                                    
       and the Un-                                                                                          
                                                                                                            
       ited Nations Development                                                                             
       Programme                                                                                            
                                                                                                            
       regarding Project No.                                                                                
       IND/90/017-                                                                                          
                                                                                                            
       Strengthening of the                                                                                 
       Foreign Service                                                                                      
                                                                                                            
       Training Institute (FSTI)                                                                            
                                                                                                            
  21   Agreement between India     14.9.1990                   14.9.1990                                    
       and the Un-                                                                                          
                                                                                                            
       ited Nations Development                                                                             
       Programme                                                                                            
                                                                                                            
       regarding Project No.                                                                                
       IND/90/035/A/                                                                                        
                                                                                                            
       01/99--Strengthening of                                                                              
       National Insti-                                                                                      
                                                                                                            
       tute of Fashion Technology                                                                           
                                                                                                            
  22   Agreement between India     25.9.1990                   25.9.1990                                    
       and the Un-                                                                                          
                                                                                                            
       ited Nations Development                                                                             
       Programme                                                                                            
                                                                                                            
       regarding Project No.                                                                                
       IND/99/028/A/                                                                                        
                                                                                                            
       01/39--Establishment of                                                                              
       Surface Analy-                                                                                       
                                                                                                            
       tical Facilities                                                                                     
                                                                                                            
  23   Agreement between India     28.9.1990                   28.9.1990                                    
       and the Un-                                                                                          
                                                                                                            
       ited Nations Development                                                                             
       Programme                                                                                            
                                                                                                            
       regarding Project No.                                                                                
       IND/90/003/A/                                                                                        
                                                                                                            
       01/99--Developing                                                                                    
       Capabilities for                                                                                     
                                                                                                            
       Hydrological Studies                                                                                 
                                                                                                            
  24   Agreement between India     28.9.1990                   28.9.1990                                    
       and the Un-                                                                                          
                                                                                                            
       ited Nations Development                                                                             
       Programme                                                                                            
                                                                                                            
       regarding Project No.                                                                                
       IND/90/009/A/                                                                                        
                                                                                                            
       01/99--Upgradation of                                                                                
       Geomechanics                                                                                         
                                                                                                            
       Investigation Facilities                                                                             
       at Central Soil                                                                                      
                                                                                                            
       and Materials Research                                                                               
       Station (CSMRS)                                                                                      
                                                                                                            
       A-8                                                                                                  
                                                                                                            
                                                                                                            
  (1)  (2)                         (3)          (4)            (5)                                          
                                                                                                            
                                                                                                            
  25   Agreement between India     28.9.1990                   28.9.1990                                    
       and the Un-                                                                                          
                                                                                                            
       ited Nations Development                                                                             
       Programme                                                                                            
                                                                                                            
       regarding Project No.                                                                                
       IND/90/038/A/                                                                                        
                                                                                                            
       01/99--Mathematical                                                                                  
       Modelling Centre                                                                                     
                                                                                                            
       for Fluvial & Ocean                                                                                  
       Hydromechanics                                                                                       
                                                                                                            
  26   Agreement between India     12.11.1990                  12.11.1990                                   
       and the Un-                                                                                          
                                                                                                            
       ited Nations Development                                                                             
       Programme                                                                                            
                                                                                                            
       regarding Project No.                                                                                
       IND/90/024/A/                                                                                        
                                                                                                            
       01/99--Performance                                                                                   
       Evaluation of EOR                                                                                    
                                                                                                            
       Pilot & Development                                                                                  
       Strategy of Volatile                                                                                 
                                                                                                            
       Oil/Condensate Reservoirs                                                                            
                                                                                                            
  27   Agreement between India     22.11.1990                  22.11.1990                                   
       and the Un-                                                                                          
                                                                                                            
       ited Nations Development                                                                             
       Programme                                                                                            
                                                                                                            
       regarding Project No.                                                                                
       IND/90/037--                                                                                         
                                                                                                            
       Strengthening the Handmade                                                                           
       Paper In-                                                                                            
                                                                                                            
       dustry in India                                                                                      
                                                                                                            
       BILATERAL                                                                                            
                                                                                                            
       Bangladesh                                                                                           
                                                                                                            
  28   Memorandum of               17.9.1990                   17.9.1990                                    
       Understanding between                                                                                
                                                                                                            
       the Government of the                                                                                
       Republic of India                                                                                    
                                                                                                            
       and the Government of the                                                                            
       People's                                                                                             
                                                                                                            
       Republic of Bangladesh on                                                                            
       the Customs                                                                                          
                                                                                                            
       Facilities for Bangladesh                                                                            
       Nationals from                                                                                       
                                                                                                            
       the Gulf transiting                                                                                  
       through India                                                                                        
                                                                                                            
       Bhutan                                                                                               
                                                                                                            
  29   Indo-Bhutan Agreement on    2.3.1990                    2.3.1990                                     
       Trade &                                                                                              
                                                                                                            
       Commerce                                                                                             
                                                                                                            
  30   Memorandum of               19.6.1990                   19.6.1990                                    
       Understanding between                                                                                
                                                                                                            
       India and Bhutan regarding                                                                           
       Air Services                                                                                         
                                                                                                            
  31   Memorandum of               25.11.1990                               25.11.1990                      
       Understanding between                                                                                
                                                                                                            
       India and Bhutan regarding                                                                           
       Preparation                                                                                          
                                                                                                            
       of Detailed Project                                                                                  
       Reports for the Tala                                                                                 
                                                                                                            
       Hydroelectric Project and                                                                            
       the Wangchu                                                                                          
                                                                                                            
       Reservoir Scheme                                                                                     
                                                                                                            
       France                                                                                               
                                                                                                            
  32   Indo-French Protocol for    18.1.1990                   18.1.1990                                    
       Cooperation in                                                                                       
                                                                                                            
       the field of Agriculture                                                                             
       and Rural De-                                                                                        
                                                                                                            
       velopment                                                                                            
                                                                                                            
       Germany                                                                                              
                                                                                                            
  33   Agreement between the       16.1.1990                   16.1.1990                                    
       Government of                                                                                        
                                                                                                            
       the Republic of India and                                                                            
       the Govern-                                                                                          
                                                                                                            
       ment of the Federal                                                                                  
       Republic of Ger-                                                                                     
                                                                                                            
       many concerning Financial                                                                            
       Cooperation.                                                                                         
                                                                                                            
       A-9                                                                                                  
                                                                                                            
                                                                                                            
  (1)  (2)                         (3)          (4)            (5)                                          
                                                                                                            
                                                                                                            
       Japan                                                                                                
                                                                                                            
                                                                                                            
  34   Low Agreement between the   27.3.1990                   27.3.1990                                    
       President                                                                                            
                                                                                                            
       of India and the Overseas                                                                            
       Economic                                                                                             
                                                                                                            
       Cooperation Fund, Japan                                                                              
       for Kolaghat                                                                                         
                                                                                                            
       Thermal Power Station                                                                                
       Flyash                                                                                               
                                                                                                            
  35   Loan Agreement between the  27.3.1990                   27.3.1990                                    
       President                                                                                            
                                                                                                            
       of India and the Overseas                                                                            
       Economic                                                                                             
                                                                                                            
       Cooperation Fund, Japan                                                                              
       for the Basin                                                                                        
                                                                                                            
       Bridge Gas Turbine Project                                                                           
                                                                                                            
  36   Loan Agreement between the  27.3.1990                   27.3.1990                                    
       President                                                                                            
                                                                                                            
       of India and the Overseas                                                                            
       Economic                                                                                             
                                                                                                            
       Cooperation Fund, Japan                                                                              
       regarding the                                                                                        
                                                                                                            
       Gandhar Gas Based Combined                                                                           
       Cycle                                                                                                
                                                                                                            
       Power Project                                                                                        
                                                                                                            
  37   Loan Agreement between the  27.3.1990                   27.3.1990                                    
       President                                                                                            
                                                                                                            
       of India and the Overseas                                                                            
       Economic                                                                                             
                                                                                                            
       Cooperation Fund, Japan                                                                              
       for Bhavani                                                                                          
                                                                                                            
       Kattalai Barrage                                                                                     
       Hydroelectric                                                                                        
                                                                                                            
       Project (I)                                                                                          
                                                                                                            
  38   Agreement between the       27.3.1990                   27.3.1990                                    
       President of                                                                                         
                                                                                                            
       India and the Overseas                                                                               
       Economic Coop-                                                                                       
                                                                                                            
       eration Fund, Japan for                                                                              
       the Indira Gan-                                                                                      
                                                                                                            
       dhi Nahar Project                                                                                    
                                                                                                            
  39   Agreement between the       27.3.1990                   27.3.1990                                    
       President of                                                                                         
                                                                                                            
       India and the Overseas                                                                               
       Economic Coop-                                                                                       
                                                                                                            
       eration Fund, Japan for                                                                              
       the Rolling Stock                                                                                    
                                                                                                            
       Workshop Modernisation                                                                               
       Project                                                                                              
                                                                                                            
  40   Exchange of Letters         6.7.1990                    6.7.1990                                     
       between India &                                                                                      
                                                                                                            
       Japan regarding a                                                                                    
       Development Grant of                                                                                 
                                                                                                            
       four hundred and thirty                                                                              
       five million yen                                                                                     
                                                                                                            
  41   Exchange of Letters         6.7.1990                    6.7.1990                                     
       between India &                                                                                      
                                                                                                            
       Japan regarding Japanase                                                                             
       Grant of 370                                                                                         
                                                                                                            
       million yen for the                                                                                  
       improvement of Fire                                                                                  
                                                                                                            
       Fighting & Rescue                                                                                    
       Equipment Project                                                                                    
                                                                                                            
  42   Exchange of Letters         6.7.1990                    6.7.1990                                     
       between India &                                                                                      
                                                                                                            
       Japan regarding Japanese                                                                             
       Grant of 401                                                                                         
                                                                                                            
       million yen for the                                                                                  
       execution of the                                                                                     
                                                                                                            
       Groundwater Exploitation                                                                             
       Project                                                                                              
                                                                                                            
  43   Exchange of Letters         14.9.1990                   14.9.1990                                    
       between India &                                                                                      
                                                                                                            
       Japan regarding Japanese                                                                             
       Loan assistance                                                                                      
                                                                                                            
       of Yen 104,826 million                                                                               
                                                                                                            
  44   Exchange of Letters         4.10.1990                   4.10.1990                                    
       between India &                                                                                      
                                                                                                            
       Japan regarding a Japanese                                                                           
       grant of 600                                                                                         
                                                                                                            
       million yen for                                                                                      
       fertilisers, agricultural                                                                            
                                                                                                            
       machinery and equipment                                                                              
                                                                                                            
       A-10                                                                                                 
                                                                                                            
  (1)  (2)                         (3)          (4)            (5)                                          
                                                                                                            
                                                                                                            
  45   Exchange of Letters         20.12.1990                  20.12.1990                                   
       between India and                                                                                    
                                                                                                            
       Japan regarding a Japanese                                                                           
       grant of                                                                                             
                                                                                                            
       401.761 million yen                                                                                  
                                                                                                            
       The Netherlands                                                                                      
                                                                                                            
  46   Loan Agreement between the  3.7.1990                    3.7.1990                                     
       President                                                                                            
                                                                                                            
       of India and De Nederlands                                                                           
       Investerings                                                                                         
                                                                                                            
       bank Voor                                                                                            
                                                                                                            
       Poland                                                                                               
                                                                                                            
  47   Trade Agreement between     26.11.1990                  1.1.1991                                     
       the Govern-                                                                                          
                                                                                                            
       ment of the Republic of                                                                              
       India and the                                                                                        
                                                                                                            
       Government of the Republic                                                                           
       of Poland                                                                                            
                                                                                                            
       Rwanda                                                                                               
                                                                                                            
  48   Trade Agreement between     13.6.1990                                                                
       the Govern-                                                                                          
                                                                                                            
       ment of the Republic of                                                                              
       India and the                                                                                        
                                                                                                            
       Government of Rwanda                                                                                 
                                                                                                            
  49   Agreement for Economic and  13.6.1990                                                                
       Technical                                                                                            
                                                                                                            
       Cooperation between the                                                                              
       Government                                                                                           
                                                                                                            
       of the Republic of India                                                                             
       and the Govern-                                                                                      
                                                                                                            
       mew of the Republic of                                                                               
       Rwanda                                                                                               
                                                                                                            
       Syria                                                                                                
                                                                                                            
  50   Agreement on Cooperation    2.9.1988                    14.5.1990                                    
       in the                                                                                               
                                                                                                            
       Sphere of Information                                                                                
       between the Re-                                                                                      
                                                                                                            
       public of India and the                                                                              
       Syrian Arab                                                                                          
                                                                                                            
       Republic                                                                                             
                                                                                                            
       United States of America                                                                             
                                                                                                            
  51   Project Grant Agreement     24.9.1990                   24.9.1990                                    
       between the                                                                                          
                                                                                                            
       President of India and the                                                                           
       United States                                                                                        
                                                                                                            
       of America for Quality                                                                               
       Control of Health                                                                                    
                                                                                                            
       Technologies                                                                                         
                                                                                                            
  52   Convention between the      12.9.1989    18.12.1990     18.12.1990                                   
       Government of                                                                                        
                                                                                                            
       the Republic of India and                                                                            
       the Govern-                                                                                          
                                                                                                            
       ment of the United States                                                                            
       of America for                                                                                       
                                                                                                            
       the Avoidance of Double                                                                              
       Taxation and                                                                                         
                                                                                                            
       the Prevention of Fiscal                                                                             
       Evasion with                                                                                         
                                                                                                            
       respect to Taxes on Income                                                                           
                                                                                                            
       Union of Soviet Socialist                                                                            
                                                                                                            
       Republics                                                                                            
                                                                                                            
  53   Agreement between India     23.7.1990                   23.7.1990                                    
       and the Union                                                                                        
                                                                                                            
       of Soviet Socialist                                                                                  
       Republics on coopera-                                                                                
                                                                                                            
       tion in the field of                                                                                 
       information                                                                                          
                                                                                                            
       A-11                                                                                                 
  Appendix III Major International Conferences/Meetings/Seminars                                            
                                                                                                            
  APPENDIX III                                                                                              
                                                                                                            
  Major International Conferences/Meetings/Seminars etc organized by Inter-                                 
  Governmental Organizations at which Government of India was represented in                                
   Sl No  Title of Conferences                        Venue      Date                                       
   (1)    (2)                                         (3)        (4)                                        
   1      27th Session of Legal Committee of          Montreal   27 March to Apr 12,                        
                                                                 1990                                       
          ICAO                                                                                              
   2      20th FAO Regional Conference for Asia       Beijing    23 to 27 April 1990                        
          and the Pacific                                                                                   
   3      First Regular Session of ECOSOC             New York   1 to 25 May 1990                           
   4      First Asia Pacific Regional Workshop on     Manila     7 to 11 May 1990                           
          Human Rights Issues                                                                               
   5      43rd Session of the World Health As-        Geneva     7 to 18 May 1990                           
          sembly                                                                                            
   6      Meeting of the Executive Council of         Berne      7 to 20 May 1990                           
          UPU Steering Committee and Sym-                                                                   
          posium on Security of Mails                                                                       
   7      29th General Assembly and the 16th          Rome       8 to 11 May 1990                           
          World Congress at the International Sav-                                                          
          ings Bank Institute                                                                               
   8      GIRO system in French Postal Bank           Paris      13 to 30 May 1990                          
   9      10th Meeting of Statistical Panel or-       Montreal   14 to 18 May 1990                          
          ganized by ICAO                                                                                   
   10     CIP Board of Trustees                       The Hague  16 to 19 May 1990                          
   11     37th Session of the Coverning Council       New York   28 May to 22 June                          
                                                                 1990                                       
          of NDP                                                                                            
   12     77th Session of International Labour        Geneva     2 to 27 June 1990                          
          Conference                                                                                        
   13     64th Session of the IMO Council             London     11 to 15 June 1990                         
   14     International Seminar on Desertification    Beijing    25 June to 3 July                          
                                                                 1990                                       
          Process                                                                                           
   15     Second Meeting of the States Parties to     London     27 to 29 June 1990                         
          the Montreal Protocol on Substances                                                               
          that deplete the Ozone Layer                                                                      
   16     Second Regular Session of ECOSOC            Geneva     4 to 27 July 1990                          
   17     UNEP sponsored Meeting on External          Geneva     6 to 9 July 1990                           
          Evaluation of the Plan of Action to                                                               
          Combat Desertification                                                                            
   18     FAO Regional Expert Consultation on         Bangkok    30 July to 3 August                        
                                                                 1990                                       
          Management and Supervision of Agricul-                                                            
          tural Extension Programme                                                                         
          A-12                                                                                              
   (1)    (2)                                         (3)        (4)                                        
   19     CABI Review Conference, 1990                London     30 July to 3 August                        
                                                                 1990                                       
   20     UNEP Governing Council Special Session      Nairobi    1 to 3 August 1990                         
   21     UN Sub Commission on Prevention of          Geneva     6 to 31 August 1990                        
          Discrimination and Protection of                                                                  
          Minorities                                                                                        
   22     First Substantive Session of Prepcom of     Nairobi    6 to 31 August 1990                        
          the UN Conference on Environment and                                                              
          Development                                                                                       
   23     Eighth UN Congress on the Prevention        Havana     27 August to 7                             
                                                                 September 1990                             
          of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders                                                           
   24     Seminar on the impact of European           Paris      10 to 14 September                         
                                                                 1990                                       
          Single Market on the Development of                                                               
          Aviation in the Asia Pacific Region or-                                                           
          ganized by UNDP                                                                                   
   25     UNHCR Executive Committee, 41st Session                                                           
                                                      Geneva     25 September to 9                          
                                                                 October 1990                               
   26     World Summit for Children                   New York   30 September 1990                          
   27     FAO Regional Expert Consultation on         Nagpur     21 to 25 October 1990                      
          Hybrid Cotton Production                                                                          
   28     2nd Regional Seminar on Maritime Legis-     Bangkok    22 to 26 October 1990                      
          lation                                                                                            
   29     28th Session of ICAO Assembly               Montreal   22 to 26 October 1990                      
   30     Meeting of the General Concept of Sep                                                             
          aration Panel organized by ICAO                                                                   
                                                      Montreal   30 October to20                            
                                                                 November 1990                              
   31     Second World Climate Conference             Geneva     6 and 7 November 1990                      
   32     First Session of the Ad hoc Working         Nairobi    19 to 23 November                          
                                                                 1990                                       
          Group of Legal and Technical Experts on                                                           
          Biological Diversity                                                                              
   33     FAO Council, 98th Session                   Rome       19 to 30 November                          
                                                                 1990                                       
   34     UN Seminar on Political, Historical,        Geneva     9 to 15 December 1990                      
          Economic, Social and Cultural Factors                                                             
          contributing to Racism, Racial Discrimi-                                                          
          nation and Apartheid                                                                              
   35     47th Session of the UN Commission on        Geneva     28 January to 8 March                      
                                                                 1991                                       
          Human Rights                                                                                      
          A-13                                                                                              
  Appendix IV Major International Conferences/Meetings/Seminars                                             
                                                                                                            
  APPENDIX IV                                                                                               
                                                                                                            
  Major International Conferences/Meetings/Seminars etc organized by Non-Gov-ernmental                      
  Organizations in which Indian experts participated in their personal capacity with                        
  Government assistance in 1990-91.                                                                         
  Sl.No. Title of Conferences etc                     Venue     Date                                        
  1      International Symposium on Application       New Delhi 21 to May 23, 1990                          
         and Management of Energy in Agriculture                                                            
  2      Final Session of the Group Qualified         New York  2 to 13 July 1990                           
         Governmental experts to undertake                                                                  
         study on the role of United Nations in                                                             
         the field of Verifications                                                                         
  3      Workshop on Improving Cyclone Warn-          Bangkok   16 to 22 July 1990                          
         ing Response and Mitigation                                                                        
  4      Eleventh international Congress of the       Bangalore 5 to 11 August 1990                         
         International Union for the Study of                                                               
         Social Insects                                                                                     
  5      International symposium on Water Ero-        Dehradun  9 to 12 October 1990                        
         sion and Sediment Transport                                                                        
  6      International Symposium on Rice Re-          Hyderabad 19 to 22 November 1990                      
         search New Frontiers                                                                               
  7      International Symposium on New Fron-         Bangalore 25 to 28 November 1990                      
         tier in Horticulture                                                                               
  8      International Conference on Power De-        New Delhi 10 to 14 December 1990                      
         velopment in Afro-Asian Countries                                                                  
  9      Technical Training cum Seminar               New Delhi 13 to 19 January 1991                       
  10     International Conference on Extension        New Delhi 19 to 22 January 1991                       
         Strategy for minimising risk in rainfed                                                            
         agriculture                                                                                        
  11     Golden Jubilee Symposium on Genetic          New Delhi 22 to 25 January 1991                       
         Research and Education-Current                                                                     
         Trends and the next 50 years                                                                       
  12     International Satellite Symposium on         New Delhi 9 to 11 February 1991                       
         grain legumes                                                                                      
  13     International Symposium on Recent Ad-        Hyderabad 19 to 21 February 1991                      
         vances in Viticulture and Oenology                                                                 
  14     Workshop on Farming System                   Hyderabad February 1991                               
  15     ICAR-ACIAR Collaborative Research            New Delhi February/March 1991                         
         Programme-Workshop on Wheat Rust                                                                   
         Project                                                                                            
         A-14                                                                                               
  16     International Workshop on Small Rumin-       New Delhi February/ March 1991                        
         ant Production with emphasis on meat                                                               
         and fibre production in Central Asia                                                               
         A-15                                                                                               
  Appendix V Miscellaneous Major International Conferences etc                                              
                                                                                                            
  APPENDIX V                                                                                                
                                                                                                            
  Miscellaneous Major International Conferences etc in 1990-91, at which Govern-ment of                     
  India was represented or in which Indian experts participated with                                        
  Government of India's assistance in their personal capacity.                                              
   Sl.No.  Title of Conferences etc                 Venue              Date                                 
   (1)     (2)                                      (3)                (4)                                  
   1       Conference of Select Developing coun-    New Delhi          23 to Apr 25,                        
                                                                       1990                                 
           tries on Global Environmental Issues                                                             
   2       Conference on Advanced materials for     Washington         3 May 1990                           
           the 90s                                                                                          
   3       IEEE International Radar Conference 90   Arlington          7 to 10 May                          
                                                                       1990                                 
   4       1st Congress of the International En-    California         10 to 12 May                         
                                                                       1990                                 
           dotoxin Society                                                                                  
   5       IEEE Robotics & Automation Conference    Ohio               13 to 18 May                         
                                                                       1990                                 
   6       EDI Seminar on Financial                 settes             10 to 15                             
           Sector-Lib-Massachus-                                       June1990                             
           eralisation & Regulation                                                                         
   7       Seminar on Computerised Banking &        Paris              18 to 30 June                        
                                                                       1990                                 
           Monetary Transactions                                                                            
   8       Final session of the Group of qualified  New York           2 to 13 July                         
                                                                       1990                                 
           Governmental Experts to undertake                                                                
           study on the role of United Nations in                                                           
           the field of Verifications                                                                       
   9       21st International Annual Conference of  Karlsruhe          3 to 6 July                          
                                                                       1990                                 
           ICT (West Ger- many)                                                                             
   10      International Photodynamic As-           New York           16 to 21 July                        
                                                                       1990                                 
           sociation-3rd Biennial Meeting                                                                   
   11      10th International Biophysics Congress                                                           
                                                    Vancouver(Canada)  29 July to 3                         
                                                                       August 1990                          
   12      6th Congress of the ASEAN Associationof                                                          
           Radiology                                                                                        
                                                    Kuala Lumpur       30 August to 2                       
                                                                       September 1990                       
   13      2nd Conference of Attorneys, General of  Seoul              1 to 9                               
                                                                       September 1990                       
           Asia and the Pacific Region                                                                      
   14      8th International Conference on Ternary                                                          
           & Multinary Compounds (ICTMC 8)                                                                  
                                                    Kishinev(USSR)     11 to 14                             
                                                                       September 1990                       
   15      International Banking Seminar held by    London             12 to 21                             
                                                                       September 1990                       
           European Service Industries Forum                                                                
   16      International Conference on Automation,  Singapore          18 to 21                             
                                                                       September 1990                       
           Robotics & Computer Vision (ICARCV 90)                                                           
   17      Regional Seminar on Maritime             Bangkok            22 to 26                             
                                                                       October 1990                         
           Legisla-tion                                                                                     
   18      International Symposium on Advanced      Bombay             26 to 28                             
                                                                       November 1990                        
           Ceramics                                                                                         
   19      Group of Experts to examine the impli-   Malta              13 to 15                             
                                                                       December 1990                        
           cations of the "Common Concern of                                                                
           Mankind" concept on Global Environ-                                                              
           mental Issues                                                                                    
           A-16                                                                                             
   (1)     (2)                                      (3)                (4)                                  
   20      International Conference on Millimeter   Dehradun           18 to 21                             
                                                                       December 1990                        
           Wave and Microwave                                                                               
   21      International symposium on Intelligent   Bangalore          3 to 5 January                       
                                                                       1991                                 
           Robotics                                                                                         
   22      International Conference on Advances in  Bombay             9 to 11 January                      
                                                                       1991                                 
           Chemical Metallurgy                                                                              
           A-17                                                                                             
  Appendix V-A Major Commonwealth Conferences in 1990-91                                                    
                                                                                                            
  APPENDIX V-A                                                                                              
                                                                                                            
  Major Commonwealth Conferences in 1990-91 in which Government of India was                                
  represented.                                                                                              
                                                                                                            
  1 First Meeting of Commonwealth (CW) High Level Appraisal Group at the level of                           
  Senior Officials, London -- 15 and Mar 16, 1990                                                           
                                                                                                            
  2 XIth Conference of CW Statisticians, Canberra -- 2 to 11 April 1990                                     
                                                                                                            
  3 Meeting of the CW Law Ministers, Christchurch -- 23 to 27 April 1990                                    
                                                                                                            
  4 Pre-WHA Meeting of the CW Health Ministers, Geneva -- 6 May 1990                                        
                                                                                                            
  5 CW Committee of Foreign Ministers on South Africa (CCFMSA) Meeting, Abuj a -- 15 to                     
  17 May 1990                                                                                               
                                                                                                            
  6 Meeting of the CW Ministers of Youth A Sports, Harare 1 to 5 June 1990                                  
                                                                                                            
  7 2nd Meeting of CW High Level Appraisal Group at the level of Senior Offi cials,                         
  London -- 29 to 31 August 1990                                                                            
                                                                                                            
  8 36th CW Parliamentary Conference, Harare -- 14 to 22 September 1990                                     
                                                                                                            
  9 CW Finance Ministers & Senior Finance Officials Meeting, Port of Spain - - 18 to 20                     
  September 1990                                                                                            
                                                                                                            
  10 Third Meeting of CW Ministers responsible for Women's Affairs, Ottawa -- 9 to 12                       
  October 1990                                                                                              
                                                                                                            
  11 XIth Conference of CW Education Ministers, Barbados -- 29 October to 2 N ovember                       
  1990                                                                                                      
                                                                                                            
  12 Meeting of the CW Senior Officials, Port Mores -- 26 to 28 November 1990                               
                                                                                                            
  13 3rd Meeting of CW High Level Appraisal Group at the level of Senior Offi cials,                        
  Kuala Lumpur -- 1 and 2 December 1990                                                                     
                                                                                                            
  14 CW Committee of Foreign Ministers on South Africa Meeting, London--15 Fe bruary                        
  1991                                                                                                      
                                                                                                            
  A-18                                                                                                      
  Appendix VI Meetings/Conferences held under the aegis of (NAM)                                            
                                                                                                            
  APPENDIX VI                                                                                               
                                                                                                            
  Meetings/Conferences held under the aegis of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) during                        
  1990-91.                                                                                                  
                                                                                                            
  1 Meeting of NAM Coordinators of Health at Brioni -- March 1990                                           
                                                                                                            
  2 Ministerial meeting of NAM committee of Nine on Palestine, Tunisia -- Ma                                
  rch 1990                                                                                                  
                                                                                                            
  3 NAM Ministerial Meeting, New York -- April 1990                                                         
                                                                                                            
  4 Meeting of NAM Guest Countries, Belgrade -- July 1990                                                   
                                                                                                            
  5 Third Conference of Ministers of Information of NAM Countries, Havana -- September                      
  1990                                                                                                      
                                                                                                            
  6 Ministerial Meeting of Algeria, India and Yugoslavia, Belgrade -- September 1990                        
                                                                                                            
  7 Ministerial Meeting with European Community 'Troika' -- September 1990                                  
                                                                                                            
  8 4th Conference of the Ministers of Labour of NAM Countries, Tunis -- Nov ember 1990                     
                                                                                                            
  9 Meeting of Ministers and Heads of Delegations of NAM Countries at 45th U NGA, New                       
  York -- October 1990                                                                                      
                                                                                                            
  10 A Foreign Ministers' Level Meeting of 15 NAM Countries and PLO Represent ative,                        
  Belgrade--12 February 1991                                                                                
                                                                                                            
  A-19                                                                                                      
  Appendix VII Statement showing the number of Fresh and Miscellaneous applications                         
  received                                                                                                  
                                                                                                            
  APPENDIX VII                                                                                              
                                                                                                            
  Statement showing the number of Fresh and Miscellaneous applications received and                         
  services granted in each passport office during the year 1990 Fresh Applications                          
  Miscellaneous Services                                                                                    
   Sl.No.  Station      Received         Granted          Received       Granted                            
   1       Ahmedabad    94,966           98,693           67,593         66,762                             
   2       Bangalore    66,416           68,742           35,096         34,730                             
   3       Bareilly     54,200           43,432           24,366         23,178                             
   4       Bhopal       19,759           19,634           10,238         9912                               
   5       Bhubaneswar  5625             6420             2230           2530                               
   6       Bombay       243,171          242,156          148,714        147,187                            
   7       Calcutta     57,918           55,921           28,419         28,514                             
   8       Chandigarh   81,905           77,303           30,520         30,507                             
   9       Cochin       153,830          141,832          78,318         77,360                             
   10      Delhi        100,962          90,065           81,870         79,049                             
   11      Goa          10,633           10,311           17,993         17,755                             
   12      Guwahati     6805             6070             2122           2049                               
   13      Hyderabad    105,415          115,256          61,418         60,884                             
   14      Jaipur       56,071           62,274           25,997         24,817                             
   15      Jalandhar    97,765           91,879           33,855         34,869                             
   16      Kozhikode    121,405          122,793          71,744         71,169                             
   17      Lucknow      64,450           62,917           18,039         17,799                             
   18      Madras       74,055           76,609           56,493         54,546                             
   19      Nagpur       6982             7447             6483           6569                               
   20      Patna        19,131           18,853           6950           7054                               
   21      Srinagar     ----- N O T F U N C T I O N I N G                                                   
                        --------------------------------------------------------------                      
   22      Trichy       132,464          120,176          43,218         42,642                             
           Total        1,573,928        1,538,783        851,676        839,882                            
           A-20                                                                                             
 Appendix VIII Statement showing the Revenue earned and Expenditure incurred by each                        
 passport                                                                                                   
                                                                                                            
 APPENDIX VIII                                                                                              
                                                                                                            
 Statement showing the Revenue earned and Expenditure incurred by each passpo                               
 rt                                                                                                         
 office during the year 19                                                                                  
 90                                                                                                         
  Sl.No.  Station      Revenue                                        Expenditure                           
  1       Ahmedabad    8,824,848.00                                   3,111,877.00                          
  2       Bangalore    6,353,853.50                                   3,175,324.00                          
  3       Bareilly     4,055,975.00                                   1,553,217.70                          
  4       Bhopal       1,732,541.00                                   934,099.00                            
  5       Bhubaneswar  494,978.00                                     608,361.00                            
  6       Bombay       23,679,820.00                                  8,936,460.00                          
  7       Calcutta     5,501,602.00                                   2,006,482.00                          
  8       Chandigarh   7,550,985.29                                   3,546,650.00                          
  9       Cochin       11,023,492.00                                  4,594,038.00                          
  10      Delhi        11,440,020.00                                  6,637,382.00                          
  11      Goa          1,312,803.00                                   1,385,593.00                          
  12      Guwahati     512,928.00                                     712,556.00                            
  13      Hyderabad    9,283,040.31                                   4,210,661.00                          
  14      Jaipur       4,901,187.00                                   1,914,108.00                          
  15      Jalandhar    8,595,959.00                                   3,824,092.00                          
  16      Kozhikode    10,224,702.00                                  3,378,050.00                          
  17      Lucknow      5,344,944.00                                   2,840,994.00                          
  18      Madras       7,127,404.00                                   3,583,353.00                          
  19      Nagpur       553,627.15                                     656,475.00                            
  20      Patna        1,637,359.00                                   990,077.00                            
  21      Srinagar     ---------- N O T F U N C T I O N I N G                                               
                       ------------------------------                                                       
  22      Trichy       10,920,101.00                                  2,265,109.00                          
          Total        1,41,072,169.25                                60,864,958.70                         
          A-21                                                                                              
 Appendix IX Cadre Strength at Headquarters                                                                 
                                                                                                            
 APPENDIX IX                                                                                                
                                                                                                            
 Cadre Strength at Headquarters and 139 Missions/Posts abroad during 1990-91                                
 Sl.No Cadre/Post                                   Posts at     Posts at         Total                     
                                                    Headquarters Missions abroad                            
 (1)   (2)                                          (3)          (4)              (5)                       
       IFS                                                                                                  
 1     Grade I                                      3            18               21                        
 2     Grade II                                     3            25               28                        
 3     Grade III                                    31           86               117                       
 4     Grade IV                                     31           78               109                       
 5     Sr Scale                                     47           187              234                       
 6     Jr Scale                                     5            28               33                        
 7     Training Reserve (Prob) Jr Scale             27                            27                        
 8     Training Reserve for all Grades              10                            10                        
 9     Leave Reserve                                19                            19                        
 10    Deputation Reserve                                        20               20                        
       IFS(B)                                                                                               
 1     Grade I                                      62           63               125                       
 2     Grade II/III                                 160          124              284                       
 3     Grade IV                                     340          379              719                       
 4     Grade V/VI                                   450          193              643                       
 5     Grade II of Cypher Sub Cadre                 81           117              198                       
 6     Selection Grade of Steno Cadre               18           36               54                        
 7     Grade I of Steno Cadre                       32           169              201                       
 8     Grade II of Steno Cadre                      202          187              389                       
 9     Grade III of Steno Cadre                     42           77               119                       
       Combined Research Cadre                      22           2                24                        
       Interpreters' Cadre                          14           21               35                        
       L & T Cadre                                               17               17                        
       Ex-Cadre HOMs                                             10               10                        
       Total                                        1636         1800             3436                      
       A-22                                                                                                 
 Appendix X Compulsory Foreign Language                                                                     
                                                                                                            
       APPENDIX X                                                                                           
       Foreign Language Chart                                                                               
 Sl No Compulsory Foreign Language                                      No. of Officers                     
 1     Arabic                                                           81                                  
 2     Bahasa Indonesia                                                 10                                  
 3     Bulgarian                                                        1                                   
 4     Burmese                                                          2                                   
 5     Chinese                                                          43                                  
 6     Dutch                                                            1                                   
 7     French                                                           84                                  
 8     German                                                           41                                  
 9     Gorakhali/Nepali                                                 5                                   
 10    Hungarian                                                        1                                   
 11    Italian                                                          5                                   
 12    Japanese                                                         25                                  
 13    Kiswahili                                                        10                                  
 14    Laotian                                                                                              
 15    Malay                                                            1                                   
 16    Persian                                                          18                                  
 17    Polish                                                           1                                   
 18    Portuguese                                                       14                                  
 19    Russian                                                          67                                  
 20    Serbo-Croatian                                                   3                                   
 21    Sinhalese                                                        3                                   
 22    Spanish                                                          53                                  
 23    Swedish                                                          1                                   
 24    Thai                                                             2                                   
 25    Tibetan                                                          3                                   
 26    Turkish                                                          2                                   
 27    Vietnamese                                                       2                                   
       Total                                                            479                                 
       A-23                                                                                                 
 Appendix XI Statement showing the number of appointments (both by direct recruitment                       
                                                                                                            
 APPENDIX XI                                                                                                
                                                                                                            
 Statement showing the number of appointments (both by direct recruitment and promotion)                    
 made in various groups in the Ministry of External Affairs and reserved vacancies                          
 filled by scheduled castes/scheduled tribes during the year 1990.                                          
 Number of vacancies                                                                                        
                                                                                                            
              de-reserved due to                                                                            
                                        Number of vacancies   Number of reserved                            
       non-availability of                                                                                  
                         Total No.         reserved for       candidates appoint                            
 ed    reserved candidates                                                                                  
                         of vacan-                                                                          
                            cies                                                                            
      Group           filled         SC        ST           SC        ST                                    
            SC       ST                                                                                     
                                                                                                            
      Group 'A'             84             5         2           15        5                                
                                                                                                            
      Group 'B'             177           42        30           23        2                                
            19       28                                                                                     
                                                                                                            
      Group 'C'             152           36        22           17       10                                
            19       12                                                                                     
                                                                                                            
      Group 'D'             53            15         4           15       5*                                
      (excluding Sweepers)                                                                                  
                                                                                                            
       *3 out of 5 candidates have                                                                          
                                                                                                            
       accepted appointment letters.                                                                        
                                                                                                            
                          A-24                                                                              
 Appendix XII Revenue Expenditure of the MEA                                                                
                                                                                                            
 APPENDIX XII                                                                                               
                                                                                                            
 Revenue Expenditure of the Ministry of External Affairs during the Financial Year                          
 1990-91.                                                                                                   
 Revised Estimates 1990-91                          (Rs in lakhs)                                           
 Headquarters                                       2812.09                                                 
 Missions/ Posts abroad                             15,020.81                                               
 Supply Wing Washington / London                    200.00                                                  
 OTHER ITEMS Contribution to UN etc                 530.00                                                  
 Commonwealth Secretariat                           78.53                                                   
 Commonwealth Foundation                            23.00                                                   
 SAARC Secretariat & other International            86.78                                                   
 institutions                                                                                               
 Central Passport Organization                      1198.00                                                 
 Special Diplomatic Expenditure                     9466.00                                                 
 Grant-in-Aid to ICCR                               1194.00                                                 
 Gulf Evacuation                                    30,000.00                                               
 Assistance to ANC                                  929.00                                                  
 Other Miscellaneous Items                          1041.04                                                 
 AID TO OTHER COUNTRIES Aid to Bangladesh           604.75                                                  
 Aid to Bhutan                                      7029.00                                                 
 Aid to Nepal                                       1699.00                                                 
 Relief Assistance to USSR                          5000.00                                                 
                                                    (including Rs 14.25 crores to Sri                       
 Aid to other developing countries                  Lanka                                                   
                                                    4487.00Rs 13.15 crores to Maldives)                     
 ITEC Programmes                                    1426.00                                                 
 Aid under AFRICA Fund                              900.00                                                  
 Total Revenue Expenditure during                   1990-91 83,725.00                                       
                                                    A-25                                                    
 Apendix XIII                                                                                               
                                                                                                            
 APPENDIX XIII                                                                                              
                                                                                                            
 Expenditure on Indian Missions/Posts abroad and Headquarters of the Ministry of                            
 External Affairs in 1990 -91. The estimated expenditure on the Headquarters                                
 organization of the Ministry du ring the Current Financial Year 1990-91 is expected to                     
 be Rs 2812.09 lakhs which is 3.36% of the total estimated revenue expenditure of this                      
 Ministry. Out of this Rs 908.15 lakhs will be on Sa laries and Wages, Rs 393 lakhs on                      
 Travel Expenses, Rs 924.94 lakhs on Office Expenses, Rs 370 lakhs on P ublicity, Rs 10                     
 lakhs on Subsidy to Canteen, Rs 200 lakhs on Rent and Maintenance. The total estimated                     
 expenditure on Indian Missions/Posts abroad excluding Ind ia Supply Missions, London                       
 and Washington, Is expected to be Rs 15,020.81 lakhs during the Current Financial Year                     
 which works out to Rs 17.94% of the total estimated Revenue Expenditure of this Minis                      
 try. Out of this, an amount of Rs 5324 lakhs are for Salaries and Wages (including                         
 Foreign Allowance ), Rs 1930.50 lakhs on Travel Expenses (Transfer Passages/Home Leave                     
 Passages and Local Tours), Rs. 33 10 lakhs on Office Expenses and Rs 4436.31 lakhs on                      
 Rent, Rates and Taxes as well as on repairs an d maintenance of Government owned/rented                    
 accommodation in Missions abroad. Average expenditure p er Mission abroad (including,                      
 Publicity) works out to Rs 106.53 lakhs.                                                                   
                                                                                                            
 The remaining 78.7% of the Estimated Revenue Expenditure of the Ministry Is b eing                         
 incurred on various Aid Programmes to neighbouring and other developing countries,                         
 Relief A ssistance to the USSR, Aid under AFRICA Fund, SAARC and SCAAP Programmes,                         
 contribution to United Natio ns Organizations and other international bodies, Passport                     
 organization Hospitality, Grant-in-Aid to Indian Council of Cultural Relations and on                      
 other Miscellaneous items. It also includes an estima ted expenditure of Rs 300 crores                     
 on evacuation of Indian nationals from the Gulf.                                                           
                                                                                                            
 A-26                                                                                                       
 Appendix XIV International Conferences/Meetings and Functions arranged                                     
                                                                                                            
 APPENDIX XIV                                                                                               
                                                                                                            
 International Conferences/Meetings and Functions arranged during the year 1990- 91 with                    
 the assistance of the Conference Cell, Ministry of External Affairs.                                       
                                                                                                            
 1 Meeting of National integration Council--Apr 11, 1990                                                    
                                                                                                            
 2 Meeting of Select Developing Countries on Global Environmental Issues -- 23 to 25                        
 April 1990                                                                                                 
                                                                                                            
 3 Second SAARC Meeting on the implementation of SAARC Travel Voucher Scheme and                            
 Settlement of Accounts held at Bomaby--15 and 16 March 1990                                                
                                                                                                            
 4 Indira Gandhi memorial Lecture--30 April 1990                                                            
                                                                                                            
 5 23rd Annual Meeting of the Board of Governors of the Asian Development Ba nk--2 to 5                     
 May 1990                                                                                                   
                                                                                                            
 6 SAARC Meeting on Literacy, Post-Literacy and Continuing Education--16 to 19 June 1990                    
                                                                                                            
 7 Meeting of the National Reception Committee for Dr Nelson Mandela -- 18 May 1990                         
                                                                                                            
 8 Meeting of the Working Group of National Reception Committee for Dr Nelson                               
 Mandela--30July 1990                                                                                       
                                                                                                            
 9 The Global Consultation on Water Sanitation for the 1990's -- 10 to 14 September 1990                    
                                                                                                            
 10 Meeting of the Working Group of National Reception Committee for Dr Nelso n Mandela                     
 -- 18 September 1990                                                                                       
                                                                                                            
 11 Meeting of the National Reception Committee for Dr Nelson Mandela -- 6 October. 1990                    
                                                                                                            
 12 National Reception Committee Meeting with Dr Nelson Mandela at Rashtrapat i Bhavan                      
 -- 15 October 1990                                                                                         
                                                                                                            
 13 People's Reception for Dr Nelson Mandela at Indira Gandhi Stadium--15 Oct ober 1990                     
                                                                                                            
 14 SAARC Workshop on Plan Modelling Techinques--29 to 31 October 1990                                      
                                                                                                            
 15 39th WTO Executive Council Meeting held at Goa--6 to 8 December 1990                                    
                                                                                                            
 16 National Workshop on the Rights of the Child with Focus on Girl Child--11                               
 to 14 December 1990.                                                                                       
                                                                                                            
 A-27                                                                                                       
 Appendix XV VVIPs Visits to India during 1990-91                                                           
                                                                                                            
 Former Chancellor of Federal Republic of Germany                                                           
                                                                                                            
       APPENDIX XV                                                                                          
       VVIPs Visits to India during 1990-91                                                                 
 Sl.No Heads of State, Heads of Government                 Date                                             
 (1)   (2)                                                 (3)                                              
 1     H.E. Mr Maumoon Abdul Gayoom.                       15 to Mar 17, 1990                               
       President of Maldives                                                                                
 2     H.E. Mr Yasser Arafat,                              26 to 28 March 1990                              
       President of Palestine                                                                               
 3     H.E. Mr Toshiki Kaifu,                              29 April to 1 May 1990                           
       Prime Minister of Japan                                                                              
 4     H.E. Mr D B Wijetunge,                              1 and 2 May 1990                                 
       Prime Minister of Sri Lanka                                                                          
 5     H.E. Mr K P Bhattarai,                              8 to 10 June 1990                                
       Prime Minister of Nepal                                                                              
 6     H.E. Dr Najibullah,                                 28 to 31 August 1990                             
       President of Afghanistan                                                                             
 7     H.E. Mr France Albert Rene,                         24 to 26 September 1990                          
       President of Seychelles                                                                              
 8     H.E. Mr Hun Sen,                                    7 to 11 October 1990                             
       Prime Minister of Cambodia                                                                           
 9     H.E. Dr Nelson Mandela,                             15 to 19 October 1991                            
       Deputy President of the African National Congress                                                    
       of South Africa                                                                                      
 10    H.M. Jigme Singye Wangchuck,                        23 to 26 November 1990                           
       King of Bhutan                                                                                       
 11    H.E. Mr K P Bhattarai,                              24 to 26 November 1990                           
       Prime Minister of Nepal                                                                              
 12    H.E. Mr Bernard Dowiyogo,                           30 December 1990 to 3 January                    
                                                           1991                                             
       President of Nauru                                                                                   
 13    H.E. Ion Iliescu,                                   16 January 1991                                  
       President of Romania                                                                                 
 14    H.E Maumoon Abdul Gayoom,                           25 to 27 January 1991                            
       President of Maldives                                                                                
       Deputy Prime minsters, Foreign, Ministers and                                                        
       others                                                                                               
 1     H.E. Mr Winsten Dookeran,                           9 to 16 March 1990                               
       Deputy prime Minister of Trinidad & Tobago                                                           
       A-28                                                                                                 
 (1)   (2)                                                 (3)                                              
 2     H.E. Mr Jiri Dienstbier,                            30 October to 2 November 1990                    
       Deputy Prime Minister and                                                                            
       Foreign Minister of Czech and Slovak Federal                                                         
       Republic                                                                                             
 3     H.E. Mr Mana Saeed Al-Otaiba,                       6 to 8 March 1990                                
       Minister of Petroleum & Mineral Resources and                                                        
       Special Envoy of President of United Arab Emirates                                                   
 4     H.E. Mr Choi Ho-Joong,                              15 to 17 March 1990                              
       Foreign Minister of Republic of Korea                                                                
 5     H.E. Mr Qian Qichen,                                20 to 24 March 1990                              
       Foreign Minister of China                                                                            
 6     H.E. Mr Isidoro Malmierca,                          8 to 13 April 1990                               
       Foreign Ministeer of Cuba                                                                            
 7     H.E. Datuk Abu Hassan Omar,                         10 to 13 April 1990                              
       Foreign Minister of Malaysia                                                                         
 8     Dr M A Ranganathan,                                 7 to 14 May 1990                                 
       Special Adviser to the President of Zambia                                                           
 9     Mr Willy Brandt,                                    27 to 30 May 1990                                
 10    H.E. Dr B Casimir,                                  11 to 13 June 1990                               
       Foreign Minister of Rwanda                                                                           
 11    H.E. Mr Abdul Wakil,                                11 to 15 June 1990                               
       Foreign Minister of Afghanistan                                                                      
 12    H.E. Mr Gareth Evans,                               1 and 2 August 1990                              
       Foreign Minister of Australia                                                                        
 13    H.E. Mr Raul S Manglapus,                           1 to 4 August 1990 and                           
       Foreign Minister of Philippines                     23 and 24 August 1990                            
 14    H.E. Mr Tanvir Ahmed,                               9 to 12 August 1990                              
       Foreign Secretary of Pakistan                                                                        
 15    Mrs Gro Harloom Brundtland,                         18 to 21 September 1990                          
       Former Prime Minister of Norway                                                                      
       A-29                                                                                                 
                                                                                                            
External website that   External website that External website that External website    External website    
opens in a new window   opens in a new window opens in a new window that opens in a new that opens in a new 
                                                                    window              window              

    Address : Patiala House, Annexe - BNew Delhi                              
   -110001                                           Page last updated on: 09 
    Telephone: 23389073, 23382694, 23073685;                  December, 2013  
   Fax: 23386340, 23387700;Feedback :            Site designed and maintained 
   dirlibmea.gov.in                                  by: National Informatics 
    Officer In-charge:-                                         Centre (NIC), 
    (c)Content Owned by MEA Library Ministry of   DeitY, MoCIT, Government of 
   External Affairs, Government of India                               India. 
   Terms & Conditions | Privacy Policy |         Visitors:                    
   Copyright Policy | Hyperlinking Policy |      
   Accessibility Statement | Help                

   java script is required for this page
   MEAs App twitter Facebook Google plus YouTube flickr
   loading
