   java script is required for this page java script is required for this
   page java script is required for this page java script is required for
   this page java script is required for this page java script is required
   for this page

   Mon, February 09, 2015 at 00:52:33 IST Indian Flag
   Ministry of                      Print Content Small Font Medium Font      
    External       MEA Library      Large Font                                
    Affairs,   Ministry of External   * Sitemap                               
   Government  Affairs, Government    * Contact Us                            
    of India         of India         * Feedback                              
                                      * _____________________           [  ]  

     * Home
     * Director's Office
          * Director Lib & Info
          * Library Officers & Staff
     * Journals
          * Current Journals
          * Online Journals
          * CD-ROMs Databases
     * Online Services
          * Business Monitor Online
          * EIU
          * JSTOR
          * Janes Online Services
          * Kessing World News Archive
          * Marketline MDIC
          * Online Service Links
     * Newspapers
          * E-Newspapers
          * Subscribed Print Newspapers
     * Library Bulletins
          * Foreign Affairs Documentation Bulletin
          * Recent Additions
          * Chronicle of Events
     * Alert
          * Book Alert
          * Article Alerts
     * Important Abbrevations

 Annual Reports Prior to 1999                                                                        
   * Home >   Annual Reports Prior to 1999 >   Annual Report 1995-96                 * Home          
 Annual Report 1995-96                                                               * Director's    
                                                                                       Office        
                                     CONTENTS                                        * Journals      
 S.No.   CHAPTERS                                                        PAGE No.    * Online        
 1.    India's Neighbours                                                1             Services      
 2.    South-East Asia and the Pacific                                   17          * Newspapers    
 3.    East Asia                                                         28          * Alert         
 4.    Central Asia                                                      33          * Important     
 5.    The Gulf, West Asia & North Africa                                37            Abbrevations  
 6.    Africa (South of the Sahara)                                      51          * Back          
 7.    Europe                                                                                        
       Eastern Europe                                                    59                          
       Western Europe                                                    70                          
 8.    The Americas/North America                                        77                          
       Central and South America and the Caribbean                       82                          
 9.    United Nations and International Organisations                    88                          
       Political Issues                                                  90                          
       Disarmament and International Security                            93                          
       Economic, Social and Humanitarian Issues                          97                          
       Human Rights                                                      101                         
       Administrative and Budgetary Issues                               103                         
       Elections and Appointments                                        104                         
       International Law: Developments and Activities                    106                         
       Non-Aligned Movement                                              110                         
       Foreign Economic Relations                                        112                         
 10.   Commonwealth                                                      114                         
 11.   Trade and Investment                                              125                         
       Back-up support to Missions and Posts                             126                         
       External Economic Publicity                                       127                         
       Important Trade and Investment Promotion Events                   128                         
 12.   Policy Planning & Research                                        130                         
 13.   External Publicity                                                134                         
 14.   Protocol                                                          140                         
 15.   Passport and Consular Services and Indians Overseas               142                         
 16.   Administration and Organisation                                   145                         
 17.   Foreign Service Institute                                         149                         
 18.   Implementation of Official Language Policy andPropagation of      152                         
       Hindi Abroad                                                                                  
 19.   Cultural Relations                                                154                         
       APPENDICES                                                        165-249                     
 Introduction                                                                                        
 Five years after the end of the Cold War, a new political equilibrium for the                       
 nation states of the World remained elusive as no new determining factors                           
 emerged. The consequences of the end of the Cold-War era remain uncertain. The                      
 momentous changes on the world scene, that began in the 90s' continued to have                      
 far- reaching implications for India's foreign policy. Several States were                          
 embroiled in regional and sub-regional issues. Whilst there was some forward                        
 movement in such areas as the Middle-East and former Yugoslavia, deteriorating                      
 conditions were in evidence in Afghanistan, the Caucasus and parts of Africa. The                   
 global threat of cross-border terrorism has not receded and needs to be firmly                      
 checked. The UN observed its 50th anniversary during which issues of                                
 democratisation of some important organs of the UN, such as the UNSC,                               
 werehighlighted, as were the UN's financial difficulties. The economic growth of                    
 developing countries remained constrained by tariff and non-tariff barriers. A                      
 number of important international conferences under UN auspices took farreaching                    
 decisions on issues of social development. Questions such as Human Rights,                          
 Environment, the Status of Women came into active consideration. TheNAM Summit                      
 was held in Cartagena Colombia). It gave fresh impetus to the non-aligned                           
 movement and reaffirmed its relevance in present day circumstances.                                 
 India adjusted and responded to this evolving external situation with dynamism                      
 and a practical approach and clear                                                                  
 -v>                                                                                                 
 perception of her vital national interests. India faced the new challenges with                     
 determination and continued to promote her political, security and economic                         
 concerns. The Government's foreign policy during the past year remained focussed                    
 on the need to build an environment conducive for the political and economic                        
 well-being of the people.                                                                           
 India's relations with the immediate neighbours remained a matter of highest                        
 priority and a conscious and purposive effort was made to improve cooperation.                      
 India continued to play an active role in Nepal's developmental efforts. A.                         
 landmark 'treaty on Joint development of the Mahakali river was signed, opening                     
 up important new possibilities for cooperation in water resource exploitation.                      
 Relations with Bhutan were marked by deep mutual understanding. A successful                        
 visit by the King of Bhutan was marked by the signing of important agreements for                   
 the bilateral development of a major hydro-electric project at Tala and a large                     
 cement plant at Dungsum. A close understanding was built up with the                                
 newGovernment of Sri Lanka. India welcomed the proposals for devolution of power                    
 announced by President Kumaratunga. India has reiterated her faith in the need                      
 for a negotiated political settlement within the framework of the unity and                         
 territorial integrity of Sri Lanka for arriving at a lasting and permanent                          
 solution to the ethnic problem. The Indo-Myanmar Border Trade Agreement was                         
 operationalised. The issue of sharing of river waters with Bangladesh wassought                     
 to be pursued through bilateral dialogue. Trade with Bangladesh developed                           
 rapidly.                                                                                            
 With Pakistan, India made several efforts to establish cordial and good                             
 neighbourly relations. Instead of responding positively, Pakistan continues to                      
 promote and encourage, cross-border terrorism. This challenge will be faced                         
 resolutely and rebuffed. The recent increment of arms supply to Pakistan from USA                   
 will only encourage it in its intransigence. India has repeatedly urged the                         
 Government of Pakistan to eschew the path of confrontation and conflict. As                         
 agreed in the Simla Agreement,- , India is ready to discuss bilateral issues with                   
 Pakistan without preconditions, and to resolve the outstanding differences                          
 peacefully and bilaterally.                                                                         
 The situation in Afghanistan remained unstable and India extended her support for                   
 the UN process. India resumed her                                                                   
 -vi>                                                                                                
 technical cooperation programme and provided humanitarian assistance.                               
                                                                                                     
 Sino-Indian relations continued to improve and expand. The Government continued                     
 to work for the establishment of a long- term, stable and good neighbourly                          
 relationship with China and create a favourable climate in which the two                            
 countries can resolve outstanding issues, including the boundary question. The                      
 Prime Minister met the Chinese President in New York during the UN's Special                        
 Commemorative Meeting. As a part of the implementation of the Border Peace and                      
 Tranquillity Agreement, four Indian and Chinese posts, two on each side, in                         
 "close proximity". were pulled back. India's relations with the US developed                        
 further Cooperation in economic, commercial and technological fields increased in                   
 range and content. The decision was taken by the US Congress to give a one-time                     
 waiver to the Pressler Amendment and permit the supply of advance US military                       
 equipment to Pakistan. The Government has unambiguously conveyed India's concern                    
 at the adverse impact of the US decision on India's security and on the                             
 environment for peace, security and stability in the region.                                        
 The visit of the Prime Minister of Canada, accompanied by a large team of                           
 provincial Premiers and Canadian businessmen, marked an important new development                   
 in bilateral ties. The instruments of Ratification of Mutual Legal Assistance                       
 Treaty between India and Canada were exchanged.                                                     
 India factored the emerging politico-economic integration of Europe in her                          
 relationship with West European Countries. Sustained efforts were made to                           
 strengthen EUs understanding of issues of vital concern to India, both regional                     
 and global. A Friends of India Group consisting of 60 MEPs has been constituted                     
 in the European Parliament.                                                                         
 India's relations with the Russian Federation were marked with traditional                          
 friendship and cordiality. Bilateral exchanges in a number of fields expanded                       
 significantly. Relations with other countries of the Commonwealth of Independent                    
 States also continued to develop satisfactorily. The Prime Minister met Russian                     
 President Boris Yeltsin and Ukranian Prime Minister Marchuk in New York.                            
 -vii>                                                                                               
 The Central Asian Republics continued to attract attention in                                       
 view of their geo-strategic importance and India's cultural and historical links                    
 with the region. The Prime Minister's visit to the Kyrghyz Republic and                             
 Turkmenistan and the Tajikistan President's visit to India further concretised                      
 long term plans for political and economic contacts with the region. The signing                    
 of the Trilateral Memorandum of Understanding on Transit between India, Iran and                    
 Turkmenistan which seeks to establish a viable surface route between these                          
 countries is a landmark.                                                                            
                                                                                                     
 India's close ties with the Gulf, West Asia and North Africa were strengthened                      
 further The mutuality of interest and shared associations over a long period                        
 continue to ensure close and cordial relations between India and the countries in                   
 this region. Geographical proximity and economic complementarity have thrown open                   
 fresh opportunities for greater interaction between India and these countries.                      
                                                                                                     
 Special attention continued to be given to forging close economic and political                     
 ties with ASEAN countries. The Prime Minister's visit to Malaysia and Senior                        
 Minister Lee Kuan Yew's visit to India contributed towards growing mutual                           
 understanding. An important break-through was achieved with ASEAN accepting India                   
 as a Full Dialogue Partner It points to the intrinsic and emerging                                  
 complementarities between the dynamic and fast consolidating economies of ASEAN                     
 and the large economy of-India.                                                                     
                                                                                                     
 The momentum of India's relations with Japan was maintained through exchange of                     
 high level visits. Japan continued to be India's largest bilateral donor of                         
 development assistance. Government has welcomed this assistance.                                    
                                                                                                     
 The Prime Minister's visit to Egypt imparted greater dynamism to the already                        
 existing friendly ties between the two countries. India's relations with the PLO                    
 continued to be marked by close understanding. India opened a Representative                        
 Office in the Palestinian Authority (PA) administered areas of Gaza and West                        
 Bank.                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 There was steady expansion in bilateral exchanges with Israel. Several new                          
 cooperative ventures in the economic field were initiated.                                          
 -viii>                                                                                              
 The multifaceted relationship with Iran was further cemented by the visit to                        
 India of President Rafsanjani. Both sides see potential for a significant                           
 expansion of ties.                                                                                  
                                                                                                     
 India maintained warm and friendly relations with African countries. A programme                    
 of economic and technical cooperation with several African states was sustained.                    
 India took part in the Donors' Conference on Namibia held in Geneva and the                         
 Donor's Conference on Angola held in Brussels.                                                      
                                                                                                     
 India's cooperation with Latin American countries was particularly significant in                   
 the multilateral context. During the period under report the Non-aligned Summit                     
 and G-15 Summit were held in the region. The Prime Minister led the Indian                          
 delegation to these meetings. In the bilateral context, the President paid                          
 successful visits to Chile and Trinidad & Tobago.                                                   
                                                                                                     
 India actively participated in deliberations of the United Nations and all its                      
 specialised agencies. At the UN's Special Commemorative Meeting, the Prime                          
 Minister articulated India's strong support to the concept of multilateralism of                    
 UN. India continued her efforts in sensitising world opinion in favour of a                         
 comprehensive reform of the UN Security Council. Issues of international concern,                   
 like human rights, environment, non- proliferation, transfer of advanced                            
 technologies and disarmament in their foreign policy dimensions engaged                             
 attention.                                                                                          
                                                                                                     
 On disarmament, India took the lead in promoting the adoption of a resolution,                      
 for the first time in the UN General Assembly, calling for time-bound elimination                   
 of nuclear weapons. India emphasised the proposed treaties on the Complete Test                     
 Ban and the Fissile Material Cut-off must be treated as an integral part of a                       
 step-by-step approach towards global nuclear disarmament within a time-bound                        
 framework.                                                                                          
                                                                                                     
 India earned the UN's appreciation for her contribution to various UN Peace                         
 Keeping Missions. Currently India's defence personnel are engaged in UN Peace                       
 Keeping Operations in Angola, Rwanda, Haiti, Liberia, Iraq-Kuwait Observer                          
 Mission. On terrorism, India effectively pursued her agenda                                         
 -ix>                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 for the international community to take concerted action against this menace.                       
                                                                                                     
 Other important meetings in which India took part were the World Summit for                         
 Social Development (Copenhagen), the Commonwealth Summit (Auckland), and the                        
 Fourth World Conference on Women (Beijing).                                                         
                                                                                                     
 The XI Non-aligned Conference of Heads of State I Government held in Cartagena                      
 focussed on the continuing relevance and role of the Non-aligned Movement (NAM)                     
 in the present day. The Prime Minister led the Indian delegation. 'The final                        
 communique addressed various issues of interest to India, including the question                    
 of Security Council expansion, international economic issues and disarmament.                       
                                                                                                     
 An appropriate role in various multilateral economic groupings was assumed by                       
 India. Trans-regional cooperation amongst developing countries was continued in                     
 the activities of G-15 where India took an active part. The Prime Minister led                      
 India's delegation to the G-15 Summit in Buenos Aires.                                              
                                                                                                     
 India hosted the Eighth SAARC Summit. Concrete steps were taken to implement                        
 various programmes and projects for regional cooperation brought up by SAARC, the                   
 most prominent being the operationalisation of the SAARC Preferential Trading                       
 Arrangement (SAPTA). It was agreed that efforts should be made to set up the                        
 South Asian Free Trade Area (SAFTA) by 2000 AD.                                                     
                                                                                                     
 A special effort was made to attract foreign direct investment                                      
 and foreign institutional investment through concerted publicity efforts and                        
 investment promotion events. A number of publications, including sector-specific                    
 and region-specific brochures, were produced. Among others, the Ministry                            
 coordinated the visits of economic delegations from Ministry of International                       
 Trade and Industry of Japan and Hong Kong Development Council.                                      
                                                                                                     
 India Technical and Economic Cooperation Programme (ITEC) and the Special                           
 Commonwealth African Assistance Programme (SCAAP) remained important instruments                    
 of South-South Cooperation. Apart from major programmes in Bhutan and Nepal, 1364                   
 training slots under ITEC/SCAAP were provided.                                                      
 -x>                                                                                                 
                                                                                                     
 A large number of slots were also provided to defence personnel for courses in                      
 Indian training institutions. Under the ITEC programme, six projects were                           
 executed and 30 long term experts are currently stationed in various developing                     
 countries. Aid towards disaster relief was sent to 15 countries.                                    
                                                                                                     
 In the area of external publicity, anti-Indian propaganda was effectively                           
 countered and a projection of a new image of India as a promising economic and                      
 business destination was successfully undertaken. In keeping with rapid                             
 development in information technology, the External Publicity Division initiated                    
 steps to open up a Home Page on the Internet World-Wide Web and to give Indian                      
 television software a greater global reach and visibility.                                          
                                                                                                     
 The Indian Council for Cultural Relations (ICCR) presented a major programme of                     
 Russian Performing Arts. The focus of ICCR's outgoing promotional activities                        
 during 1995 was a yearlong Festival of India in Thailand. The Council also paid                     
 special attention to the general welfare of international students and took steps                   
 to familiarise them with India milieu. The Council has mooted a proposal to set                     
 up an Indian Cultural Centre in Port-of- Spain.                                                     
                                                                                                     
 During 1995 the overall emphasis was on reducing the pendency of Passport                           
 applications. As part of streamlining the procedure, a simplified revised                           
 passport application form was introduced. Greater security measures were                            
 introduced in the Passport booklet to make it less subject to fraud.                                
                                                                                                     
 The Ministry continued to arrange for the Haj Pilgrimage with the number of                         
 pilgrims increasing to 56,000 from 31,000 last year. In coordination with Central                   
 and State Haj Committees, satisfactory arrangements were made for the                               
 transportation, stay and other needs of the pilgrims. Facilities for the Kailash                    
 Mansarovar Yatra organised by the Ministry were upgraded and the total number of                    
 pilgrims was increased to 450.                                                                      
                                                                                                     
 The Policy Planning Division began compilation of bilateral treaties and                            
 agreements signed by India with other countries during 1971 to 1980 and 1995. The                   
 Documentation Service as well as other operations and services of the Ministry's                    
 library were computerised.                                                                          
 -xi>                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 The Foreign Service Institute conducted 9 courses during 1995 including one for                     
 foreign diplomats in which 26 diplomats from as many countries were trained in                      
 diplomatic theory and practice.                                                                     
                                                                                                     
 To make the Indian Foreign Service more aware of and responsive to the present                      
 day international situation, a 4-member Expert Committee has been appointed to                      
 review the recruitment system.                                                                      
                                                                                                     
 New Missions in Slovakia and Burkina Faso and Posts in Glasgow and Houston were                     
 opened. The Mission in Afghanistan was re- opened.                                                  
                                                                                                     
 During the year under review, important construction projects progressed on                         
 schedule. The Ministry also purchased properties in several places. As a result                     
 of these efforts, the Ministry will save considerable expenditure on the rental                     
 of offices and residences.                                                                          
 -xii>                                                                                               
 1995                                                                                                
 1.India's Neighbours                                                                                
                                                                               Top                   
 Traditionally, ties between India and Nepal have been close.                                        
 Relations between the two countries continued to be on an even keel.                                
                                                                                                     
 The visits of the then Deputy Prime Minister Madhav Kumar Nepal (6 to 10 February                   
 1995) and former Prime Minister Manmohan Adhikari (10 to 14 April 1995) to India                    
 resulted in a better understanding on matters of mutual concern and helped                          
 further consolidate ties between the two countries. Efforts are being made to                       
 take concrete steps to improve cooperation with the new Government led by Prime                     
 Minister Deuba.                                                                                     
                                                                                                     
 The visits of Minister of External Affairs to Nepal (26-29 January 1996) and                        
 Prime Minister Deuba to Delhi (12-18 February 1996) helped in further                               
 consolidation of India's traditionally close ties with Nepal. These visits                          
 resulted in the signing of a treaty on the development of Mahakali rivers which                     
 represents a major breakthrough in the harnessing of river waters in the region                     
 for mutual benefit. Apart from bringing the economies of the two countries                          
 closer, the setting up of a new major project, as provided for in the treaty, is                    
 bound to have a far-reaching impact on, the quality of lives of the people of                       
 Nepal as well as the adjoining regions in India.                                                    
 -1>                                                                                                 
                                                                                                     
 The on-going economic liberalisation in both the countries as well as the stable                    
 foundations provided by the 1990-91 Treaties of Trade & Transit, and further                        
 amendments thereof in 1993, continued to have a positive impact on Indo-Nepal                       
 trade and economic relations. As on 31 December 1995, out of a total of 247 joint                   
 ventures 95 are from India. India's exports to Nepal from April to September 1995                   
 amounted to Rs 270.63 crores against Rs 202 crores for the same period in 1994.'                    
 India's imports from Nepal from April to September 1995 amounted to Rs 58.74                        
 crores against Rs 53.63 crores for the corresponding period in 1994.                                
                                                                                                     
 As in earlier years, India continued to play an active role in Nepal's                              
 developmental efforts. Work is proceeding apace on the setting up of a Medical                      
 College and Institute at Dharan. Another major project for the construction of 22                   
 bridges on the East-West Highway in western Nepal has been initiated. Additional                    
 locomotives and coaches are being supplied to strengthen the service on the                         
 Jayanagar-Janakpur railway sector. Work on surveys for east-west electric                           
 railway, outer ring road at Janakpur, broad-gauging of rail link between Raxaul                     
 and Sirsia as well as other projects have been initiated.                                           
                                                                                                     
 Work on the identification of India-Nepal boundary gained further momentum. In                      
 the 18th meeting of the Joint Technical Level India- Nepal Boundary Committee                       
 held in Kathmandu, a time bound programme for completion of the work was drawn                      
 up.                                                                                                 
                                                                                                     
 Relations with Bhutan, which have traditionally been close and cordial, continued                   
 to be marked by deep mutual understanding. Close cooperation in the economic                        
 field has been a significant factor in reinforcing intimate bilateral links.                        
                                                                                                     
 Periodic exchanges of views have fostered a traditionally friendly relationship.                    
 Bhutanese Foreign Minister and Planning Minister visited India during the year.                     
 From the Indian side, Foreign Secretary and Cabinet Secretary visited Bhutan in                     
 October and November 1995 respectively.                                                             
                                                                                                     
 King Jigme Singye Wangchuk of Bhutan paid an official visit to India from 1 to 7                    
 March. During the visit, which was aimed at strengthening the close and cordial                     
 ties between the two countries, the King held extensive discussions with Prime                      
 -2>                                                                                                 
                                                                                                     
 Minister, Minister of External Affairs and other Indian leaders on expanding                        
 bilateral relations. Two agreements, both pertaining to setting up of Projects in                   
 Bhutan, were signed during the visit. One is on the Tala Hydroelectric Project                      
 (1020 MW), the other is on setting up of the Dungsum Cement Plant, a dry process                    
 plant (0.5 million tonnes per year) as a joint venture between the Royal                            
 Government of Bhutan and an Indian company.                                                         
                                                                                                     
 India continues to be closely associated with Bhutan's developmental efforts.                       
 India's participation in projects in Bhutan's on-going VII Five Year Plan                           
 (1992-97) was reviewed during the Plan Talks between the two countries held in                      
 Delhi in July 1995. Major projects such as hospitals, schools, roads and bridges,                   
 transmission lines, rural electrification, survey projects are underway. A                          
 significant development was the conclusion of the agreement in September 1995                       
 between the Kurichu Project Authority and the National Hydroelectric Power                          
 Corporation Ltd (NHPC) on the setting up of a 45 MW Kurichu Hydroelectric Project                   
 in Bhutan; the implementation of the Project is underway.                                           
                                                                                                     
 Relations with Bangladesh continue to be close and stable with regular                              
 interaction between the two Governments. Prime Minister Khaleda Zia attended the                    
 SAARC Summit in New Delhi in May 1995. During bilateral meetings at that time,                      
 the Bangladesh Prime Minister discussed with the Prime Minister the issues of                       
 sharing of river waters, Chakma refugees, and trade and economic cooperation. It                    
 was decided to resume dialogue between the Foreign Secretaries on water sharing                     
 and other outstanding issues. Thereafter, Foreign Secretary held discussions with                   
 Bangladesh authorities in Dhaka in June 1995, during which it was decided to                        
 reconvene the Joint Rivers Commission at Ministerial level. India has put forward                   
 proposals for scheduling a meeting of the Joint Rivers Commission as a measure of                   
 building confidence and reopening dialogue on arrangements for sharing of river                     
 waters.                                                                                             
                                                                                                     
 The Bangladesh Government has continued its attempts at internationalising the                      
 issue of river waters; the Prime Minister of Bangladesh raised the issue at the                     
 United Nations General                                                                              
 -3>                                                                                                 
                                                                                                     
 Assembly in October 1995. India believes this issue requires a bilateral solution                   
 and remains committed to holding constructive bilateral dialogue for arriving at                    
 a long-term, comprehensive arrangement on water sharing with Bangladesh, taking                     
 into account the requirements of both sides.                                                        
                                                                                                     
 Both Governments continued efforts to facilitate the repatriation of Chakma                         
 refugees from India to Bangladesh. The second meeting of the Indo-Bangladesh                        
 Joint Working Group was held in Dhaka in April 1995 to discuss, inter alia,                         
 security related issues, cross-border movements, the repatriation of Chakma                         
 refugees, the existing visa regime and the situation along the Indo-Bangladesh                      
 border. Director General level talks between the Border Security Force and the                      
 Bangladesh Rifles were held in New Delhi in June 1995 and in Dhaka in November                      
 1995. Issues relating to the demarcation of the land boundary were discussed in                     
 meetings between the Survey authorities of the two countries in October 1995.                       
                                                                                                     
 India's exports to Bangladesh are to the order of Rs 2001 crores in 1994-95. A Rs                   
 30 crore credit agreement and an agreement on avoidance of double taxation are in                   
 force. India continues to provide training facilities to Bangladesh personnel                       
 under the Technical Assistance Programme financed by the Ministry of External                       
 Affairs. During 1995, training was provided in the areas of auditing,                               
 sericulture, insurance; human resource development, etc.                                            
                                                                                                     
 India and Maldives share a close, cordial and friendly relationship. The Indira                     
 Gandhi Memorial Hospital, gifted to the Maldives by India, was jointly                              
 inaugurated by Prime Minister of India and President Maumoon Abdul Gayoom of                        
 Maldives on 15 and 16 April 1995. India's close interaction with Maldives was                       
 continued with the Maldivian President visiting Delhi for the SAARC Summit on 2                     
 and 3 May 1995.                                                                                     
                                                                                                     
 The Minister of External Affairs visited Maldives in August 1995, and co-chaired                    
 the 3rd Indo-Maldives Joint Commission. During this meeting, the gamut of                           
 bilateral relations was reviewed and areas for future cooperation were                              
 identified. India remains committed to assisting Maldives in. the overall process                   
 -4>                                                                                                 
                                                                                                     
 of its development. Both sides agreed to take steps to develop trade relations                      
 further and cooperate in the field of tourism. A, tripartite agreement on                           
 providing Maldivians with specialised tailor-made training courses for human                        
 resource development was signed on 20 September 1995. The agreement is between                      
 the two Governments and Educational Consultants India Ltd.                                          
                                                                                                     
 India's relations with Myanmar also showed improvement. The first Indian Trade                      
 Fair was held in Yangon in March 1995. It was inaugurated by Minister of State                      
 for Commerce Shri P Chidambaram and was successful in creating art interest in                      
 both countries for exploring trade and commerce. The Indo-Myanmar Border Trade                      
 Agreement was operationalised during the visit of Myanmar Minister of Commerce                      
 Tun Kyi to India in April 1995. The Myanmar Minister for Heavy Industries Kyaw                      
 Than visited India from 16 to 21 October 1995.                                                      
                                                                                                     
 In terms of the Memorandum of Understanding for increasing civilian border                          
 contacts arrived at in January 1994, the 2nd National Level Talks of Civilian                       
 Border Authorities were held in New Delhi on 16 and 17 August 1995. The Myanmar                     
 delegation led by the Deputy Minister for Home Affairs held discussions with the                    
 Home Secretary on priority issues of national interest such as control of arms                      
 smuggling, drugs smuggling and insurgency control along the common Indo-Myanmar                     
 border. India has received cooperation from the Myanmar authorities on                              
 controlling insurgency.                                                                             
                                                                                                     
 India and Myanmar signed a Memorandum of Understanding to restore civil aviation                    
 links on 11 July 1995 under which Indian Airlines and Myanmar Airways will '                        
 resume direct commercial traffic to each other's countries. '                                       
                                                                                                     
 The Jawaharlal Nehru Award for International Understanding for 1993 has been                        
 conferred upon Daw Aung San Suu Kyi in recognition of her "brave, non-violent and                   
 unyielding struggle 'Y for freedom, democracy and human dignity.' The award was                     
 received on her behalf by Daw Than E in a ceremony on 14 November 1995 in New                       
 Delhi. Government of India welcomed the release of Aung San Suu Kyi on 10 July                      
 1995 from house arrest. It has voiced the hope that this could open an era of                       
 peace, freedom and national reconciliation.                                                         
 -5>                                                                                                 
                                                                                                     
 A close understanding and cordiality has been built up with the new Government in                   
 Sri Lanka. Friendly ties between the two countries were cemented through the                        
 visits of the Sri Lankan President to India in March and May 1995.                                  
                                                                                                     
 The Government of India formally requested the Sri Lankan Government for the                        
 extradition of the LTTE Chief V Prabhakaran along with Pottu Amman and Akila in                     
 connection with the assassination case of Shri Rajiv Gandhi. The request was                        
 forwarded on 3 June 1995 and is under examination of the Sri Lankan authorities.                    
                                                                                                     
 India continues to favour a peaceful solution to the ethnic crisis in Sri Lanka                     
 within a framework of sovereignty and territorial integrity of Sri Lanka, without                   
 outside interference and through negotiations. Government of India has welcomed                     
 the proposals for devolution of power announced by President Kumaratunga in                         
 August 1995, and has stated that these devolution proposals constitute a bold                       
 attempt to resolve the ethnic issue and deserve the most serious consideration of                   
 all concerned.                                                                                      
                                                                                                     
 Problems pertaining to fishermen from both countries straying to each other's                       
 territorial waters and related issues continue to be on the agenda for                              
 consultations between India and Sri Lanka. This issue was discussed during the                      
 Sri Lankan Foreign Minister's visit and again during the visit of the Sri Lankan                    
 President to India. During the External Affairs Minister's meeting with President                   
 Kumaratunga in March 1995, there was agreement on the need for a mechanism which                    
 would enable both sides to consult with each other and avoid incidents of violent                   
 actions. The subject continues to be under discussion between India and Sri                         
 Lanka..                                                                                             
                                                                                                     
 Indo-Sri Lankan trade has grown to Rs 1252 crores during 1994-95. The Sri Lankan                    
 Government has sought tariff concessions and greater investment from India as                       
 part of efforts to reduce the trade imbalance. A credit line of US $ 30 million                     
 has been extended to Sri Lanka and an announcement granting reduction in customs                    
 duties on 18 items of export interest to Sri Lanka was made during the                              
 President's visit to India. The Indo-Sri Lanka Joint Business Council which met                     
 -6>                                                                                                 
                                                                                                     
 in Madras in June 1995, was inaugurated by Minister of State for Commerce Shri P                    
 Chidambaram. The JBC has examined possibilities of attracting greater Indian                        
 investments into Sri Lanka as well as expanding trade. India continues to extend                    
 technical training and assistance to Sri Lanka under ITEC.                                          
                                                                                                     
 Pakistan's unabated promotion and support to terrorism directed against India,                      
 its sustained efforts to internationalise the Kashmir issue and its intransigence                   
 on the resumption of bilateral dialogue with India, continued to prevent an                         
 improvement in bilateral relations.                                                                 
                                                                                                     
 Pakistan's attempts in interfering in India's internal affairs continued in 1995.                   
 Pakistan's sponsorship of trans-border terrorism in India included political,                       
 diplomatic and material assistance to terrorist groups in Jammu & Kashmir.                          
 Pakistani and third country mercenaries continued to be inducted into the Indian                    
 State of Jammu & Kashmir for carrying out terrorist and subversive activities.                      
 Pakistan's involvement in trans-border terrorism was highlighted by the                             
 Charar-e-Sharif incident (May 1995) in which Pakistan-sponsored terrorists and                      
 foreign mercenaries were involved. A Pakistani mercenary was later accorded a                       
 hero's welcome in Pakistan. The kidnapping of foreign tourists in Jammu & Kashmir                   
 and the subsequent killing of the Norwegian tourist highlighted the brutal                          
 methods being adopted by terrorists operating in Jammu & Kashmir. The hitherto                      
 unknown Al- Faran group responsible for the kidnapping is demanding the release                     
 of imprisoned members of Harkat-ul-Ansar, a terrorist organisation headquartered                    
 in Pakistan/Pakistan-occupied Kashmir.                                                              
                                                                                                     
 Government has strongly urged Pakistan to give up its path of promoting and                         
 supporting terrorism and conduct inter-state relations as a responsible member of                   
 the international community. Prime Minister Shri P V Narasimha Rao, in his                          
 address to the 11th Non-Aligned Summit on 18 November 1995 (Cartagena, Colombia),                   
 stated that the sufferings of the people of Jammu & Kashmir originate from                          
 outside support for terrorism. Prime Minister said that it was Government's                         
 determination to ensure that the lives of innocent Indian citizens in Kashmir                       
 shall not be allowed to be threatened by these activities.                                          
 -7>                                                                                                 
                                                                                                     
 Pakistan's efforts to internationalise the Kashmir issue continued in 1995. After                   
 receiving setbacks in its attempts to move resolutions on Jammu & Kashmir at the                    
 UNHRC and the UNGA in 1994, Pakistan did not make attempts to move resolutions on                   
 Jammu & Kashmir in 1995. Pakistani leaders and representatives, however, raised                     
 the issue directly and indirectly in various international fora, including the                      
 Special Commemorative Meeting of the UN General Assembly, 11th Non-Aligned                          
 Meeting and the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting (CHOGM).                                   
                                                                                                     
 Pakistan's moves to internationalise the Kashmir issue were resisted by the                         
 Government. It was reiterated from all relevant international platforms that the                    
 State of Jammu & Kashmir is an integral part of the Indian Union. The Prime                         
 Minister in his address to the 11th Non-Aligned Summit (18 November 1995) said                      
 that the State of Jammu & Kashmir is an integral part of India and that                             
 Pakistan's illegal occupation of a part of this State has to be vacated.                            
 Government also continued to apprise the international community of the situation                   
 in Jammu & Kashmir in its true perspective.                                                         
                                                                                                     
 Pakistan's efforts to acquire weapons and sophisticated technology, far in excess                   
 of its legitimate requirements, from various sources continued. Government has                      
 informed the concerned countries that supply of military hardware to Pakistan is                    
 not conducive to peace and security in the region and is likely to trigger an                       
 arms race in the sub-continent.                                                                     
                                                                                                     
 Consistent with its policy to resolve differences with Pakistan through direct                      
 bilateral negotiations in accordance with the Simla Agreement, Government                           
 throughout the year 1995, reiterated its willingness to resume bilateral                            
 discussions with Pakistan without any preconditions. Prime Minister during his                      
 discussions with Pakistan President Farooq Leghari during latter's visit to India                   
 for the SAARC Summit (2-4 May 1995) once again conveyed India's willingness to                      
 resume direct bilateral dialogue with Pakistan. Pakistan's response on the                          
 resumption of the bilateral dialogue has been conditional and negative.                             
 -8>                                                                                                 
                                                                                                     
 The situation in Afghanistan continues to be unstable, with the various factions                    
 still at loggerheads with each other, thus denying the peaceful resolution of the                   
 conflict. The situation has been further exacerbated by the interference of                         
 Pakistan directly and more so through its creation, the Taliban. The peace                          
 initiative launched by the United Nations under the Special Envoy of the UN                         
 Secretary General Ambassador Mehni.oud Mestiri suggesting transfer of power as an                   
 interim arrangement was not found acceptable by all factions. As a result,                          
 prospects for a peaceful political settlement in the near future still remain                       
 uncertain.                                                                                          
                                                                                                     
 India continued her traditional policy of friendship and cooperation with                           
 Afghanistan. She has extended her support for the UN process and called upon all                    
 the countries in the region to use their influence to provide stability and                         
 conciliation in Afghanistan.                                                                        
                                                                                                     
 India's cooperation with Afghanistan has consistently focussed on areas which are                   
 of direct benefit to the Afghan people. Unfortunately, in the unsettled                             
 conditions in Afghanistan, cooperation programmes have been disrupted. Government                   
 has, however, been able to resume some technical cooperation training facilities,                   
 scholarships, medical facilities, etc) during 1995. During the financial year of                    
 1995-96 India has supplied tea, medicines, cooking oil, milk and woollen garments                   
 worth about Rs 1.6 crore as bilateral humanitarian assistance.                                      
                                                                                                     
 India's Mission in Kabul, which was closed in January 1994, was reopened on 3 May                   
 1995. During the year under report, contacts with the Afghan Government                             
 continued. Minister of Civil Aviation, Abdul Rehman and Minister of Power &                         
 Irrigation Fariduddin Rafi, Minister of State of Foreign Affairs Najibullah                         
 Lafrai visited India.                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 India-China relations continued to improve, steadily and to expand into new areas                   
 of cooperation. The Government continued to work for the establishment of a                         
 long-term, stable and good neighbourly relationship with China and create a                         
 favourable climate in which the two countries can resolve outstanding issues,                       
 including the boundary question.                                                                    
 -9>                                                                                                 
 Political contact between India and China continued through high level exchanges                    
 and consultations at other levels. Prime Minister Shri Narasimha Rao met                            
 President Jiang Zemin in New York in October 1995 during the 50th anniversary                       
 celebrations of the United Nations. Chairman of the Standing Committee of the                       
 National People's Congress of China Qiao Shi visited India in November 1995.                        
 Other high level political exchanges included the visits of the Chinese Labour,                     
 Education and Coal Ministers to India and the visits of the Ministers of Home                       
 Affairs, Human Resource Development, Environment and Forests, Personnel and                         
 Textiles to China.                                                                                  
                                                                                                     
 The situation along the India-China border remained peaceful. The eighth meeting                    
 of the India-China Joint Working Group (JWG) was held in New Delhi in August                        
 1995. The JWG continued discussions aimed at arriving at a fair, reasonable and                     
 mutually acceptable solution to the boundary question and on the implementation                     
 of the Border Peace and Tranquillity Agreement. At this meeting, the two sides                      
 agreed on the pulling back of four Indian and Chinese posts, two on each side, in                   
 close proximity in the Sumdorong Chu Valley. This decision has been implemented                     
 and is without prejudice to the respective stands of India and China on the                         
 alignment of the Line of Actual Control (LAC) in the area. The fourth meeting of                    
 the India-China Expert Group was held in Beijing from 7 to 9 February 1996.                         
                                                                                                     
 The two countries placed special emphasis on expanding the economic and                             
 technological content of the relationship. The total trade volume in 1994-95 was                    
 Rs 3167.73 crores, representing an increase of 40.38% over the previous year.                       
 From April to September 1995, the total volume of bilateral trade was Rs 1711.38                    
 crores. A number of joint ventures between India and China were set up in the two                   
 countries. The year also saw continued efforts to expand cooperation to new areas                   
 based on the logic of mutual benefit. Coal, textiles and environment are some of                    
 the new areas in which the two countries have initiated cooperation. Given the                      
 size and strength of the Indian and the Chinese economies, the untapped potential                   
 for economic and technological cooperation remains vast.                                            
 -10>                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 The Eighth Summit of the Heads of State or Government of the South Asian                            
 Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC) countries was held in New Delhi from                   
 2 to 4 May 1995. The Summit was preceded by the Fifteenth Session of the SAARC                      
 Council of Ministers (New Delhi, 30 April-1 May 1995), Twentieth Session of the                     
 Standing Committee (New Delhi, 27-29 April 1995) and Fifteenth Session of the                       
 Programming Committee (New Delhi, 26 April 1995).                                                   
                                                                                                     
 Prime Minister of Bangladesh Begum Khaleda Zia, the King of Bhutan Jigme Singye                     
 Wangchuk, Prime Minister of India Shri P V Narasimha Rao, President of Maldives                     
 Maumoon Abdul Gayoom, the Prime Minister of Nepal Manmohan Adhikari, the                            
 President of Pakistan Farooq Ahmad Khan Leghari and the President of Sri Lanka                      
 Chandrika Bandaranaike Kumaratunga attended the Eighth SAARC Summit. The Delhi                      
 Declaration of the Heads of State or Government of SAARC countries was issued on                    
 4 May 1995.                                                                                         
                                                                                                     
 The main decisions taken by Heads of State or Governments in the Summit were:                       
                                                                                                     
 (i) Decision to celebrate the First Decade of SAARC both in the individual Member                   
 States and collectively and to convene a Commemorative Session of the Council of                    
 Ministers on the theme "SAARC-Vision for the Second Decade".                                        
                                                                                                     
 (ii) Reaffirmation of commitment to the eradication of poverty in South Asia,                       
 preferably by the year 2002 AD, through an Agenda of Action; endorsement of the                     
 recommendations of the Finance & Planning Ministers' Meeting held in Dhaka in                       
 July 1994 and establishment of a three-tier mechanism to act as a forum for                         
 exchange of information on poverty eradication programme in the region.                             
 Declaration of 1995 as the "SAARC Year of Poverty Eradication".                                     
                                                                                                     
 (iii) Early ratification of the Agreement on SAARC Preferential Trading                             
 Arrangement (SAPTA) to facilitate its operationalisation by the end of 1995 as                      
 mandated.                                                                                           
 -11>                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 (iv) Reaffirmation of commitment to work towards the global objective of "Shelter                   
 for All by the Year 2000".                                                                          
                                                                                                     
 (v) Noting of progress in the implementation of the Plan of Action to mark                          
 1991-2000 AD as the "SAARC Decade of the Girl Child" and urging the Council of                      
 Ministers to conduct a mid- decade review.                                                          
                                                                                                     
 (vi) The SAARC Youth Charter was approved and the Member States were urged to                       
 implement it.                                                                                       
                                                                                                     
 (vii) All Member States were requested to initiate concrete programmes to                           
 eradicate illiteracy in the region preferably by the year 2000 AD. It was decided                   
 to observe 1996 as the "SAARC Year of Literacy".                                                    
                                                                                                     
 (viii) Emphasis on the importance of speedy implementation of the measures and                      
 programmes suggested in the two environmental studies (1) Causes and Consequences                   
 of Natural Disasters and Protection and Preservation of Environment, and (2) The                    
 Regional Study on Greenhouse Effect and its Impact on the Region.                                   
                                                                                                     
 (ix) Member States were urged to expedite enabling legislation for effective                        
 implementation of the SAARC Regional Convention on Suppression of Terrorism and                     
 follow-up action on the SAARC Convention on Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic                         
 Substances.                                                                                         
                                                                                                     
 (x) Endorsement of the establishment of a three-window South Asian Development                      
 Fund (SADF) and mandate for finalisation of its terms of reference, operational                     
 modalities and composition of the Governing Board.                                                  
                                                                                                     
 (xi) Reaffirmation of earlier decision to develop collective positions in                           
 international fora, such as the Fourth World Conference on Women in Beijing in                      
 September 1995. Mandate for promoting institutional cooperation with other                          
 international and regional organisations and authorisation to Secretary-General                     
 to sign Memoranda of Understanding with UNDP, EU, UNDCP and ITU.                                    
                                                                                                     
 SAARC Council of Ministers requested to continue consultations with EU-Troika as                    
 well as ASEAN.                                                                                      
 -12>                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 (xii) Expression of satisfaction with the smooth implementation of SAARC Visa                       
 Exemption Scheme effective from March 1992; also decided to include in the Scheme                   
 Ministers of Foreign/External Affairs, Foreign Secretaries/Permanent Secretaries                    
 dealing with Foreign Affairs, SAARC Secretary-General, Directors of SAARC                           
 Secretariat, Presidents of the National Chambers of Commerce and Industry;                          
 spouses and dependent children below 18 years of age included in the SAARC Visa                     
 Exemption Scheme.                                                                                   
                                                                                                     
 All Member States have identified various activities/programmes to be undertaken                    
 for Commemoration of SAARC Decade. India has identified the following National                      
 and SAARC Programmes for the occasion:-                                                             
                                                                                                     
 (i) Issuance of Commemorative Postal Stamp, (ii) Special Radio/TV Programmes,                       
 (iii) TV/Radio Quiz Competition, (v) Painting Competition, (v) Essay Writing                        
 Competition, (vi) Tree Planting by SAARC Foreign Ministers (vii) Special SAARC                      
 Stall at the World Book Fair (New Delhi, 3-11 February, 1996), (viii) Special                       
 Publication on SAARC, (ix) SAARC Trade Fair (New Delhi, 9-14 January 1996), and                     
 (x) SAARC Handicrafts Exhibition.                                                                   
                                                                                                     
 The Second Special Session of the Standing Committee was held in New Delhi on 25                    
 and 26 August 1995. It reviewed the functioning of SAARC institutional mechanisms                   
 including the Secretariat and made recommendations for improvement of their                         
 functioning.                                                                                        
                                                                                                     
 The Sixteenth Session of the SAARC Council of Ministers was held in New Delhi on                    
 18 and 19 December 1995. It was preceded by the Twenty-first Session of the                         
 Standing Committee at the Foreign Secretaries level. The Ministerial Meeting                        
 commenced with a Commemorative Session to mark the first decade of SAARC. This                      
 was addressed by the Prime Minister of India who is Chairman of SAARC. The                          
 meeting took stock of the achievements of SAARC so far, reviewed the progress of                    
 activities of its various mechanisms and took decisions on the future course of                     
 action. It was agreed that Member States should strive for the realisation of the                   
 South                                                                                               
 -13>                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 Asian Free Trade Area (SAFTA) preferably by the year 2000 but before 2005 AD and                    
 Committee for Economic Cooperation (CEC) was directed to set up an Expert Group                     
 for making recommendations towards this end.                                                        
                                                                                                     
 A three-tier mechanism on poverty eradication was established by the Summit. The                    
 first-tier consisting of the Group of Secretaries in the Ministries/Departments                     
 concerned with Poverty Eradication and Social Development and the second tier                       
 consisting of Finance and Planning Secretaries met in New Delhi on 6 and 7                          
 September 1995 and 8 September 1995 respectively. The third-tier consisting of                      
 Finance and Planning Ministers of the SAARC countries met in New Delhi on 3 and 4                   
 January 1996. The leaders of delegations from Member States resolved to carry                       
 forward the process of poverty eradication by prioritising trade developmental                      
 efforts; by undertaking special poverty eradication programmes after taking all                     
 policy imperatives into account; improving institutional, environmental and                         
 resource availability for the attainment of the objectives relating to sustained                    
 growth in income and employment generation; and developing strategies for greater                   
 social mobilisation of community participation. They felt that the theme for the                    
 SAARC Year 1997 should focus on greater participation of target groups in the                       
 process of formulation and implementation of poverty eradication programmes                         
 through social mobilisation. They agreed to designate appropriate nodal agencies                    
 for establishment of networking arrangements for sharing information on poverty                     
 eradication. Member States would also forward to the SAARC Secretariat annual                       
 reports highlighting the progress made by them in the area of poverty                               
 eradication. They called for closer interface between Government agencies and                       
 NGOs.                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 A meeting of the Experts on the Establishment of the South Asian Development Fund                   
 (SADF) was held in SAARC Secretariat, Kathmandu on 26 and 27 September 1995. The                    
 Group of Experts finalised the terms of reference, operational modalities and                       
 composition of the Governing Board of SADF                                                          
                                                                                                     
 The Inter-Governmental Group (IGG) on Trade Liberalisation in its Sixth Meeting                     
 held in April 1995 successfully completed negotiations for exchanging trade                         
 concessions. The Sixth                                                                              
 -14>                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 Meeting of the Committee on Economic Cooperation (CEC) was held in New Delhi on                     
 16 and 17 November 1995. The SAPTA Agreement entered into force on 7 December                       
 1995. All Member States have nominated their representatives on the "Committee of                   
 Participants' to review progress in the implementation of this Agreement. They                      
 also decided that the 'Components' and 'Additional Measures' identified in                          
 Articles 4 and 6 respectively of the SAPTA Agreement should be implemented. It                      
 further recommended that, with the operationalisation of the SAPTA Agreement, it                    
 was desirable to significantly enlarge inter-SAARC Preferential trade under SAPTA                   
 and that the Inter-Governmental Group (IGG) on Trade Liberalisation should be                       
 reconvened. Other important matters discussed by the Sixth Meeting of CEC, inter                    
 alia, included Meeting of the Commerce Ministers, promotion of intraregional                        
 investment and establishment of joint ventures catering to national, regional and                   
 international markets and preparation of a tripartite study.                                        
                                                                                                     
 The first meeting of the SAARC Commerce Ministers was held in New Delhi on 8 and                    
 9 January 1996. A joint statement recommending further measures for deepening                       
 trade and economic cooperation was issued at the conclusion of the meeting.                         
 Highlights of the joint statement were:                                                             
                                                                                                     
 (i) Reiteration of commitment to the resolution of the SAPTA process and to the                     
 realisation of South Asian Free Trade Area (SAFTA) preferably by the year 2000                      
 but not later than 2005;                                                                            
                                                                                                     
 (ii) Agreement that the second round of trade negotiations to be conducted by the                   
 Inter-Governmental Group (IGG) in Sri Lanka in March 1996 will consider removal                     
 of non-tariff and trade control barriers and will negotiate for making tariff                       
 concessions wider, deeper and more meaningful by expanding tariff lines as well                     
 as by adopting sectoral and across-the-board approaches in addition to the                          
 product-by-product approach. The second round should be concluded no later than                     
 31 July 1996. The First Meeting of the Inter-Governmental Group (IGG) for                           
 carrying out Second Round of Trade Negotiations took place in Colombo on 14 and                     
 15 March 1996;                                                                                      
 -15>                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 (iii) Businessmen should be issued multi-entry visas on application and decisions                   
 on visa applications of businessmen recommended by the apex trade bodies should                     
 be taken as expeditiously as possible, preferably within seventy-two hours of the                   
 application being received;                                                                         
                                                                                                     
 (iv) SAARC Arbitration Board for settlement of trade disputes required to be set                    
 up;                                                                                                 
                                                                                                     
 (v) Customs and related procedures urgently needed to be simplified, harmonised                     
 and streamlined. In order to facilitate this, the Customs Administrations of the                    
 SAARC Countries should meet every six months;                                                       
                                                                                                     
 (vi) Exchange of business information for promotion of trade and investments                        
 should be facilitated by developing networking among national business                              
 information networks;                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 (vii) Member Governments would exchange voluntarily information about their                         
 overseas bulk procurements on public account;                                                       
                                                                                                     
 (viii) SAARC Trade Fair would be held regularly at various venues in all SAARC                      
 countries; and                                                                                      
                                                                                                     
 (ix) SAARC Commerce Ministers would henceforth meet on an annual basis.                             
                                                                                                     
 A "SAARC Ministerial Meeting on Women: Towards the Fourth World Conference on                       
 Women in Beijing" was held in Dhaka on 29 and 30 July 1995. The Meeting adopted                     
 the "Dhaka Resolution on Women". It was forwarded to the Conference Secretariat                     
 of the Fourth World Conference on Women, New York for circulation as a Conference                   
 Document.                                                                                           
                                                                                                     
 Under the Integrated Programme of Action covering a number of areas and                             
 activities, Technical Committees on Communication, Agriculture, Environment,                        
 Prevention of Drug Trafficking and Drug Abuse, Rural Development, Tourism and                       
 Transport, met daring the year and submitted their Reports. Many                                    
 Workshops/Seminars as identified by the Technical Committees were also organised.                   
 -16>                                                                                                
 1995                                                                                                
 South-East Asia and the Pacific                                                                     
                                                                               Top                   
 As part of India's 'Look East' policy, efforts to strengthen he already existing                    
 good relations between India and he countries of Asia Pacific and South-East Asia                   
 continued during the year. Prime Minister paid an official visit to Malaysia in                     
 August 1995. Foreign Minister of Australia visited India during the year.                           
 Minister of External Affairs Shri Pranab Mukherjee visited Thailand, Cambodia and                   
 Laos from 16 to 21 January 1996. Air links were established between India and                       
 Brunei Darussalam when Royal Brunei Airlines started operations to Calcutta. An                     
 Air Services Agreement was also signed by the respective Ministers of the two                       
 countries. At the academic level, an India-Australia Seminar was jointly                            
 organised by the Institute of Defence Studies and Analyses (IDSA) of India and                      
 the Indian Ocean Centre for Peace Studies of Australia at Perth. India-Malaysia                     
 Colloquium was organised by IDSA in December 1995.                                                  
                                                                                                     
 According to the latest statistics, countries in this region figure prominently                     
 in terms of direct investment in India with Thailand being placed third, Malaysia                   
 sixth and Singapore tenth. Meetings of Joint Business Councils (JBCs) were held                     
 with several countries including the first ever JBC with the Philippines.                           
 Investment seminars were held in different countries to acquaint the business                       
 community with the opportunity thrown open by India's economic liberalisation                       
 programme.                                                                                          
 -17>                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 The ASEAN Ministerial Meeting (AMM) held in Bandar Seri Begawan, Brunei                             
 Darussalam in July-August 1995 expressed satisfaction with the continuing                           
 Sectoral Dialogue with India. It was decided at the 5th ASEAN Summit held in                        
 Bangkok (14-15 December 1995) that India would become a Full Dialogue Partner of                    
 ASEAN.                                                                                              
                                                                                                     
 In keeping with a desire for expanding bilateral relations with Brunei, the two                     
 countries agreed, in February 1995 during the visit of Permanent Secretary of                       
 Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Brunei Darussalam Dato Lim Jock Seng, to establish                   
 a Joint Committee to exchange views on bilateral, regional and international                        
 issues of mutual concern. The committee at the level of senior officials will                       
 meet periodically in each other's capital.                                                          
                                                                                                     
 Another landmark was achieved when on 4 November 1995 the inaugural flight of                       
 Royal Brunei Airlines started operations linking Bandar Seri Begawan, the capital                   
 of Brunei and Calcutta. On this occasion, Minister of Communications Dato Seri                      
 Laila Jasa Awang Haji Zakaria visited India. In Calcutta, the Minister called on                    
 the Chief Minister of West Bengal Shri Jyoti Basu. He also visited Delhi during                     
 which an Air Services Agreement between the two countries was signed on 6                           
 November.                                                                                           
                                                                                                     
 Both India and Philippines have expressed their determination to take concrete                      
 steps for economic cooperation. The senior-most official in the Trade Ministry,                     
 Under Secretary for Trade Cesar B Bautista visited India with the delegation of                     
 businessmen in April 1995. The response from Indian side was very encouraging.                      
 The first meeting of the India-Philippine Joint Business Council was held on 3                      
 and 4, October in Manila. The JBC identified certain fields for cooperation                         
 between the two countries such as processed foods, textiles and textile machinery                   
 and components, sugar, drugs and pharmaceuticals, tourism, acquaculture, auto                       
 parts, power generation, etc. It was also decided to set up sub- committees on                      
 specific sectors of business and products. The JBC concluded with a resolve to                      
 increase, within three years, trade between the two countries from Rs 490 crores                    
 to Rs 1750 crores. Senator Leticia Shahani, President, Pro-tempore of the                           
 Philippines Senate visited India in January 1996.                                                   
 -18>                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 A Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) on enhanced cooperation in the field of                         
 renewable energy between India and the Philippines was signed on 26 February by                     
 the Ambassador and the Philippines Energy Secretary (Minister). The MoU envisages                   
 cooperation between the two countries through exchange of technical expertise,                      
 joint research, information networking in non- conventional energy technologies,                    
 etc.                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 During the year, various visits at different levels reinforced the close                            
 bilateral relations between India and Singapore. A delegation led by Finance                        
 Minister Dr Manmohan Singh visited Singapore (21-23 September) in connection with                   
 the meeting of Indo-ASEAN Sectoral Dialogue and to participate in the World                         
 Economic Forum. During the visit , the Finance Minister called on Prime Minister                    
 Goh Chok Tong, Senior Minister Lee Kuan Yew and Finance Minister Richard Hu                         
                                                                                                     
 Chief Minister of Karnataka Shri H D Deve Gowda paid a four-day (23-26 July )                       
 visit to Singapore. Besides meeting his host, Minister for Trade and Industry Yew                   
 Chewo Tong, the Chief Minister had a meeting with Foreign Minister Professor S                      
 Jayakumar, and also called on Prime Minister Goh Chok Tong on 24 July. Chief                        
 Minister of Bihar Shri Laloo Prasad Yadav, accompanied by a large business                          
 delegation, also paid a three day (26-28 July) visit to Singapore to attract                        
 investments in Bihar.                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 As a follow up of the science and technology Memorandum of Understanding signed                     
 in January 1995, a 25-member delegation of scientists led by the Director                           
 General, Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR) Dr R A Mashelkar,                     
 visited Singapore from 13 to 15 September to coincide with an international                         
 exhibition called Technology Showcase'95 in Singapore. On this occasion, a                          
 special seminar on technological opportunities in India was also organised.                         
                                                                                                     
 Senior Minister of Singapore Lee Kuan Yew visited India from 3 to 5 January 1996                    
 at the invitation of Prime Minister. Senior Minister Lee is acknowledged to be                      
 the architect of the economic success of Singapore and is regarded as a Senior                      
 Asian statesman. During the visit, he called on the Prime Minister and held                         
 extensive discussions on political and economic developments                                        
 -19>                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 in the region and elsewhere. Apart from this, Senior Minister had meetings with                     
 Ministers of External Affairs and Finance and Minister of State for Commerce                        
 among others. In two addresses, one at India International Centre and the other                     
 to the captains of Indian industry, Senior Minister Lee spoke about Singapore's                     
 experience of economic development and his views on India's economic reform                         
 programme.                                                                                          
                                                                                                     
 India and Singapore held a week long (3 to 13 March) Anti Submarine Warfare                         
 Exercise off Visakhapatnam. The Chief of Naval Staff of Singapore, Kwek Siew Jin,                   
 participated in the Valedictory of the exercises.                                                   
                                                                                                     
 Permanent Secretary in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Singapore Kishore                         
 Mahbubani, visited India on 5 February for Foreign Office Consultations. The two                    
 countries had concluded a MoU for regular Foreign Office Consultations during the                   
 visit of Prime Minister to Singapore in September 1994. During the visit, the                       
 Permanent Secretary had extensive talks with senior officials in Ministry of                        
 External Affairs and paid courtesy calls on Minister of External Affairs and                        
 Minister of State for External Affairs Shri R L Bhatia.                                             
                                                                                                     
 Minister of State for Defence Shri M Mallikarjun represented India in the Asian                     
 Aerospace '96 which was inaugurated on 6 February. During the visit, the Minister                   
 of State called on Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Defence of Singapore Dr                   
 Tony Tan.                                                                                           
                                                                                                     
 India's bilateral trade with Singapore continued its upswing with overall value                     
 reaching Rs 5599.42 crores during the year 1994-95 as against Rs 4781.99 crores                     
 in 1993-64. Investment proposals from Singapore worth Rs 253 crores were approved                   
 till the end of August 1995 making it the tenth largest investor.                                   
                                                                                                     
 With Thailand, the upswing in India's bilateral relations was maintained through                    
 bilateral visits which included those of the Minister of Civil Aviation and                         
 Tourism Shri Gulam Nabi Azad and the then Chief Minister of Uttar Pradesh Km                        
 Mayawati who visited in October 1995. The Minister and the Chief Minister of                        
 Uttar Pradesh together with the Education                                                           
 -20>                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 Minister of Thailand ceremonially planted a sapling of the Bodhi tree from                          
 Bodhgaya at the Buddhamandal on 7 October.                                                          
                                                                                                     
 Following Prime Minister's discussions with the King of Thailand during the                         
 former's visit to Thailand in 1993, it was decided to hold a Festival of India as                   
 part of the celebrations marking the 50th Anniversary of the King's accession to                    
 the throne. It was inaugurated on 13 December 1995 in Bangkok by Princess                           
 Mahachakri. From India's side, the then Minister for Human Resource Development                     
 Shri Madhavrao Scindia attended.                                                                    
                                                                                                     
 Minister of External Affairs Shri Pranab Mukherjee, accompanied by Secretary                        
 (East), visited Bangkok, Thailand from 16 to 18 January 1996. The Minister                          
 co-chaired the India-Thailand Joint Commission meeting along with his Thai                          
 counterpart Kasem S Kasemsri. He also had detailed interactions with the Thai                       
 leadership including Prime Minister Banharn Silpaarcha, Deputy Prime Minister &                     
 Defence Minister Chavalit Yongehaiyudh as well as the Thai Transport &                              
 Communications Minister. He also called on Princess Mahachakri Sirindhorn.                          
                                                                                                     
 Chief of Naval Staff, Admiral V S Shekhawat, paid a transit visit to Bangkok on                     
 23 March. Despite the fact that it was a transit halt, the Commander-in-Chief of                    
 the Royal Thai Navy, Admiral Prachet Siridej hosted a dinner for CNS and his                        
 delegation.                                                                                         
                                                                                                     
 India's bilateral trade with Thailand continued to expand with overall value                        
 reaching Rs 1808.67 crores during the year 1994-95 as against Rs 1297.56 crores                     
 in 1993-94. Investment proposals from Thailand worth Rs 698 crores were approved                    
 till the end of August 1995 making it the third largest investor.                                   
                                                                                                     
 Indonesia celebrated the 50th Anniversary of its independence on 17 August 1995.                    
 On this occasion, the Indonesian Government decided to confer the highest honour                    
 "Bintang Republik Indonesia Adipurna" on late Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru and                           
 "Bintang Jasa Utama" on the former Chief Minister of Orissa Shri Biju Patnaik,                      
 former Representative of India to Indonesia Shri Mohamad Yunus, and former Consul                   
 General                                                                                             
 -21>                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 of India to Indonesia Shri P R S Mani. Prof Rasheedudin Khan also participated in                   
 the seminar on "Islam and the Global Community" held at Jakarta on 15 and 16                        
 November 1995.                                                                                      
                                                                                                     
 India continued to enjoy close and friendly relations with Indonesia during the                     
 year. The Minister of External Affairs visited Indonesia in April 1995 to attend                    
 Non-Aligned Move ment (NAM) Ministerial Meeting. The Prime Minister had a meeting                   
 with President Soeharto during the NAM Summit in Cartagena in Colombia on 17                        
 October 1995. India's trade with Indonesia has been steadily increasing. The                        
 volume of trade in 1994-95 at Rs 1856.56 crores far exceeded the previous year's                    
 figure of Rs 1112.17 crores.                                                                        
 India's bilateral relations with Malaysia continued to be cordial. The high point                   
 was the visit of Prime Minister Shri Narasimha Rao to Malaysia in August 1995. A                    
 24-member business delegation was in Kuala Lumpur to coincide with Prime                            
 Minister's visit. The Prime Minister had candid and useful exchange of views with                   
 the Malaysian leadership including King Tuanku Ja'afar, Prime Minister Mahathir                     
 Mohamad, Deputy Prime Minister and Finance Minister Anwar Ibrahim, and Senior                       
 Economic Adviser Tun Daim Zainuddin. Prime Minister also addressed the Institute                    
 of Diplomacy and Foreign Relations on "Post cold war scene-a blueprint for the                      
 future". Five Agreements/Memoranda of Understanding were signed in the presence                     
 of the two Prime Ministers on Bilateral Investment Protection, Cooperation in the                   
 Highway Sector, Doordarshan and Binariang on satellite communication, Antrix and                    
 Maxstar on Malaysia's Space Programme and Confederation of Indian Industry and                      
 Malaysian Industrial Development Authority (MIDA) on industrial cooperation and                     
 investment. A number of corporate agreements were also signed during the course                     
 of the visit.                                                                                       
                                                                                                     
 India's bilateral trade with Malaysia continued its upswing with overall value                      
 reaching Rs 2677.91 crores during the year 1994-95 as against Rs 1711.20 crores                     
 in 1993-94. Investment proposals from Malaysia worth Rs 353 crores were approved                    
 till the end of August 1995 making it the sixth largest investor.                                   
 -22>                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 Commerce Secretary visited Malaysia during the month. Apart from meeting                            
 Malaysia's business community, he delivered the keynote address in a seminar                        
 jointly organised by FICCI and its Malaysian counterpart.                                           
                                                                                                     
 India continued to enjoy very friendly, cordial and close relations with the                        
 three Indo-Chinese countries, namely, Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos during the year                    
 under report.                                                                                       
                                                                                                     
 During the year, Vietnam was admitted to ASEAN as its 7th member at the ASEAN                       
 Ministerial Meeting held in July 1995 in Brunei.                                                    
                                                                                                     
 Pursuant to Prime Minister's visit to Vietnam in September 1994, a Joint Working                    
 Group was set up with Vietnam under the aegis of the India-Vietnam Joint                            
 Commission to meet frequently to discuss and enhance bilateral cooperation. In                      
 1993-94, imports from Vietnam were Rs 137.49 crores and exports Rs 87.87 crores.                    
 In 1994-95, imports were Rs 138.79 crores and exports to Vietnam were Rs 183.46                     
 crores. Main imports are rice, cashew nuts, wood and wood products and major                        
 exports to Vietnam are drugs and pharmaceuticals, rubber products, machinery,                       
 iron and steel bars, electronic goods, etc. A Memorandum of Understanding in the                    
 field of Mining was signed between India and Vietnam on 18 April 1995. In August                    
 1995, India set up a multi-purpose industrial training centre in Hanoi at a cost                    
 of Rs 1.5 crores.                                                                                   
                                                                                                     
 The second meeting of the India-Vietnam Joint Working Group was held at Hanoi on                    
 18 and 19 December 1995. The Indian delegation was led by Secretary (East) in the                   
 Ministry of External Affairs. It was agreed to identify concrete measures to                        
 promote trade, investment, banking and commercial relations between the two                         
 countries. In this connection, it was agreed that a new trade Protocol would be                     
 signed at an early date. The 7th India-Vietnam Joint Commission was held in New                     
 Delhi on 23 and 24 February 1996.                                                                   
                                                                                                     
 Regarding Laos, India donated an amount of Rs 0.105 crores for flood relief in                      
 September- 1995. Two high-level delegations from Laos visited India in November                     
 199.5, one was Lao Agriculture Minister Sisavath Keobounphonh who visited India                     
 -23>                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 from 8 to 17 November. The Minister called on his Indian counterpart Shri Balram                    
 Jakhar, and also the Minister of Rural Employment and Rural Areas Dr Jagannath                      
 Mishra. The Minister and his delegation also visited Indian Agricultural Research                   
 Institute, Pusa, New Delhi; the Agricultural Equipment Productions Factory,                         
 Forest Research Institute and Indian Council of Forestry Research and Education                     
 at Dehradun; Horticulture and Agricultural projects and Kirloskar Pumps at                          
 Bangalore; and sugarcane, coffee plantation, rice farms, etc at Coimbatore.                         
                                                                                                     
 The other visit from Laos was a Defence delegation headed by Head of Technical                      
 Battalion of Fighter Planes Khathongsa Sengkhasmyong (16-23 November). The                          
 delegation visited defence facilities at Vizag, Koraput, Pune, Nasik, Bharat                        
 Electronics Limited, Ghaziabad and Defence pavilion at India International Trade                    
 Fair, New Delhi and held fruitful discussions with officials in the Ministry of                     
 Defence in Delhi.                                                                                   
                                                                                                     
 There is no significant trade with Laos. India's imports in 1994- 95 were only Rs                   
 1.86 crores and exports Rs 0.39 crores.                                                             
                                                                                                     
 India continued to enjoy friendly and cordial relations with Cambodia. India                        
 donated 2,000 tons of rice at a cost of US $4,80,000 as food aid. Cambodia's                        
 Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Transport and Works Ing Keith visited India                   
 in March 1995 to attend an international conference. During his visit, he called                    
 on India's Ministers of Power, External Affairs, Railways, and Minister of State                    
 for Surface Transport. The First Prime Minister of Cambodia, Prince Norodom                         
 Ranariddh paid an official visit to India from 29 to 31 January 1996. During his                    
 visit, he addressed a CII gathering iq Calcutta and also visited Bodh Gaya. In                      
 New Delhi, he had meetings with the President, the Prime Minister as well as the                    
 Deputy Chairman of the Rajya Sabha. Prime Minister hosted a dinner for the                          
 visiting dignitary. A Cultural Agreement was signed during this visit.                              
                                                                                                     
 Bilateral trade with Cambodia is very low. In 1994-95, imports were Rs 4.81                         
 crores and exports Rs 2.28 crores only.                                                             
 -24>                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 Minister of External Affairs paid an official visit to Cambodia and Laos from 18                    
 to 21 January 1996. The Foreign Ministers of both these countries had visited                       
 India in 1994, and the visit of Minister of External Affairs further strengthened                   
 the existing friendly and close relations with these countries. With Cambodia, a                    
 Memorandum of Understanding for Economic and Technical Cooperation was signed                       
 during the visit, and with Laos, a Cultural Exchange Programme (CEP) was signed.                    
 Minister of External Affairs announced that 1000 Metric Tonnes of rice would be                     
 given to Laos as humanitarian assistance. The Minister also planted a sapling of                    
 the, Bodhi Tree from Bodh Gaya at the That Luang Temple in Vientiane.                               
                                                                                                     
 Relations between India and Australia continued to expand and grow. Deputy                          
 Secretary in the Department of Foreign Affairs Kim Jones was in India on 24                         
 January 1995 to exchange views with Ministry of External Affairs on Comprehensive                   
 Test Ban Treaty negotiations. Australian Foreign Minister Gareth Evans visited                      
 New Delhi on 19 and 20 May 1995 to seek India's participation in International                      
 Forum on Indian Ocean Rim in Perth from 11 to 13 June 1995. He called on the                        
 President, the Vice President and the Prime Minister. Minister of State for                         
 External Affairs Shri Salman Khurshid visited Australia from 18 to 22 June 1995                     
 to inaugurate Australia-India Business Forum in Melbourne and Sydney. He held                       
 detailed discussions with Foreign Minister Gareth Evans and Minister for Overseas                   
 Trade Bob McMullan. Special Envoy of the Prime Minister for the Commonwealth of                     
 Australia Stephen Loosley visited India from 25 to 27 September 1995 to discuss                     
 Australia's candidature for the UN Security Council. India- Australia Senior                        
 Officials' Talks and Disarmament Talks at Secretary level were held in New Delhi                    
 on 2 and 3 November 1995. Secretary (East) led the Indian side while the                            
 Australian side was led by Deputy Permanent Secretary of Ministry of Foreign                        
 Affairs and Trade of Australia Geoff Forrester. Indepth discussions were held on                    
 important international and bilateral issues and disarmament issues. As part of                     
 the on-going exchanges between the defence establishments, Commander, Joint                         
 Forces Australia and Past Commander, United Nations Transitional                                    
 Authority-Cambodia (UNTAC) John Sanderson visited India from 3 to 6 April 1995.                     
 -25>                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 India-Australia Council was formally inaugurated by the Minister of External                        
 Affairs at New Delhi on 12 December 1995.                                                           
                                                                                                     
 Deputy Premier of Western Australia Hendy Cowan visited India in January 1996 and                   
 opened Trade Office of Western Australia in Bombay. India-Australia Joint                           
 Business Council was held in Sydney in February 1996. During the meeting,                           
 interest was shown on both sides in forging joint ventures particularly in food                     
 processing, mining, education, power, automotive components, construction and                       
 telecommunications.                                                                                 
                                                                                                     
 On the economic front, the two-way trade between India and Australia is growing                     
 both ways. Bilateral trade increased to Rs 4383.43 crores in 1994-95 as against                     
 Rs 3185.84 crores in 1993- 94, registering an increase of about 30 per cent from                    
 the previous year.                                                                                  
                                                                                                     
 A delegation led by Minister for Resources, Government of Australia David Bedall                    
 visited India from 19 to 29 May 1995 to encourage trade and investment between                      
 India and Australia in the coal and power sectors. Minister of State for Steel                      
 Shri Santosh Mohan Dev visited Australia in July 1995 at the invitation of David                    
 Bedall and held discussions on the possibility of cooperation in steel, coal,                       
 power and mining sectors.                                                                           
                                                                                                     
 India-New Zealand relations continued to be friendly and cordial. Over the last                     
 year, bilateral trade between India and New Zealand has been moving at a                            
 satisfactory pace.                                                                                  
                                                                                                     
 Minister of External Affairs Shri Pranab Mukherjee visited New Zealand from 7 to                    
 13 November 1995 to attend-the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting (CHOGM)                     
 at Auckland. The visit was also utilised for bilateral discussions with New                         
 Zealand's Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign Minister Don McKinnon.                                  
                                                                                                     
 India-New Zealand Joint Business Council and Joint Trade Committee Meetings were                    
 held in Auckland from 12 and 13 February 1996. Specific issues relating to market                   
 access to each other's country were discussed. Associate Minister of                                
 -26>                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 Education Dr Roges McClay, visited India from 10 to 18 March 1996.                                  
                                                                                                     
 The Government of India has been closely following the developments in Fiji and                     
 is watching with keen interest the process of constitutional reforms. The                           
 Government of India has consistently taken the stand that the 1990 racially                         
 biased Constitution should be reviewed to arrive at a constitutional arrangement                    
 that is democratic, just, non-discriminatory and acceptable to all the                              
 communities living in Fiji.                                                                         
                                                                                                     
 India established diplomatic relations with Palau in April 1995.                                    
                                                                                                     
 Ambassador of India to Philippines has been concurrently accredited to Palau.                       
 India has also decided to open a Resident Mission in Port Moresby, Papua New                        
 Guinea. Shri V S Verma has been appointed India's High Commissioner to Papua New                    
 Guinea.                                                                                             
                                                                                                     
 Efforts were made to strengthen and maintain India's cordial relations with other                   
 Pacific Island countries during the year.                                                           
 -27>                                                                                                
 1995 3. East Asia                                                                                   
                                                                               Top                   
 India's relations with countries of East Asia region continued to expand during                     
 the year. Exchange of Ministerial level visits contributed to the continuation of                   
 dialogue at the political level. Official level exchanges were maintained. Growth                   
 of trade and increase in number of collaborations and joint ventures gave content                   
 to the economic relationship.                                                                       
                                                                                                     
 Minister of External Affairs Shri Pranab Mukherjee visited Japan from 6 to 10                       
 September 1995. He met Japanese Prime Minister, Foreign Minister and Minister for                   
 International Trade and Industry. He also paid a call on the Emperor of Japan.                      
 During the visit, it was agreed that there should be regular exchange of high                       
 level visits. The two sides agreed to discuss policy towards Asia as part of                        
 their regular foreign office dialogue. The Minister's visit was followed by                         
 India-Japan Foreign Secretary level talks in New Delhi on 30 and 31 October 1995.                   
 Japan's Foreign Minister was scheduled to visit India for talks in January 1996;                    
 however, the visit was postponed because of the sudden resignation of the Foreign                   
 Minister on 5 January 1996.                                                                         
                                                                                                     
 The Vice President of India visited Japan from 3 to 10 December 1995 to attend an                   
 International Conference on "The Future of Hope" organised by Elie Wiesel                           
 Foundation. During his stay in Tokyo, the Vice President also paid a call on the                    
 Emperor of Japan.                                                                                   
 -28>                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 Japan continued to be India's largest bilateral donor of development assistance                     
 and one of the largest investors. In 1995- 96, Japan's commitment was Rs 4895                       
 crores (Yen 131.4 billion).                                                                         
                                                                                                     
 The Japanese Minister for International Trade and Industry R Hashimoto visited                      
 India in January 1995. The annual India-Japan Trade Talks were held in New Delhi                    
 on 26 and 27 October 1995. The second policy dialogue at the Secretary/Vice                         
 Minister level between India's Ministry of External Affairs and the Japanese                        
 Ministry of International Trade and Industry (MITI) took place in New Delhi on 25                   
 November 1995.                                                                                      
                                                                                                     
 Exchanges of economic and commercial delegations at the non- official level                         
 continued. Notable among the Japanese delegations to India were: a 40-member                        
 delegation from Japan's Apex Economic Organisation Federation (Keidanren)                           
 consisting of top industrialists that visited India in February 1995; a 45-member                   
 MITI Study Group in November 1995; and a 35-member Small and Medium Enterprises                     
 delegation led by a former MITI Vice-Minister also in November 1995. The                            
 India-Japan Study Committee (IJSC) met in Tokyo in April 1995 and in New Delhi in                   
 October 1995.                                                                                       
                                                                                                     
 India's two-way trade with Japan in 1994 was Rs 16450 crores. Exports to Japan                      
 were Rs 9275 crores and imports from Japan were Rs 7175 crores. Foreign                             
 investment approvals from 1991 to 31 October 1995 amounted to Rs 1507 crores.                       
                                                                                                     
 The 9th meeting of the India-Japan Mixed Cultural Commission met in Delhi on 12                     
 January 1996, after a gap of 4 years. It reviewed progress on cultural                              
 cooperatiop and decided on promoting further cultural cooperation between the two                   
 countries.                                                                                          
                                                                                                     
 India's relations with the Republic of Korea (ROK) continued to be friendly and                     
 cordial. President of the Republic of Korea made a state visit to India from 24                     
 to 27 February 1996. His entourage comprised Minister of Foreign Affairs and                        
 Minister for Trade and Industry and a large number of senior officials and 38 top                   
 businessmen. The President had meetings with President, Vice President, Prime                       
 Minister and Minister of                                                                            
 -29>                                                                                                
 External Affairs. The ROK President and the Indian Prime Minister led the two                       
 sides' delegations, for the important official talks. The ROK President also                        
 addressed a joint meeting of top Indian ana Korean businessmen, organised by                        
 FICCI/ASSOCHAM/CII. Three significant documents were signed at the time of the                      
 visit: An Agreement setting up a Joint Commission at Foreign Ministers level; a                     
 Bilateral Investment Promotion Agreement and A Cultural Exchange Programme for                      
 1996-1998. Notes were also exchanged for eventual establishment of a South Korean                   
 Consulate General in Bombay and a possible reciprocal facility for India.                           
 Ministerial level visits to ROK during the year included those of Minister of                       
 State for Textiles Shri Kamal Nath (28 September-2 October 1995), Minister of                       
 Civil Aviation and Tourism Shri Ghulam Nabi Azad (4-6 October 1995), Minister of                    
 Power Shri N K P Salve (14-16 October 1995) and Minister of State for Commerce                      
 Shri P Chidambaram to co-chair the Joint Trade Committee meeting (9-11 November                     
 1995).                                                                                              
                                                                                                     
 An Indian Parliamentary delegation led by Deputy Chairman of the Rajya Sabha Smt                    
 Najma Heptullah visited ROK from 10 to 12 September 1995. The delegation had                        
 meetings with the Deputy Speaker of National Assembly, members of the Korea-India                   
 Society and other prominent public figures.                                                         
                                                                                                     
 As per latest figures available, India's exports to ROK in 1994 were Rs 2048                        
 crores and India's imports from ROK were Rs 4060 crores. The India-ROK Joint                        
 Trade Committee. has set a target of reaching Rs 17500 crores (US $ 5 billion)                      
 bilateral trade and Rs 7000 crores (US $ 2 billion) for ROK investment in India                     
 by 2000 AD. ROK's direct investment in India from 1991 to 30 September 1995 was                     
 Rs 331.51 crores, Investment from ROK has been mainly in the fields of nylon                        
 yarn, tyres, automobiles, television tubes, electronics, garments, stone cutting                    
 and glass.                                                                                          
                                                                                                     
 Exchanges of students, scholars and cultural delegations between India and ROK                      
 have been taking place under the Cultural Exchange Programme. Notable among the                     
 Indian cultural delegations to ROK was a 13-member folk performance troupe from                     
 Himachal Pradesh that visited ROK from 16 to 26 September 1995. The troupe was                      
 sponsored by the ICCR                                                                               
 -30>                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 and hosted by the Korea Foundation and the Kwangju Biennale Organising Committee.                   
                                                                                                     
 The, friendly ties that have traditionally existed between India and the                            
 Democratic People's Republic of Korea (DPRK) were maintained during the year.                       
 Bilateral Foreign Office Consultations at Secretary-level were held in New Delhi                    
 on 27 September 1995.                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 The then Governor of Sikkim Shri P Shiv Shankar, visited DPRK in his capacity as                    
 Chairman of India-DPRK Friendship Association in August 1995 on a goodwill                          
 mission.                                                                                            
                                                                                                     
 India and DPRK continued to cooperate in the economic, commercial and technical                     
 fields. As per latest figures available, India's exports to DPRK during 1994-95                     
 amounted to Rs 158.30 crores, while India's imports from DPRK amounted to Rs                        
 168.32 crores.                                                                                      
                                                                                                     
 India sent blankets by way of relief assistance to DPRK in the wake of the worst                    
 ever floods that hit DPRK in 1995.                                                                  
                                                                                                     
 Exchange between the two countries under the Cultural Exchange Programme                            
 continued during the year. A major event was the visit of a 16-member Indian                        
 dance troupe of the Natya Ballet Centre, sponsored by the ICCR, to Pyongyang to                     
 participate in the April Spring Friendship Art Festival.                                            
                                                                                                     
 India and Mongolia share a tradition of warm and friendly relations which was                       
 reinforced during the year. The two countries commemorated the 40th anniversary                     
 of the establishment of diplomatic relations in December 1995. The Treaty of                        
 Friendly Relations and Cooperation, signed during the visit of President P                          
 Ochirbat to India in 1994, was ratified.                                                            
                                                                                                     
 Speaker, Lok Sabha, Shri Shivraj Patil visited Mongolia from 14 to 18 July 1995.                    
 During the visit, a protocol on cooperation between the two Parliaments was                         
 signed. President of ICCR Shri Vasant Sathe visited Mongolia from 20 to 22 June                     
 1995. Mongolia's Deputy Minister for Agriculture and Cooperation G Surenjargal                      
 visited India from 24 to 26 September 1995. During his visit, a work plan for                       
 1996 and 1997 for cooperation in the field of agriculture was signed.                               
 -31>                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 Steps were taken to enhance trade and economic links between India and Mongolia,                    
 which have been limited by distance. A delegation from India-Mongolia Chambers of                   
 Commerce visited Mongolia in June 1995.                                                             
                                                                                                     
 Chairman of the State Great Hural of Mongolia N Bagabandi, led a Parliamentary                      
 delegation to India from 9 to 14 January 1996.                                                      
 -32>                                                                                                
 1995                                                                                                
 Central Asia                                                                                        
                                                                               Top                   
 The year under review witnessed considerable activisation of India's relations                      
 with Turkey and Central Asian countries both in terms of exchanges of delegations                   
 as well as in the development of institutional linkages.                                            
                                                                                                     
 The President of Tajikistan, Rakhmonov visited India from 11 to 16 December 1995.                   
 During the visit, he had discussions with President, Vice President, Prime                          
 Minister and other leaders on matters of common concern. The Prime Minister of                      
 India and the President of TaJikistan signed a declaration on further development                   
 of bilateral relations. Agreements were signed on setting up of the Indo-Tajik                      
 Joint Commission, cooperation in environment, health, telecom, science &                            
 technology, and on bilateral investment protection. During discussions, the                         
 commonality of approach to regional issues was stressed; in the joint                               
 declaration, the Tajik leader supported India's bilateral approach to disputes                      
 between countries and her case for permanent membership of the Security Council.                    
                                                                                                     
 The Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign Minister of Turkmenistan Boris O                              
 Shikhmuradov visited New Delhi from 18 to 21 April 1995 at the invitation of                        
 Minister of External Affairs. During his stay, apart from bilateral meetings with                   
 Indian leaders, he also signed, along with the Foreign Minister of Iran, a                          
 trilateral Memorandum of Understanding on trade                                                     
 -33>                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 and transit to facilitate the use of Iranian and Turkmen territory for trade with                   
 other Central Asian countries.                                                                      
                                                                                                     
 The First Deputy Prime Minister of Kazakhstan and Kazakh Co- Chairman of the                        
 Indo-Kazakh Joint Commission V L Mette led a high-powered delegation, accompanied                   
 by prominent Kazakh businessmen, for the second session of the Indo-Kazakh Joint                    
 Commission. As a result of this meeting, several important initiatives in areas                     
 like hydro-carbons, mining, etc were taken. A second credit agreement to extend                     
 an additional credit of US $ 10 million was also signed during the 'visit of the                    
 Kazakh dignitary.                                                                                   
                                                                                                     
 The Deputy Foreign Minister of the Kyrghyz Republic T Chinetov visited India at                     
 the invitation of Secretary (East) in the Ministry of External Affairs. During                      
 his stay, foreign office level consultations took place with his Indian                             
 counterpart; he also called on other high officials in the Government.                              
                                                                                                     
 Minister of State for External Affairs Shri Salman Khurshid visited Tashkent in                     
 response to an invitation from the Government of Uzbekistan for a conference of                     
 Foreign Ministers on security and cooperation in Central Asia on 15 and 16                          
 September 1995. The conference adopted a declaration on Central Asian security                      
 and cooperation. During his stay, Minister of State for External Affairs also                       
 called on President of Uzbekistan I A Karimov and met other officials and                           
 participating Ministers.                                                                            
                                                                                                     
 Minister of External Affairs Shri Pranab Mukherjee visited Uzbekistan from 19 to                    
 21 March 1996 at the invitation of the leadership of the country. This visit is                     
 part of regular consultations between the leaderships of the two countries on                       
 matters of mutual interest. The third session of the Joint Commission was also                      
 held during the visit. During his stay in Uzbekistan, Minister of External                          
 Affairs called on the President of Uzbekistan; he also handed over a message from                   
 Prime Minister. The two sides discussed bilateral and regional issues and spoke                     
 in support of promoting peace in the region, based on preserving the territorial                    
 integrity and sovereignty of all countries, and without any outside interference                    
 in the internal affairs of countries in the region. Bilateral relations                             
 -34>                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 are progressing satisfactorily and regular consultations at different levels are                    
 to continue. As Co-Chairman of the Indo- Uzbek Joint Commission, Shri Mukherjee                     
 led the Indian delegations at the third session of the Joint Commission;                            
 alongwith the Uzbek Co-Chairman, U T Sultanov Prime Minister of Uzbekistan, a                       
 review of the state of Indo-Uzbek economic cooperation as well as cooperation in                    
 the field of science and technology was undertaken. Minister of External Affairs                    
 also had an exchange of views on the region and on other international issues                       
 with the Minister for, Foreign Affairs of Uzbekistan. A prominent street in                         
 Tashkent has been named after Mahatma Gandhi and Shri Mukherjee attended the                        
 naming ceremony.                                                                                    
                                                                                                     
 Prime Minister visited Turkmenistan from 19 to 21 September 1995 to return the                      
 visit of President Niyazov in April 1992. The Prime Minister had useful talks                       
 with the Turkmen leader on the situation in the region and beyond as well as                        
 bilateral relations. He addressed the Turkmen Parliament and was conferred                          
 honorary membership of the Academy of Sciences of Turkmenistan. The joint                           
 communique issued at the end of the visit supports the Simla Agreement and                          
 condemns terrorism and hostile propaganda. President Niyazov also supported                         
 India's case for a permanent membership of the UN Security Council. The Turkmen                     
 leader spoke of his country's commitment to secularism and welcomed India's                         
 positive assessment of Turkmen proposal for the status of positive neutrality for                   
 Turkmenistan. The agreements/protocols signed during the visit included those on                    
 foreign office consultations, on extension of CEP for 1995-96, on setting up of                     
 the Indo-Turkmen Joint Commission (Minister of State for External Affairs Shri                      
 Salman Khurshid is Indian Co-Chairman), on extension of second credit line of US                    
 $ 10 million and bilateral investment protection.                                                   
                                                                                                     
 Prime Minister visited the Kyrghyz Republic from 21 to 23 September 1995. During                    
 the visit agreements on cooperation in tourism and in science & technology as                       
 well as protocol for extension of CEP upto 1996 were signed. Prime Minister had                     
 separate meetings with President Akaev and Prime Minister Jumagulov. Prime                          
 Minister addressed Kyrghyz Parliament-                                                              
 -35>                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 arians. A road in Bishkek was named after Mahatma Gandhi. President Akaev agreed                    
 that Jammu & Kashmir was a bilateral issue and supported India's case for                           
 permanent membership of UN Security Council.                                                        
 -36>                                                                                                
 1995                                                                                                
 The Gulf, West Asia & North Africa                                                                  
                                                                               Top                   
 The Gulf area accounts for about 15% of India's foreign trade, meets nearly                         
 two-thirds of the country's oil imports and is the home for more than two million                   
 Nonresident Indians (NRIs), whose remittances play a significant role in the                        
 country's balance of payments position. For the Gulf region, India is a source of                   
 skilled and disciplined manpower, a market for its products, a place for                            
 educational and medical services and an option for science and technology and                       
 training establishments. The mutuality of interest continues to ensure close and                    
 cordial relations between India and the countries in the Gulf area. India's                         
 policy towards the Gulf rests on a desire for peace, stability and security in                      
 the region and for safeguarding independence, sovereignty and territorial                           
 integrity of the countries in the area. Gulf countries have conveyed an                             
 understanding and appreciation of India's principled position on various regional                   
 issues. Geographical proximity and economic complementarity have thrown open                        
 fresh opportunities for greater interaction between India and the Gulf countries                    
 in the wake of continued liberalisation of India's economy. There have been                         
 substantial commitments of investment, by way of joint ventures in sectors such                     
 as oil refining and downstream units.                                                               
 -37>                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 In the recent times, India's bilateral relations with all the Gulf countries have                   
 been marked by growing mutually beneficial cooperation and cordiality. The year                     
 1995-96 saw further development in this direction.                                                  
                                                                                                     
 In the wake of launching of economic reforms programme in India, Bahrain has                        
 shown renewed interest in strengthening bilateral economic and commercial ties                      
 with India. Bahrain's emergence as a major off-shore financial centre represents                    
 significant opportunities for channelising investment funds from the Gulf into                      
 India. With this objective in view an Indo-Bahraini joint venture merchant bank,                    
 Trans Arab Investment Bank (TAIB) Capital Corporation Limited was set up in                         
 November. in Bangalore. Governor of Bahrain Monetary Agency Abdullah Said visited                   
 India from 14 to 20 November to participate in the inaugural ceremony of the                        
 joint venture bank. Said called on Finance Minister Dr Manmohan Singh and met                       
 Governor of Reserve Bank of India Shri C Rangarajan. The newly established                          
 Bahrain Promotions and Marketing Board also decided to establish an office in                       
 India, to promote bilateral trade and investment. To take advantage of Bahrain's                    
 liberal economic policies, a number of Indian companies have established their                      
 presence in Bahrain particularly in the financial, metallurgical and hydrocarbon                    
 sectors. Bahrain's Development and Industry Minister Yousuf Al Shirawi visited                      
 India from 18 to 21 May at the invitation of Minister of Tourism and Civil                          
 Aviation Shri Ghulam Nabi Azad. During Shirawi's visit, an agreement was signed                     
 to increase the air passenger capacity between India and Bahrain from 8000 to                       
 9000 per week.                                                                                      
                                                                                                     
 The Minister of Commerce of Bahrain, Ali Salel Al Saleh, accompanied by a senior                    
 level official and business delegation, visited India in December at the                            
 invitation of the Minister of State for Commerce Shri P Chidambaram. During his                     
 visit the Bahraini Minister of Commerce called on the President, the Minister of                    
 External Affairs and held discussions with the Minister of State for Commerce                       
 with a view to enhancing bilateral trade and investment.                                            
                                                                                                     
 Relations with Kuwait which were in an upswing were further strengthened during                     
 the year with four bilateral agreements, namely, a protocol on Scientific and                       
 Technical                                                                                           
 -38>                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 Cooperation between CSIR and Kuwait Institute for Scientific Research (June), a                     
 Memorandum of Understanding on Civil aviation between the Ministry of Civil                         
 Aviation and the Kuwaiti Ministry of Transport (July), a Memorandum of                              
 Understanding between Indian Oil Corporation (IOC) and Kuwait Petroleum                             
 Corporation for setting up of an oil refinery in Orissa (September) and a                           
 protocol on cooperation between Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and                       
 Industry (FICCI) and Kuwait Chamber of Commerce and Industry (October). The                         
 Memorandum of Understanding on civil aviation created additional seating capacity                   
 in the busy India- Kuwait sector.                                                                   
                                                                                                     
 There were also exchanges of visits. From the Kuwaiti side, a delegation from the                   
 Parliamentary Friendship Association of the Kuwait National Assembly, Sheikh                        
 Salem Al Sabah of the Kuwait National Committee for POW and Missing in Action                       
 (September) and a delegation from the Ministry of Transport and Communication                       
 (July) visited India. From the Indian side, the visits included those of a                          
 9-member Parliamentary delegation led by Speaker, Lok Sabha Shri Shivraj Patil                      
 (November), Minister of State for Petroleum & Natural Gas Captain Satish Sharma                     
 (September) and a delegation from Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce &                       
 Industry (October) and Spices Board (November). In the area of defence, two naval                   
 ships visited Kuwait (November).                                                                    
                                                                                                     
 The Special Kuwait Cell had forwarded approximately 1,46,000 Indian claims by 1                     
 January 1995, the final date stipulated by the United Nations Compensation                          
 Commission (UNCC) for receipt of claims in individual categories (A,B,C &D).                        
 Claims received after 1 January 1995 were forwarded to the UNCC as late claims                      
 which may be accepted or rejected by the UNCC at their discretion. Approximately                    
 60,500 Indian claims in category A & B have so far been approved by the UNCC for                    
 payment. However, the UNCC has released US $ 642,500 for 167 'B' claims (for                        
 serious injury or death) only. This is currently under disbursement to successful                   
 claimants. The decision to adopt a staggered mode of payment, the non-receipt of                    
 payments for the rest of the approved claims, are attributed to the lack of funds                   
 in the Compensation Fund established for the purpose.                                               
 -39>                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 With Iraq, India's endeavour to strengthen the relations within the ambit of the                    
 UN sanctions continued and involved a few significant developments. Iraqi                           
 Minister of Transport and Communications Murtadha Ahmed Murtadha visited India in                   
 July as Special Envoy o f President Saddam Hussein and delivered messages from                      
 the Iraqi President to President and Prime Minister. He met Minister of External                    
 Affairs Shri Pranab Mukherjee and in his capacity as Minister, he held talks with                   
 the then Minister of Railways Shri Jaffer Sharief, Minister of Communications                       
 Shri Sukh Ram and Minister of Surface Transport Shri Jagdish Tytler on bilateral                    
 relations. From the Indian side, a railway delegation led by Chairman, Railway                      
 Board and an experts' team from Oil & Natural Gas Commission (ONGC) visited Iraq.                   
 There were also visits by a number of Indian journalists to Iraq. As humanitarian                   
 relief, India shipped medicines and tea to Iraq. India also offered scholarships                    
 to Iraqi students for study and training in Indian institutions. India also                         
 participated in the Babylon International Festival. As regards the deferred                         
 payments due from Iraq, there has been no progress due to the UN sanctions. On                      
 the political side, the Iraqi Minister of Foreign Affairs met Minister of                           
 External Affairs in New York during the 50th Session of the UN General Assembly.                    
 In response to a letter from Iraqi Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of External                      
 Affairs reiterated India's support for Iraq's independence, sovereignty and                         
 territorial integrity. In a message to President Saddam Hussein, President Shri                     
 Shanker Dayal Sharma congratulated him on his assumption of office for a 7-year                     
 term, consequent on the referendum of 15 October. India continued the policy                        
 favouring a phased withdrawal of the UN sanctions in tandem with the Iraqi                          
 compliance of the UN Security Council requirements.                                                 
                                                                                                     
 India's traditionally close relations with Oman have been further strengthened                      
 with the addition of an agenda for substantial expansion and diversification of                     
 bilateral economic cooperation. High level contacts between India and Oman                          
 continued in order to follow up on the various important decisions taken during                     
 Prime Minister's visit to Oman in June 1993. The first meeting of the Indo-Omani                    
 Joint Commission, established in pursuance of the Economic, Trade and Technical                     
 -40>                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 Cooperation Agreement signed during Prime Minister's visit, was held in New Delhi                   
 from 18 to 20 April. The Omani side was led by Minister of Commerce and Industry                    
 Maqbool bin Ali Sultan and the Indian side by Minister of State for Commerce Shri                   
 P Chidambaram. The Joint Commission reviewed the whole gamut of Indo-Omani                          
 economic and commercial relations and agreed for the speedier implementation of                     
 projects in the hydrocarbon and fertilizer sectors. Sultan also held meetings                       
 with Finance Minister Dr Manmohan Singh, Minister of State for Petroleum and                        
 Natural Gas Captain Satish Sharma, Minister of Civil Aviation and Tourism Shri                      
 Ghulam Nabi Azad and Minister of External Affairs Shri Pranab Mukherjee. A                          
 delegation from Omani Chamber of Commerce and Industry which accompanied Sultan,                    
 signed a Memorandum of Understanding with the Federation of Indian Chambers of                      
 Commerce and Industry for establishment of a Joint Business Committee to promote                    
 bilateral trade and investment. Omani Minister of Communications Salim bin                          
 Abdullah Al Ghazali visited India from 30 May to 1 June at the invitation of                        
 Minister of Civil Aviation and Tourism Shri Ghulam Nabi Azad. During his visit an                   
 Air Services Agreement between India and Oman was signed which allowed the large                    
 Keralite community based in Oman direct access from Muscat to Cochin.                               
                                                                                                     
 Chief Justice of India Shri A M Ahmadi visited Oman on 11 and 12 March. A                           
 14-member delegation from Confederation of Indian Industry (Southern Region)                        
 visited Oman from 17 to 20 March and signed a Memorandum of Understanding with                      
 the Oman Chamber of Commerce and Industry for promoting cooperation in trade and                    
 investment. The then Chief of Staff of the Indian Air Force Air Chief Marshal S k                   
 Kaul visited Oman from 16 to 19 November. During his visit the Omani side                           
 reiterated their keen interest in expanding bilateral cooperation with India in                     
 the defence sector.                                                                                 
                                                                                                     
 Heir-Apparent and Defence Minister of Qatar Sheikh Hamad bin Khalifa Al-Thani                       
 deposed his father Sheikh Khalifa bin Hamad Al- Thani and declared himself the                      
 new Emir on 27 June. He also assumed the office of Prime Minister while retaining                   
 the posts of Defence Minister and Commander-in-                                                     
 -41>                                                                                                
 Chief of the Armed Forces. The President of India and the Prime Minister of India                   
 sent messages of felicitations to the new Emir. India and Qatar continue to enjoy                   
 good relations. However, a significant potential exists for developing more                         
 substantive relations in the economic area particularly in the hydrocarbon                          
 sector. Foreign Minister of Qatar Sheikh Hemad bin Jassim bin Jabor Al-Thani                        
 visited India on 23 and 24 April. He called on the President of India, the Prime                    
 Minister, the Finance Minister and the Minister of External Affairs. The                            
 discussions centered on coordination of views on regional and international                         
 issues of mutual interest as well as the need for expanding and strengthening                       
 bilateral economic relations. The Ministry took note of his suggestion for                          
 concluding a security arrangement between India and Qatar keeping in view the                       
 interest of both the countries in maintaining stability in the Gulf region. The                     
 Minister of Energy and Industry Abdullah bin Hamad Al-Attiyah visited India from                    
 23 to 27 March at the invitation of Minister of State for Petroleum and Natural                     
 Gas Captain Satish Sharma. During the visit it was agreed that high level                           
 contacts will be maintained in order to identify areas of mutually beneficial                       
 cooperation particularly in the hydrocarbons and related areas. Foreign Secretary                   
 Shri Salman Haidar paid an official visit to Doha on 15 and 16 July and held                        
 discussions on bilateral and regional issues of mutual interest. Minister of                        
 State for External Affairs Shri R L Bhatia sent an invitation to Qatari Minister                    
 of State for Foreign Affairs Ahmed Abdulla Al Mehmoud to visit India.                               
                                                                                                     
 As regards Saudi Arabia, a 12-member team from Saudi Armed Forces Command and                       
 Staff College visited in June and toured defence facilities. From the Indian                        
 side, Foreign Secretary Shri Salman Haidar visited Saudi Arabia (July) and held                     
 discussions with Deputy Foreign Minister for Political Affairs Sheikh Abdul                         
 Rahman Al Mansouri. Health Minister Shri A R Antulay visited the Kingdom in                         
 November and held discussions with his Saudi counterpart. Minister of External                      
 Affairs, in a message to Saudi Foreign Minister Prince Saud Al Faisal, conveyed                     
 shock at the Riyadh car bomb blast and condemned the terrorist act. President and                   
 Prime Minister in separate messages conveyed their concern at the hospitalisation                   
 of                                                                                                  
 -42>                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 King Fahd and their best wishes for His Majesty's early recovery. On the trade                      
 side, delegations from FICCI and Spices Board visited the Kingdom and India                         
 participated in the Life Style Exhibition in Jeddah. Under an Agreement between                     
 CSIR and Saudi Arabian Standards Organisation (SASO), Saudi nominees have been                      
 accepted for training in standards.                                                                 
                                                                                                     
 India's multi-faceted relations with United Arab Emirates (UAE) continued to                        
 grow. UAE with the bilateral trade exceeding Rs 8700 crores has emerged as one of                   
 India's biggest trading partners. During 1995, India became the third largest                       
 exporter to UAE after Japan and China and ahead of US, the UK and South Korea.                      
 India's exports to UAE during the first nine months of 1995 exceeded Rs 3000                        
 crores. During the year, there was increased interaction in the defence sector                      
 which could develop into a potentially significant area for mutually beneficial                     
 cooperation. Fourteen Indian companies from public and private sector                               
 participated in the International Defence Exhibition (IDEX'95) held in Dubai in                     
 March. A high level official Indian delegation led by Minister of State for                         
 Defence Shri Mallikarjun also visited the exhibition. Shri Mallikarjun again                        
 visited Dubai from 14 to 16 November to attend the Dubai Aerospace Exhibition'95.                   
 He met Crown Prince of Dubai Sheikh Mohamed bin Rashid Al Maktoum and Defence                       
 Minister of UAE. The then Chief of Air Staff Air Chief Marshal S K Kaul visited                     
 UAE from 20 to 22 October. He called on the Crown Prince of Dubai and Defence                       
 Minister Sheikh Mohammed and Chief of Staff of UAE Sheikh Mohammed bin Zayed Al                     
 Nahyan. Two Indian naval ships and a submarine paid a goodwill visit to UAE from                    
 18 to 30 November. During the visit, joint naval exercises were held with the UAE                   
 Navy. A high level 7-member defence delegation from UAE visited India from 28                       
 August to 2 September to prepare the ground work for the visit of Chief of Staff,                   
 UAE Armed Forces. The then Minister of Agriculture Shri Balram Jakhar visited UAE                   
 on 13 and 14 July and. held discussions with his UAE counterpart for boosting                       
 relations in the field of agriculture. Secretary (East) visited UAE on 18 and 19                    
 July in the context of periodic official level bilateral consultations.                             
                                                                                                     
 India's relations with Yemen continued to be cordial. The bilateral economic                        
 relations, which had been restricted                                                                
 -43>                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 because of the civil war situation in Yemen in the previous years, saw positive                     
 movement with the first meeting of Indo-Yemen Joint Committee held on 10 and 11                     
 July in Sana'a. The Indian delegation was led by Secretary (East). A number of                      
 areas were identified for bilateral cooperation including trade and investment,                     
 small scale industry, tele-communications, hydrocarbons, civil aviation,                            
 construction, science and technology, health, education, agriculture and                            
 provision of training to Yemeni experts and deputation of Indian experts to Yemen                   
 under the Indian Technical and Economic Cooperation Programme. The delegation                       
 called on the Prime Minister, the Deputy Prime Minister, the Minister of Planning                   
 and Development and the Minister of Defence. An Agreement on Economic and                           
 Technical Cooperation between India and Yemen was signed on 11 July. A 7-member                     
 senior level defence delegation from Yemen visited India from 3 to 10 November                      
 with a view to identifying areas of bilateral cooperation including possibility                     
 of sourcing hardware from India.                                                                    
                                                                                                     
 The efforts initiated in recent years to develop a multi-faceted relationship of                    
 mutual advantage with Iran were pursued further. There was a significant step-up                    
 in high level exchanges of visits which contributed to expansion and                                
 diversification of bilateral cooperation in several areas. Regular contacts                         
 between both the foreign offices facilitated this process.                                          
                                                                                                     
 The President of Iran Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani paid a State visit to India from                     
 17 to 19 April 1995. During his stay in India, President Rafsanjani called on                       
 President, held wide ranging discussions with Prime Minister, addressed a joint                     
 meeting of Parliament and met Minister of External Affairs. Delegation level                        
 talks covered bilateral economic, technical and cultural cooperation. The two                       
 sides agreed to expand bilateral cooperation into new areas. The two sides also                     
 agreed to expand people-to- people contacts and to sustain the high-level                           
 exchanges which would further strengthen the positive trends of bilateral                           
 relations in the recent period. During the visit, Memoranda of Understanding were                   
 signed on Cooperation in Tourism; Telecommunications & Postal Services;                             
 Environment; and Prevention of Drug Trafficking. A Cultural Exchange Programme                      
 was also concluded.                                                                                 
 -44>                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 Iranian Minister of Foreign Affairs Dr Ali Akbar Velayati visited India on 13                       
 January 1996 for bilateral discussion on various important political and economic                   
 issues. During his stay in India, he called on Prime Minister and had meetings                      
 with Minister of External Affairs Shri Pranab Mukherjee and Minister of State for                   
 External Affairs Shri R L Bhatia. During the visit, important bilateral, regional                   
 and international political issues besides various bilateral economic projects                      
 like Qeshm Island Fertilizer Project, Indo-Iran Gas Pipe Line, etc were                             
 discussed. Dr Velayati attended the centenary. celebration of Confederation of                      
 Indian Industry (CII) in Bombay on 12 January 1996.                                                 
                                                                                                     
 Other important visits from the Iranian side were: W Deputy Minister of Commerce                    
 Dr N Shirazi led a delegation in November 1995 to strengthen commercial relations                   
 between the two countries. During the visit an important commercial deal was                        
 concluded for supply of wheat to Iran, the first ever such deal between the two                     
 countries; (ii) During the same time Deputy Foreign Minister Abbas Maleki visited                   
 India to attend a seminar organised by Indira Gandhi Memorial Trust; (iii)                          
 Agriculture Minister Dr Issa Kalantari visited India during the first week of                       
 February 1996 to strengthen cooperation in the fields of agriculture, animal                        
 husbandry, etc.                                                                                     
                                                                                                     
 Minister of Food Shri Ajit Singh visited Iran in the beginning of October 1995.                     
 Foreign Secretary Shri Salman Haidar also led a team of officials from different                    
 Ministries to Tehran from 28 to 30 August 1995 for a mid-term review of 8th Joint                   
 Commission decisions. Significant points that emerged from the visit included                       
 setting up of joint projects in the fields of fertilizer, gas pipeline, railway                     
 signalling, etc. Except the pipeline project, the two other projects are moving                     
 in a positive direction.                                                                            
                                                                                                     
 Increased inter-governmental interaction also resulted in closer contact between                    
 the corporate sectors of the two countries. The Delhi branch of the Indo-Iran                       
 Chamber of Commerce and Industry was set up in November 1995 which is expected to                   
 further the economic and commercial relations between the two countries.                            
 -45>                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 During the year under review India's relations with the West Asia and North                         
 Africa (WANA) countries continued to grow multifariously, in a strengthening                        
 spirit of mutual understanding and cooperation. Their distinguishing feature was                    
 Government of India's successful projection of its principled stand on Kashmir to                   
 these countries, which was reflected in Pakistan's failure to internationalise                      
 the issue in the UN fora with their help. Countries of this region, by and large,                   
 dissuaded Pakistan from introducing resolutions, at the UN Human Rights                             
 Sub-Commission meeting in Geneva as well as at the 50th session of the UN General                   
 Assembly.                                                                                           
 The signing of the agreements between Israel and the PLO, which provided for                        
 extension of self-rule for Palestinians in the West Bank, was warmly welcomed by                    
 India. India's deep interest in the progress of the Middle East Peace Process                       
 (MEPP) was displayed by her participation in the Middle East/North Africa                           
 Economic Summits held in Amman in October 1995, as well as in the participation                     
 in all Working Groups of the MEPP. India continued to extend moral and material                     
 help to the Palestinian people. India made an additional pledge of $1 million by                    
 way of Indian cooperation for projects in the Palestinian territory. It was also                    
 decided to open a Representative Office in the Palestinian Authority (PA)                           
 administered areas of Gaza and West Bank.                                                           
                                                                                                     
 The Prime Minister's visit to Egypt on 15 and 16 October 1995 was in keeping with                   
 India's long-standing ties with the Arab world. The visit also helped to                            
 consolidate Indo-Egyptian relations. India expressed her anguish at the tragic                      
 assassination of Israel's Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin; Finance Minister Dr                         
 Manmohan Singh represented India at the funeral.                                                    
                                                                                                     
 India's commercial and economic relations with WANA countries showed a renewed                      
 vibrancy. Bilateral trade with various partners was marked by healthy growth rate                   
 and diversification. India's economic reforms and liberalisation policies, and                      
 their positive manifestations, have been viewed in the WANA region with                             
 considerable interest and admiration, which may be expected to provide further                      
 momentum to economic cooperation.                                                                   
 -46>                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 India noted with interest the successful conduct of Algeria's Presidential                          
 elections, and sent congratulatory messages to Lamine Zeroual on. his election to                   
 the high post. Shri R L Bhatia, Minister of State for External Affairs, visited                     
 Algeria from 19 to 23 January 1996. Both countries maintained their tradition of                    
 mutual understanding, and coordination of approach in various international fora.                   
                                                                                                     
 Relations with traditionally friendly Egypt were considerably strengthened when                     
 Prime Minister Shri P V Narasimha Rao visited Egypt on 15 and 16 October 1995.                      
 The visit, and his discussions with the Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak on                         
 matters of bilateral interest and mutual concern, imparted greater dynamism to                      
 the bilateral relations. Three agreements signed during the visit included an                       
 Agreement on Scientific and Technological Cooperation, Agreement on Cooperation                     
 in the Sphere of Information, and Cooperation Agreement to combat all forms of                      
 Criminal Acts particularly Terrorist, Transnational and Organised Crimes. A                         
 6-member Parliamentary delegation led by Speaker of Lok Sabha, Shri Shivraj                         
 Patil, visited Egypt from 14 to 17 April 1995. A protocol of cooperation between                    
 All India Radio and Doordarshan and ERTV was signed in November 1995. Steel                         
 Authority of India (SAIL) signed a Memorandum of Understanding with the Egyptian                    
 company MICOR for bilateral and third country ventures. A business delegation                       
 from Alexandria visited India from 26 February to 6 March 1996. The Union                           
 Minister for Agriculture, Rural Areas and Employment Dr Jagan Nath Mishra led an                    
 official delegation to attend the Afro-Asian Rural Reconstruction Organisation                      
 (AARRO) Conference in Cairo from 15 to 18 March 1996.                                               
                                                                                                     
 Bilateral relations between India and Israel were added further facets and                          
 strength, particularly in trade and economic cooperation. In April 1995 Minister                    
 of State for External Affairs Shri R L Bhatia visited Israel and held discussions                   
 on a wide range of issues. Visits by Chief Ministers of several States were                         
 undertaken to explore possibilities of improving cooperation in agriculture, dry                    
 land farming, horticulture, and conservation of water resources etc. Israel's                       
 Minister of Education, Professor Amnon Rubenstein visited                                           
 -47>                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 India from 17 to 24 January 1996, followed by Finance Minister, Avraham B Shohat,                   
 ' from 25 to 31 January 1996. The first meeting of the India-Israel Joint                           
 Committee on Trade and Economic Cooperation was held in Israel from 28 to 31                        
 January 1996. Minister of State for Commerce Shri P Chidambaram led the Indian                      
 delegation.                                                                                         
                                                                                                     
 Traditional friendly relations with Jordan were further bolstered with regular                      
 contacts and exchange of visits at various levels. An official Indian delegation                    
 led by Minister of State for External Affairs, Shri R L Bhatia, visited Amman to                    
 participate in the Middle East North Africa (MENA) Economic Summit from 29 to 31                    
 October 1995. The 7th session of the India-Jordan Trade and Economic Joint                          
 Committee was held in Amman on 13 and 14 March 1996. This was part of the                           
 sustained efforts to promote bilateral trade and economic cooperation, including                    
 diversification.                                                                                    
                                                                                                     
 Relations with Lebanon have been friendly, which are now marked by a growing                        
 awareness in both countries of mutual benefits of economic cooperation. Efforts                     
 of the Lebanon Government for economic reconstruction of the country are opening                    
 up opportunities to widen economic contacts between the two sides. Foreign                          
 Secretary, Shri Salman Haider, visited Beirut on 23 and 24 September 1995 to hold                   
 bilateral consultations prior to the 50th session of the UN General Assembly.                       
                                                                                                     
 The 7th meeting of the India-Libya Joint Commission was held in Tripoli from 13                     
 to 15 April 1995. Minister of State for Industry Shrimati Krishna Sahi led the                      
 Indian delegation. One main issue at the Joint Commission meeting was to seek                       
 more expeditious payments from the Libyan side of various outstanding dues of                       
 Indian construction and other companies for works done in that country. Both                        
 sides reached understanding on a time frame for these payments. A Special Envoy                     
 of Libya's Foreign Minister Dr Salem Ben A'mir visited India from 11 to 15                          
 September 1995.                                                                                     
                                                                                                     
 The growing relations with Morocco received a further fillip when Morocco's Trade                   
 Minister Driss Jettou led an official-cum- business delegation on a visit to                        
 India in the last week of June 1995. Jettou along with India's Minister of State                    
 for                                                                                                 
 -48>                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 Commerce led the two sides at the second meeting of the India- Morocco Joint                        
 Commission, held after a gap of several years. Both sides evinced a strong                          
 interest in expansion of their bilateral trade and economic cooperation, and                        
 identified several new areas towards this objective. It was decided to hold an                      
 exclusive Indian trade expo in Casablanca in 1996, which is being organised as                      
 scheduled. President of the Moroccan House of Representatives, Dr Jalal Essaid,                     
 led a delegation to India from 7 to 12 August 1995. In September the two                            
 countries reached an understanding for cooperation in the area of solar energy.                     
                                                                                                     
 India's relations with Palestine, represented through the Palestinian Liberation                    
 Organisation (PLO), continued to be characterised by regular consultations,                         
 mutual understanding, friendship and support, and growing economic cooperation.                     
 India has been an unwavering supporter of the legitimate aspirations of the                         
 Palestinian people. India has also extended her full support to the Middle 'East                    
 Peace Process. India welcomed the Agreements, signed between Israel and the PLO                     
 on 30 September 1995 in Washington DC, expanding self-rule to areas of the West                     
 Bank, and reiterated her view that for durable peace in the region it was                           
 necessary to resolve all outstanding issues to the satisfaction of all parties                      
 concerned. India continued and expanded her moral, material and technical                           
 assistance to the Palestinian refugees. In part fulfilment of India's pledge made                   
 at a Donor's Conference in October 1993, 83 tons of tea was despatched to Gaza                      
 and Jericho. In early 1996 India announced a pledge of another $ one million for                    
 reconstruction projects in the Palestinian Authority administered areas of Gaza                     
 and the West Bank, India decided to open a Representative Office to the                             
 Palestinian Authority, to be located in Gaza initially. The Office is to start                      
 functioning very shortly. Minister of State for External Affairs Shri R L Bhatia                    
 visited Gaza in April 1995 and met Chairman Yasser Arafat. On the occasion of the                   
 International Day of Solidarity with Palestinian People, Prime Minister sent a                      
 message to the UN reiterating India's commitment of support for the Palestinian                     
 people and their legitimate aspirations.                                                            
 -49>                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 Bilateral relations with the Sudan continued to improve further. Foreign Minister                   
 of the Sudan, Ali Osman Mohammad Taha, paid an official visit to India from 30                      
 May to 3 June 1995. The visit provided an occasion for a useful exchange of views                   
 on matters of bilateral interest and mutual concern. The two sides also agreed to                   
 upgrade the Joint Committee for bilateral cooperation to a Joint Commission to                      
 meet at ministerial level.                                                                          
                                                                                                     
 Similar progress was made in strengthening bilateral relations with Syria. There                    
 was an increased emphasis to translate the potential for greater economic                           
 cooperation into concrete measures. Minister of External Affairs Shri Pranab                        
 Mukherjee paid an official visit to Syria from 24 to 26 November 1995. In his                       
 meeting in Damascus with Syrian President Hafez Al Assad, he held discussions on                    
 matters of mutual interest. An Indian Parliamentary delegation visited Syria from                   
 25 to 29 December 1995. In a new development the two countries signed a barter                      
 deal worth US $7 million providing for export of dumpers by the BEML from India                     
 against import of rock phosphate from Syria. A delegation from Central                              
 Electronics Laboratory visited Syria from 9 to 13 October 1995, when a Protocol                     
 on Transfer of Technology was signed to set up a photovoltaic cell plant in                         
 Syria. India participated in the Damascus International Trade Fair, Damascus                        
 International Film Festival, and a cultural Bosra International, Festival in                        
 Syria.                                                                                              
                                                                                                     
 Bilateral relations with Tunisia retained their positive trend of increasing                        
 understanding and cooperation. Minister of State for External Affairs Shri R L                      
 Bhatia visited Tunisia on 17 and 18 October 1995. During his visit two bilateral                    
 agreements were signed, one on Scientific and Technological Cooperation, and the                    
 other was a Declaration on Combating Drug Trafficking, Organised Crime and                          
 International Terrorism.                                                                            
                                                                                                     
 India maintained traditionally close relations with the League of Arab States                       
 (LAS). Regular consultations were held with LAS, and its Secretary General, on                      
 matters of mutual concern. Minister of External Affairs Shri Pranab Mukherjee                       
 sent a message of congratulations to Dr Esmat Adel Maguid in March 1996 on his                      
 re- election as Secretary General for another 5-year term.                                          
 -50>                                                                                                
 1995                                                                                                
 Africa (South of the Sahara)                                                                        
                                                                               Top                   
 Building on almost five decades of close political support and provision of                         
 technical assistance India is now moving towards closer economic and trade                          
 relations with the countries of sub- Saharan Africa in the true spirit of                           
 South-South Cooperation. Visits in 1995-96 to India of the President of Mali and                    
 Prime Ministers of Mauritius and Namibia and those of the President of India to                     
 Namibia and Zimbabwe and Prime Minister of India to Burkina Faso and Ghana                          
 alongwith several ministerial and senior official level exchanges have all                          
 contributed to strengthening ties with Africa. Countries of Francophone Africa                      
 are also now receiving greater attention with the establishment of a high- level                    
 inter-ministerial coordination board for the sub-region.                                            
                                                                                                     
 A conference on "Understanding Contemporary Africa: India and South-South                           
 Cooperation" jointly organised by the India International Centre and the                            
 Department of African Studies of the Delhi University in close coordination with                    
 the Africa Division in February 1996 provided a useful opportunity to assess the                    
 impact of the rapid changes taking place in comtemporary Africa that might call                     
 for suitable adjustments in India's policy towards Africa.                                          
                                                                                                     
 There have been positive developments in the peace processes in Angola and                          
 Liberia. The role of Indian peace-keeping contingents under the auspices of the                     
 United Nations con-                                                                                 
 -51>                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 tinue to draw admiration. There are also moves for closer bilateral and regional                    
 political and economic cooperation among countries of Africa. Indian public and                     
 private sector enterprises are actively engaged in these developments, and also                     
 in bilateral trade and economic cooperation. India took part in the Regional                        
 Workshop for eastern and southern Africa in Harare on 26 and 27 July organised                      
 jointly by UNDP, Japan and Zimbabwe, and in the activities of the Southern                          
 African Development Community (SADC) and Common Market for Eastern and Southern                     
 Africa (COMESA).                                                                                    
                                                                                                     
 India's trade with sub-Saharan Africa continued to maintain an upward trend.                        
 Exports to the region in 1994-95 increased by over 34% in comparison with the                       
 previous year to reach a level of Rs 2671 crores, while imports too increased by                    
 24% to Rs 2700 crores. The most spectacular growth expected was achieved in the                     
 case of South Africa with bilateral trade reaching Rs 994 crores in 1994-95.                        
 Other major trading partners in the region were Nigeria, Mauritius, Zambia, Kenya                   
 and Tanzania.                                                                                       
                                                                                                     
 India's exports to sub-Saharan Africa, however, were hampered by lack of EXIM                       
 Bank credit lines/ECGC cover which in turn have their own limitations due to past                   
 blocked repayments arising from foreign exchange difficulties in most of those                      
 countries.                                                                                          
                                                                                                     
 Developing a multifaceted and close relationship between India and South Africa                     
 has been a priority of both the Governments. Following the historic visit of                        
 President Mandela to India in January 1995, the India-South Africa Joint                            
 Commission held its first meeting in July 1995 in Pretoria when concrete steps                      
 were identified for augmenting cooperation in the political, economic, trade,                       
 science and technology, defence, health, educational and cultural sectors. An                       
 Agreement on Cooperation in Science and Technology was signed. Several high level                   
 visits followed, most notably from the South African side, those of the Ministers                   
 of Housing, Health, Trade and Industry, and Justice, and the Minister without                       
 portfolio in the President's Office in charge of development planning, a                            
 Parliamentary delegation led by the Speaker, a Constitutional delegation led by                     
 the Minister for Constitutional Affairs, and, from the                                              
 -52>                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 Indian side, those of Smt Sonia Gandhi and the Minister of State for Defence.                       
                                                                                                     
 At the Joint Commission it was also decided that India would organise a cultural                    
 festival in South Africa in 1997. In recognition of the contribution made by                        
 Mahatma Gandhi to the freedom struggles in both countries, a set of commemorative                   
 stamps was jointly released by the President of India in New Delhi and the                          
 Foreign Minister of South Africa in Pretoria on 2 October 1995 which also marked                    
 the closing of a year of activities commemorating Gandhiji's 125th birth                            
 anniversary.                                                                                        
                                                                                                     
 India's desire to strengthen relations with the countries of southern Africa and                    
 capitalise on the new environment in the region following the emergence of a                        
 multiracial South Africa was demonstrated by state visits by the President of                       
 India Shri Shanker Dayal Sharma and Smt Vimala Sharma to Namibia and Zimbabwe in                    
 June 1995. In Zimbabwe, the President donated Rs 1 million to the Jawaharlal                        
 Nehru-Robert Mugabe Trust Fund and a Tata mini-bus to the Zimbabwe Child Survival                   
 and Development Foundation.                                                                         
                                                                                                     
 In Namibia, the President also announced a donation of 1000 MT of wheat to help                     
 tide over the drought conditions in that country while Smt Vimala Sharma donated                    
 a mini-bus to the Namibian National AIDS Control Programme. The fourth session of                   
 the India- Zimbabwe Joint Commission held in Harare in January 1996 identified                      
 several measures to strengthen bilateral trade and economic cooperation. India                      
 greeted the re-election of President Robert Mugabe in the elections held in March                   
 1996. The visit of the Namibian Prime Minister Hage Geingob to India in November                    
 1995 provided an opportunity to further consolidate the close friendly relations                    
 between the two countries. The Namibian Prime Minister expressed his support for                    
 India's candidature to a permanent seat on an expanded UN Security Council. India                   
 committed herself to setting up a Technology Demonstration and Training Centre in                   
 Namibia. A Trade Agreement and a Memorandum of Understanding on cooperation on                      
 potable water supply in Namibia were signed during the visit. Minister of State                     
 Shri Mukul Wasnik represented India at the Donors' Conference on Namibia in                         
 Geneva in November 1995.                                                                            
 -53>                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 India's traditionally close relations with Mozambique and Zambia were further                       
 strengthened during the year through exchange of high level visits and                              
 enhancement of commercial and economic cooperation programmes. The Defence                          
 Minister of Mozambique visited India in November 1995 and the Agriculture                           
 Minister of Zambia in February 1996. An exclusive Indian exhibition INDEXPO'95                      
 was organised in Lusaka in May 1995.                                                                
                                                                                                     
 India's interest in supporting the peace efforts in Angola were demonstrated                        
 through the positive contribution of the Indian contingent including an infantry                    
 battalion, two companies of engineers and civilian and military observers to the                    
 United Nations Angolan Verification Mission (UNAVEM-III). India was also                            
 represented at the Donors' Conference on Angola at Brussels in September 1995 on                    
 which occasion she reiterated her commitment to assist in the economic                              
 reconstruction of war-torn Angola.                                                                  
                                                                                                     
 Relations with Mauritius, with whom India has special ties, were further                            
 strengthened through high level contacts established during the visits of                           
 Mauritian Finance Minister in August 1995 and Prime Minister Jugnauth in October                    
 1995, and the Deputy Prime Minister of Foreign Affairs in the new government,                       
 Paul Berenger, in February 1996. Visits from the Indian side included those of                      
 Smt Sonia Gandhi in April, Leader of the Opposition in the Lok Sabha Shri A B                       
 Vajpayee in June and former Prime Minister Shri Chandrasekhar in September. Both                    
 countries continued to maintain close consultation and coordination at                              
 international fora. At the 50th UNGA, Mauritius supported India's claim for                         
 permanent membership of an expanded UN Security Council. Both countries also                        
 share similar views and are in close coordination on the setting up of the Indian                   
 Ocean Rim Association. India reiterated her desire to consolidate and expand                        
 relations with Mauritius under the new government led by Prime Minister Navin                       
 Ramgoolaw following, the general elections in December 1995.                                        
                                                                                                     
 A 'Made in India' show organised by the Confederation of Indian Industry in                         
 Mauritius in June evoked an enthusiastic response and a Joint Task Force set up                     
 in its wake has                                                                                     
 -54>                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 identified a number of areas for joint venture projects and commercial                              
 cooperation. Over 60 defence officers and 50 civilians from Mauritius were                          
 trained in India during the year, while 20 experts are on deputation to the                         
 Government of Mauritius. In the cultural field, India provided a grant of Rs 10                     
 lakhs for the Hindi-speaking Union in Mauritius.                                                    
 India also attaches great value to her relations with the Seychelles, Madagascar                    
 and Comoros. India joined in the international condemnation of the mercenary coup                   
 against the legitimately constituted Government of Comoros in September 1995. The                   
 Minister for Trade and Economy of Comoros visited India in February 1996. India                     
 welcomed the election of president Mohamed Taki Abdoulkarim the following month.                    
 The Minister of Finance and Communications of the Seychelles James Michel visited                   
 India on several occasions during the year. The meeting of the India- Seychelles                    
 Joint Commission in New Delhi in February 1996 identified several new areas of                      
 technical and cultural cooperation between the two countries. The Seychelles also                   
 established a weekly air link with India in June 1995 with the objective of                         
 strengthening bilateral trade and tourism.                                                          
                                                                                                     
 India's relations with Kenya and Uganda continued to be marked by mutual close                      
 understanding. President Moi made a stop-over in Delhi on his way to Malaysia in                    
 September. Exports to Kenya have shown substantial increase and Kenya                               
 participated for the first time in the India International Trade Fair in                            
 November. Trade delegations from the Confederation of Indian Industry (CII) and                     
 Indian Merchants Chamber visited Uganda in June and July respectively. Uganda was                   
 among the largest beneficiaries from Africa of ITEC/SCAAP training programmes in                    
 India. The presence of the Ugandan Vice President Wandira-Kazibwe at the CII                        
 centenary celebrations in Bombay and the constructive deliberations of the second                   
 session of the India-Uganda Joint Committee in New Delhi in January 1996 were                       
 further manifestations of the desire of both countries to strengthen trade and                      
 economic relations.                                                                                 
                                                                                                     
 Tanzania was engaged through most part of the year with preparations for its                        
 first multiparty elections held in October 1995. India welcomed the re-election                     
 of the Chama Cha                                                                                    
 -55>                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 Mapinduzi (CCM) to power with an overwhelming majority in the Parliament and the                    
 election of its candidate Benjamin Mkapa as President. Bilateral relations have                     
 progressed steadily with Indian companies winning five contracts worth about US$                    
 20 million against stiff international competition. A number of joint venture                       
 proposals were also initiated during this period. Former President Dr Julius                        
 Nyerere visited India in January 1996 to receive the first Gandhi Peace Prize.                      
 The Tanzanian Chief of Defence Forces R P Mboma led a military delegation to                        
 India for discussions aimed at strengthening defence cooperation between the two,                   
 countries. The year also witnessed the conclusion of a Protocol on Cooperation                      
 between the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research and the Tanzanian                         
 Commission for Science & Technology as well as a Memorandum of Cooperation                          
 between the Indian Merchants Chamber and the Tanzanian Chamber of Commerce and                      
 Industry.                                                                                           
                                                                                                     
 India remained concerned about the continuing conflict in Rwanda and Burundi and                    
 of the security of Indian nationals in these countries. Both countries                              
 demonstrated interest in increasing and strengthening technical cooperation with                    
 India. The Indian contingent to the United Nations Aid Mission in Rwanda (UNAMIR)                   
 came in for praise from the Rwandan authorities for its high standards of                           
 professionalism.                                                                                    
                                                                                                     
 Relations with Ethiopia continued to be friendly. India welcomed the installation                   
 of a new democratically elected Government headed by Prime Minister Meles Zenawi                    
 following general elections held in May under the new constitution. Ethiopia has                    
 expressed keen interest in expanding economic cooperation with India and                            
 recruiting Indian experts in the fields of education, irrigation, soil                              
 conservation, agricultural development, etc and for training of its personnel in                    
 various fields.                                                                                     
                                                                                                     
 The Prime Minister Shri P V Narasimha Rao visited Burkina Faso and Ghana in                         
 November. The visit was intended to demonstrate India's interest in strengthening                   
 relations with the region. India initiated a Rs 15.8 crore Agricultural                             
 Development Project in Burkina Faso. The Prime Minister personally handed over                      
 the first consignment of tractors and other                                                         
 -56>                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 agricultural implements during his visit. A Trade Agreement and Memorandum of                       
 Understanding on railway cooperation were also signed. Relations were further                       
 strengthened with the visit to India of Foreign Minister of Burkina Faso Ablasse                    
 Ouedraogo and the holding of the second meeting of the bilateral Joint Commission                   
 in February 1996.                                                                                   
                                                                                                     
 With Ghana, an agreement for setting up a Joint Commission with the objective of                    
 further enhancing and diversifying the already existing multifaceted bilateral                      
 relationship was signed. India gifted two eye care clinics and a toy 'train for a                   
 children's park in Ghana. Two major credit agreements were signed during the year                   
 to help finance Ghana's urban transport and rural electrification projects.                         
                                                                                                     
 The President of Mali Alpha Oumar Konare visited India in August when                               
 India-agreed to assist Mali in areas of agriculture, rural development and                          
 employment generation, drinking water supply, small scale industries, etc. These                    
 understandings were consolidated further with the visit to India of the Ministers                   
 of Industries, Tourism and Handicrafts and of Rural Development and Environment                     
 in March 1996. With the other countries of West Africa also, India made efforts                     
 to strengthen political understanding and expand economic cooperation. The                          
 Minister of State for External Affairs Shri Salman Khurshid visited Guinea and                      
 Ivory Coast in November 1995. The Minister of State for Education and Culture Km                    
 Selja visited Ghana, Burkina Faso and Ivory Coast in July with the aim of                           
 intensifying educational and cultural relations with the countries of the region.                   
 The first meeting of the India-Senegal Joint Trade Committee was held in Dakar in                   
 August 1995. India and Senegal are also partners within the G-15 group of                           
 developing countries and India is undertaking a number of projects in Senegal                       
 aimed at a practical demonstration of her commitment to South-South cooperation.                    
                                                                                                     
 All the above west African countries expressed support for India's claim for the                    
 permanent membership of the Security Council and their stand against                                
 internationalisation of the Kashmir issue which they want to see settled under                      
 Simla agreement.                                                                                    
 -57>                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 India welcomed the elections in Benin and Sierra Leone in March 1996. India also                    
 took positive note of the peace accord on Liberia concluded in the Nigerian                         
 capital of Abuja in August and the installation of a broadly representative                         
 Council of State in that country. India also remained concerned about                               
 developments in Nigeria. While India was a party to the Queenstown Declaration of                   
 the Commonwealth Heads of Government at Auckland on the suspension of Nigeria                       
 from the Commonwealth, India continued to value her close ties with Nigeria and                     
 expressed the hope that the Nigerian Government, would do all that was necessary                    
 to regain her rightful place in the Commonwealth at the earliest opportunity.                       
                                                                                                     
 India's bilateral relations with the countries of sub-Saharan Africa were                           
 complemented and reinforced through increased interaction with regional                             
 organisations. India viewed the Indian Ocean Rim Initiative (IORI) as an economic                   
 bridgehead between Asia and Africa and is participating actively in the                             
 initiative launched at Mauritius in March 1995. The Deputy Executive Secretary of                   
 the Southern African Development Community (SADC) L B Monyake visited India in                      
 September and the Secretary General of the Common Market for Eastern and Southern                   
 Africa (COMESA) Dr Bingu Wa Mutharika in November to examine possibilities of                       
 cooperation with India within a regional framework. India recognises the growing                    
 importance of such multilateral economic links as a natural corollary of a                          
 globalising, interdependent world economy and as an important instrument to fully                   
 exploit the immense opportunities for economic cooperation with the peoples of                      
 Africa.                                                                                             
 -58>                                                                                                
 Europe                                                                                              
                                                                               Top                   
 1995                                                                                                
 Eastern Europe                                                                                      
                                                                               Top                   
 India's relations with countries of the Commonwealth of Independent States as                       
 well as Central and Eastern Europe were consolidated and further strengthened                       
 during 1995-96. Traditionally, India's relations with almost all these countries                    
 have been characterised by friendship and cooperation based on trust and                            
 confidence. The effort has been to retain these positive elements of the old                        
 relationship while making adjustments, as necessary, in a dynamic and forward                       
 looking manner. The evolution of these countries towards democracy and political                    
 pluralism on the one hand, and towards market-oriented structures giving freer                      
 play to private enterprise and initiative on the other, is evocative of the                         
 similar choices which have been made in India and have tended to reinforce                          
 similarities in basic outlook.                                                                      
                                                                                                     
 Consequently, apart from developing on the tradition of friendship and continuity                   
 in these relationships, special efforts have been made to emphasise the new                         
 commonalities of approach and outlook which have emerged between India and these                    
 countries in the recent past. Direct contacts at the Parliamentary level have                       
 been further cultivated to create the national consensus, cutting across party                      
 affiliations on the importance of good bilateral relations between India and                        
 these countries. On their part, these countries have recognised the potential                       
 which India provides as a large emergent market and have                                            
 -59>                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 been keen to build upon existing institutional mechanisms and business linkages                     
 in order to take advantage of these opportunities. The efforts on both sides to                     
 judiciously blend continuity with change in seeking to adjust to the transition                     
 process in the Commonwealth of Independent States/Central and East European                         
 region have imparted both dynamism and diversification to India's relations with                    
 these countries.                                                                                    
                                                                                                     
 India's relations with the Russian Federation continued to develop satisfactorily                   
 and in a multi-faceted manner. Both countries sought to emphasise the importance                    
 which they attach to their relations and their strategic cooperation in various                     
 spheres of cooperation.                                                                             
                                                                                                     
 Prime Minister Shri P V Narasimha Rao met Russian President Boris Yeltsin on 22                     
 October 1995 during the 50th UN General Assembly Session in New York.                               
                                                                                                     
 Minister of External Affairs Shri Pranab Mukherjee represented the Prime Minister                   
 at the Victory in Europe Day celebrations in Moscow from 8 to 10 May 1995.                          
                                                                                                     
 Russian Deputy Prime Minister Yuri F Yarov visited India from 5 to 7 July 1995                      
 for a meeting of the Co-Chairmen of the Indo- Russian Inter-Governmental                            
 Commission on Trade, Economic, Scientific, Technological and Cultural                               
 Co-operation. He called on Prime Minister Shri P V Narasimha Rao and had meetings                   
 with Minister of External Affairs Shri Pranab Mukherjee and Minister of Industry                    
 Shri K Karunakaran, as well as Ministers of State for Commerce and Power. The                       
 visit was useful in identifying issues needing priority attention prior to the                      
 full meeting of the Joint Commission.                                                               
                                                                                                     
 Minister of External Affairs visited Moscow from 3 to 6 August 1995 at the                          
 invitation of the then Russian Foreign Minister Andrei Kozyrev. Apart from                          
 discussions with Kozyrev, he met Prime Minister Victor Chernomyrdin.                                
                                                                                                     
 The Second Meeting of the Indo-Russian Joint Commission took place from 9 to 12                     
 October 1995. Minister of External Affairs Shri Pranab Mukherjee and Deputy Prime                   
 Minister Yuri F Yarov co- chaired the meeting of the Commission. The 64-member                      
 Russian delegation for the meeting included the                                                     
 -60>                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 Ministers of Culture and Construction and the Chairman of the Trade Committee in                    
 addition to 10 Deputy Ministers and several high-ranking officers. Yarov called                     
 on Prime Minister Shri P V Narasimha Rao and met Chief Minister of Delhi Shri                       
 Madan Lal Khurana.                                                                                  
                                                                                                     
 The Protocol signed after the meeting of the Joint Commission took note of the                      
 rapid growth in bilateral trade which had taken place and stressed the need to                      
 promote, economic and investment cooperation between the two countries. It also                     
 stressed the need to increase investment cooperation through joint investment of                    
 rupee debt repayment funds in projects in both India and Russia. The year saw the                   
 establishment of mechanisms for increased cooperation in shipping with the                          
 decision to establish a joint shipping service between the two countries. The                       
 Commission also established a tenth Working Group on Pharmaceuticals to promote                     
 bilateral cooperation in trade and investment in this area.                                         
                                                                                                     
 Commander of the Border Guards of the Russian Federation Nikololaev visited India                   
 in April 1995 at the invitation of Home Minister Shri S B Chavan. He had                            
 discussions with Home Minister and met Minister of State for External Affairs                       
 Shri R L Bhatia. An Agreement on Cooperation across state borders, providing for                    
 cooperation between the two countries in combating illegal migration, smuggling                     
 of prohibited items and illicit drug trafficking was signed during the visit.                       
                                                                                                     
 The "Days of Russian Culture" was held in India from 1 to 14 December 1995.                         
 Russian Deputy Prime Minister Yarov visited India from 1 to 3 December 1995 for                     
 inauguration of the event. Prime Minister Shri P V Narasimha Rao and Yarov                          
 inaugurated the event at a well-attended ceremony at Kamani Auditorium. Prominent                   
 and well-established cultural troupes from Russia including Kremlin Ballet Troupe                   
 gave star performances in Delhi, Bombay and Calcutta. The event concluded with                      
 performances in Calcutta. Yarov called on Prime Minister during the visit. Prime                    
 Minister Chernomyrdin and President Yelstin sent special messages on the                            
 occasion.                                                                                           
                                                                                                     
 The Prime Minister of Tatarstan F Mukhametshin led a delegation to India from 10                    
 to 14 January 1996 at the invitation of the President of the Indian Council for                     
 Cultural                                                                                            
 -61>                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 Relations Shri Vasant Sathe. He called on the Minister of External Affairs Shri                     
 Pranab Mukherjee and the President of the Indian Council for Cultural Relations.                    
 He also had meetings with the Minister of State Shri R L Bhatia. He had intensive                   
 business discussions with FICCI with which a Memorandum of Understanding on Trade                   
 and Economic Cooperation was signed. Tatarstan and the Indian Council for                           
 Cultural Relations also signed a Cultural Agreement during the visit.                               
                                                                                                     
 Chairman of the Constitutional Court of the Russian Federation V A Tumanov                          
 visited India at the invitation of the Chief Justice of India Shri A M Ahmadi                       
 from 25 February to 3 March 1996. In addition to having meetings with the Chief                     
 Justice, Tumanov also called on the Vice President Shri K R Narayanan and the,                      
 Minister of State for Law, Justice and Company Affairs Shri H R Bhardwaj. He also                   
 had meetings with National Human Rights Commission, the Bar Council of India and                    
 the Bar' Council of the Supreme Court. Tumanov was also received by the Governor                    
 of Goa Shri Romesh Bhandari. This was the first visit from Russian Federation in                    
 the area of judiciary.                                                                              
                                                                                                     
 The Head of Ryazan Regional Administrator Gennadiy K Merkulov visited India from                    
 25 to 28 February 1996 to discuss with the Indian business and industry, possible                   
 business cooperation between Indian companies and the Ryazan. He called on the                      
 Minister of State for External Affairs Shri R L Bhatia. He had intensive                            
 discussions with the FICCI, CII and PHDCCI with whom the Ryazan delegation signed                   
 several Memoranda of Understanding.                                                                 
                                                                                                     
 Foreign Minister of the Russian Federation Yevgeny M Primakov visited India on 30                   
 and 31 March 1996 at the invitation of the Minister of External Affairs Shri                        
 Pranab Mukherjee. This was the first bilateral visit of a Russian Foreign                           
 Minister after 16 years. Primakov had meetings with the Minister of External                        
 Affairs and called on the President Shri Shanker Dayal Sharma, the Vice President                   
 Shri K R Narayanan and the Prime Minister Shri P V Narasimha Rao. The two                           
 Ministers signed an Agreement on establishment of Hot Line between Kremlin in                       
 Moscow and the Prime                                                                                
 -62>                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 Minister's residence in New Delhi as well as the Cultural Exchange Programme                        
 between India and Russia for the years 1996- 97. In addition, the Indian National                   
 Science Academy and the Russian Academy of Sciences signed an Agreement on                          
 cooperation between the two Academies, in the presence of the Minister of                           
 External Affairs and the Russian Foreign Minister.                                                  
                                                                                                     
 A Russian ship Mikhail Olminskiy was detained at Cochin port on 6 December 1995                     
 on suspicion of smuggling electronic goods into India. The customs authorities                      
 claim to have discovered substantial evidence to that effect. The Russian Consul                    
 General in Madras alleged that the Indian Customs officials had beaten the ship's                   
 crew and taken away their private property. The Kerala High Court decided that                      
 the ship could leave the port after providing bank guarantees amounting to Rs                       
 1.42 crores. The ship left in the beginning of January 1996 after paying these                      
 guarantees. The allegations of beating and taking away private property are under                   
 investigation.                                                                                      
                                                                                                     
 In another incident, a Russian plane AN-26 originating from Kazan in Tatarstan,                     
 and taking off from Karachi was forcelanded in Delhi on 24 December 1995 by the                     
 Indian Aviation authorities on grounds that it had entered the Indian air space                     
 on an invalid flight permit. The Russian authorities contested the allegation.                      
 The plane's cargo was physically checked and was found in accordance with the                       
 previously made declaration. The plane was allowed to leave Delhi on 28 December                    
 1995. The Russian authorities alleged that the plane's crew was maltreated and                      
 denied consular access for 10 hours. The matter was rectified', however, on                         
 intervention by the Ministry of External Affairs. Ambassador of Russia in New                       
 Delhi, Drukov also brought the matter to the attention of the Minister of                           
 External Affairs Shri Pranab Mukherjee who assured him of full cooperation by the                   
 Ministry of External Affairs. He described the incident as over-response to the                     
 Purulia event, and stressed that it is no reflection on friendly ties and                           
 partnership between India and Russia.                                                               
                                                                                                     
 Prime Minister met Ukranian Prime Minister Marchuk on 19 October 1995 during the                    
 50th UN General Assembly Session in New York.                                                       
 -63>                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 Croatia, Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (FRY) and Bosnia- Herzegovina reached an                    
 Agreement in Dayton, USA, on 21 November 1995 on the General Framework for Peace                    
 which laid down the constitutional principles for establishing peace in the                         
 country. This followed the earlier Agreement on Basic Principles concluded in                       
 September 1995. India welcomed both Agreements since these sought to maintain the                   
 territorial integrity of Bosnia- Herzegovina and were arrived at with the                           
 participation and concurrence of all the concerned parties in the region.                           
                                                                                                     
 The United Nations Security Council suspended trade and economic sanctions                          
 against Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (FRY) on 22 November 1995. India welcomed                    
 the suspension of sanctions and looked forward to the restoration of her trade                      
 and economic linkages with the countries of the region.                                             
                                                                                                     
 Deputy Foreign Minister of FRY Radoslav Bulajic visited India on 22 and 23 June                     
 1995. He called on Minister of State for External Affairs Shri Salman Khurshid                      
 and had discussions with Secretary(West). A Protocol on Foreign Office                              
 Consultations was signed during the visit.                                                          
                                                                                                     
 An Indian Parliamentary delegation led by Shri Rabi Ray, Member of Lok Sabha,                       
 visited FRY from 11 to 14 July 1995. The delegation had meetings with President                     
 Lilic and Deputy Prime Minister Unkovic, besides interacting with the Parliament                    
 of the FRY.                                                                                         
                                                                                                     
 Foreign Minister of Croatia Mate Granic visited India from 27 to 29 April 1995.                     
 He had discussions with Minister of External Affairs Shri Pranab Mukherjee and                      
 called on President, Vice President and Prime Minister. A Protocol on Foreign                       
 Office Consultations was signed during the visit.                                                   
                                                                                                     
 A Commerce-cum-External Affairs Ministry delegation visited Slovenia from 25 to                     
 26 June 1995. Separate bilateral discussions were held with the Ministry of                         
 Foreign Affairs of Slovenia.                                                                        
                                                                                                     
 Minister of State for External Affairs Shri Salman Khurshid visited Estonia from                    
 27 to 29 August 1995. He had meetings with Minister of Foreign Affairs Riivo                        
 Sinijarv and called on President Lenmart Meri and Deputy Prime Minister Tiit                        
 Vahi.                                                                                               
 -64>                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 A Protocol on Foreign Office Consultations was signed during the visit.                             
                                                                                                     
 Minister of State for External Affairs Shri Salman Khurshid visited Belarus on 29                   
 and 30 August 1995. He called on Prime Minister Chigir, Adviser to the President                    
 Sinitsyn and had discussions with First Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs                          
 Tsepkalo and Minister for Foreign Economic Relations Mariich.                                       
                                                                                                     
 Minister of State for External Affairs Shri Salman Khurshid visited Lithuania on                    
 30 and 31 August 1995. He met Foreign Minister Povilas Gylys, and called on                         
 President Algirdas Brazauskas and Prime Minister Adolfas Slezevicius. A Protocol                    
 on Foreign Office Consultations was signed during the visit.                                        
                                                                                                     
 Lithuanian Prime Minister Adolfas Slezevicius made a stopover visit in New Delhi                    
 on 28 and 29 September 1995. He had talks with Prime Minister on bilateral and                      
 other issues of mutual interest. Minister of State for External Affairs Shri                        
 Salman Khurshid and Minister of State for Surface Transport Shri M Rajasekhara                      
 Murthy called on him.                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 Minister of State for External Affairs Shri Salman Khurshid visited Latvia from                     
 31 August to 2 September 1995. He called on President Ulmanis, Prime Minister                       
 Mari Gailis and had meetings with Foreign Minister Vladis Birkavs. A Protocol on                    
 Foreign Office Consultations, an Agreement on Technical and Economic Cooperation,                   
 a Declaration on Principles and Directions of Cooperation, and a Memorandum of                      
 Understanding on Cooperation in Culture, Arts, Education, Science, Mass Media and                   
 Sports, were signed during the visit.                                                               
                                                                                                     
 The Minister of External Affairs Shri Pranab Mukherjee met the Foreign Minister                     
 of Albania Alfred Serrequi in New York on the margins of the 50th Session of the                    
 UN General Assembly.                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 An Agreement on Trade and Economic Cooperation was signed with Georgia on 15                        
 August 1995.                                                                                        
                                                                                                     
 Deputy Foreign Minister of Poland Robert Mroziewicz visited India from 11 to 14                     
 June 1995 for Indo-Polish Foreign Office                                                            
 -65>                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 Consultations which were held with Secretary (West). Mroziewicz called on the                       
 Minister of External Affairs, the Minister of Home Affairs, the Minister of State                   
 for Power and the Minister of State for External Affairs Shri Salman Khurshid. He                   
 also had discussions with Secretary, Coal and Secretary, Culture.                                   
                                                                                                     
 The 14th Session of the Indo-Polish Joint Commission for Economic, Trade,                           
 Scientific and Technical Cooperation, was held in New Delhi from 30 January to 1                    
 February 1996. The Joint Commission Meeting was held after a gap of over five                       
 years. Minister of Foreign Economic Relations of Poland Jacek Buchacz who led the                   
 Polish delegation to the Joint Commission called on the President Shri Shanker                      
 Dayal Sharma. Minister of State for Coal Shri Jagdish Tytler led the Indian side                    
 of the Joint Commission.                                                                            
                                                                                                     
 A Parliamentary delegation led by Speaker, Lok Sabha, visited Hungary from 24 to                    
 29 June 1995. The delegation met Speaker of the Hungarian Parliament Zoltan Gal                     
 as well as Minister of State for Environment and Regional Policy Katalin Szili,                     
 Minister of Industry and Trade Laszlo Pal, and Defence Minister Gyorgy Keleti.                      
                                                                                                     
 Minister of Foreign Affairs of Republic of Hungary Laszlo Kovacs visited New                        
 Delhi from 16 to 18 February 1996 for official discussions at the invitation of                     
 Minister of External Affairs Shri Pranab Mukherjee. Kovacs called on President                      
 Shri Shanker Dayal Sharma, Prime Minister Shri P V Narasimha Rao and Lok Sabha                      
 Speaker Shri Shivraj V Patil. He had discussions with Minister of External                          
 Affairs and Minister of State for External Affairs, Shri Salman Khurshid                            
 focussing on bilateral, regional and international issues. Kovacs also met with                     
 Finance Minister Dr Manmohan Singh.                                                                 
 A meeting of the Indo-Hungarian Joint Commission's Sub-group on Trade was held in                   
 Budapest from 26 to 30, October 1995.                                                               
                                                                                                     
 A programme of Cooperation was finalised for the years 1996-98 under the                            
 framework of the Indo-Hungarian Science and Technology Agreement. Hungarian                         
 Minister of Culture and Education Gabor Fodor visited India from 11 to 19                           
 November                                                                                            
 -66>                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 1995. Fodor called on the President, and had discussions with the then Minister                     
 of Human Resource Development and the Minister of State for External Affairs Shri                   
 Salman Khurshid. A Cultural Exchange Programme (CEP) for the years 1996-98 was                      
 signed during the visit.                                                                            
                                                                                                     
 Secretary (West) visited Hungary on 18 and 19 December 1995 for Foreign Office                      
 Consultations. He called on Political State Secretary for Foreign Affairs and                       
 Acting, Foreign Minister Szent- Ivanyi, and had discussions with Administrative                     
 State Secretary in the Hungarian Foreign Ministry, Dr Somogyl and other senior                      
 Foreign Ministry officials.                                                                         
                                                                                                     
 The first meeting of the Indo-Slovak Joint Economic Committee was held in                           
 Bratislava on 22 and 23 May 1995. A joint Commerce-cum- External Affairs                            
 delegation was sent from India on this occasion.                                                    
                                                                                                     
 Secretary (West) visited the Slovak Republic on 11 July 1995. He had discussions                    
 with State Secretary in the Slovak Ministry of Foreign Affairs Josef Sestak and                     
 State Secretary in the Slovak Defence Ministry Josef Gajdoz.                                        
                                                                                                     
 Slovak Defence Minister Jan Sitek visited India from 13 to 17 November 1995. He                     
 had discussions with Ministers of State for Defence and for Defence Production                      
 and Supplies. A Memorandum on Cooperation between the Ministry of Defence and the                   
 Slovak Defence Ministry was concluded during his visit. Defence Minister Sitek                      
 also had talks with Minister of State for External Affairs Shri Salman Khurshid.                    
                                                                                                     
 State Secretary in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Slovak Republic Jozef                     
 Sestak visited India from 7 to 12 March 1996. He called on Minister of External                     
 Affairs Shri Pranab Mukherjee, Minister of State for External Affairs Shri Salman                   
 Khurshid and had discussions with Secretary (West). Sestak also called on the                       
 Minister of State for Defence Shri M Mallikarjun and Minister of State for                          
 Commerce Shri P Chidambaram. Secretary, Department of Culture and Sestak signed                     
 an Agreement on Cultural Cooperation.                                                               
                                                                                                     
 A resident Indian Mission opened in Bratislava in August 1995. Deputy Minister of                   
 Commerce and External Economic                                                                      
 -67>                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 Relations of Bulgaria Ivan Kolev visited India from 20 to 23 June 1995. Kolev                       
 called on the Ministers of Home Affairs and Agriculture as well as the Minister                     
 of State for External Affairs Shri Salman Khurshid. He also had discussions in                      
 the Ministry of Defence.                                                                            
                                                                                                     
 Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Economic Development of Bulgaria Roumen                       
 Gechev visited India from 26 to 30 September 1995. Gechev called on the Vice                        
 President ' and the Prime Minister, and had meetings with the Ministers of Home                     
 Affairs, Finance, Agriculture and Civil Aviation and Tourism, And Ministers of                      
 State for Industry, for Commerce and for External Affairs Shri Salman Khurshid.                     
 Gechev also addressed a seminar organised by the Indo-Bulgarian Joint Business                      
 Council.                                                                                            
                                                                                                     
 The Twelfth Session of the Indo-Bulgarian Joint Committee on Defence Cooperation                    
 was held in Bulgaria from 4 to 10 October 1995. Secretary (West) visited Bulgaria                   
 from 20 to 22 December 1995 for Foreign Office consultations. Besides talks with                    
 Bulgarian Deputy Foreign Minister Glavanakov, Secretary (West) called on                            
 Bulgarian Deputy Prime Minister Tsochev (who co-Chairs the Indo-Bulgarian Joint                     
 Commission) and Foreign Minister Pirinski:                                                          
                                                                                                     
 The Romanian Minister of Research and Technology D D Palade visited India from 7                    
 to 11 May 1995. He had discussions with the Minister of State for Science and                       
 Technology and Secretary, Department of Science and Technology. A Joint Committee                   
 for scientific and technological cooperation was formed in accordance with the                      
 Indo-Romanian Agreement on Science and Technology.                                                  
                                                                                                     
 Minister of Tourism of Romania Matei Agathon Dan paid a visit to India from 9 to                    
 14 April 1995. He "called on the President and had discussions with the Minister                    
 of Civil Aviation and Tourism. He also met with the representatives of the Indian                   
 hotel and tourism industry. Subsequently, from 26 to 30 November 1995, a meeting                    
 of the Indo-Romanian Working Group on Tourism was held in Bucharest.                                
                                                                                                     
 Minister of Interior of Romania loan Doru Taracila visited India from 29 October                    
 to 4 November 1995. Taracila had discussions with the Minister of Home Affairs.                     
 An agreement                                                                                        
 -68>                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 on the readmission of persons having illegal status was signed during the visit.                    
                                                                                                     
 The Romanian Minister of Commerce Petru Crisan visited India from 10 to 15                          
 November 1995. While in New Delhi, he had discussions with the Ministers of State                   
 for Commerce and for External Affairs. On the occasion of Crisan's visit, the                       
 Indo-Romanian Joint Business Council organised a seminar on promoting Indo-                         
 Romanian Economic Cooperation and facilitated one-to-one meetings between the                       
 businessmen accompanying Crisan and their Indian counterparts. The seminar was                      
 addressed by Crisan and the Minister of State for Commerce.                                         
                                                                                                     
 Minister of State for Defence visited Romania from 3 to 7 June 1995. During the                     
 visit, he called on President Iliescu, Deputy Prime Minister Cosea, Foreign                         
 Minister Melescanu and the Chairman of the Chamber of Deputies Adrian Nastase. He                   
 also had discussions with Romanian Defence Minister Gheorge Tinca.                                  
                                                                                                     
 Minister of State for Commerce visited Romania from 21 to 24 June 1995 for the                      
 Eleventh Session of Indo-Romanian Joint Commission. He called on Romanian Prime                     
 Minister Nicolae Vacaroiu and the Chairman of the Chamber of Deputies Adrian                        
 Nastase. He also had wide ranging discussions on Indo-Romanian economic                             
 cooperation with Romanian Commerce Minister Petru Crisan. A Protocol was signed                     
 at the conclusion of the Joint Commission meeting, incorporating an action plan                     
 for increasing the bilateral Indo- Romanian trade turnover to US $ 150-200                          
 million in the near future. The Fourth Session of the Indo-Romanian Joint                           
 Business Council was held in tandem with the Joint Commission.                                      
                                                                                                     
 A Parliamentary delegation led by Speaker, Lok Sabha visited Romania from 9 to 14                   
 October 1995 to participate in the 94th Inter Parliamentary Union (IPU)                             
 Conference. During the visit, Speaker had meetings with Prime Minister Vacaroiu,                    
 President of the Senate Oliviu Gherman and the Chairman of the Chamber of                           
 Deputies Adrian Nastase.                                                                            
                                                                                                     
 President of the Republic of Armenia, Levon Ter-Petrossian paid a State visit to                    
 India from 13 to 16 December 1995.                                                                  
 -69>                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 President Ter-Petrossian called on the President Dr Shanker Dayal Sharma. The                       
 Vice President Shri K R Narayanan, Speaker of Lok Sabha Shri Shivraj V Patil and                    
 Minister of State for External Affairs Shri Salman Khurshid called on him.                          
 Following a meeting between the Prime Minister Shri P V Narasimha Rao and                           
 President Ter-Petrossian, delegation level talks were held, led by the two                          
 leaders. Separate discussions were held between Minister of State for External                      
 Affairs Shri Salman Kurshid and Armenia's Foreign Minister Vahan Papazian.                          
 Representatives of Armenia's industrial and the defence complex also had talks in                   
 the Ministry of Defence. A Treaty on Friendship and Cooperation between the                         
 Republic of India and Republic of Armenia was signed by Prime Minister Rao and                      
 President Ter-Petrossian. Agreements on Economic and Technical Cooperation (ITEC)                   
 and on Cultural Cooperation were also signed during the visit. It was also agreed                   
 to establish an Indo-Armenian Joint Commission. This was the first ever State                       
 visit from independent Armenia to India.                                                            
                                                                                                     
 Czech Deputy Foreign Minister Helena Bambasova transited through New Delhi on 28                    
 and 29 March 1996. During her stay in Delhi, she had discussions with Secretary                     
 (West) on Indo-Czech. bilateral relations.                                                          
                                                                                                     
 Western Europe                                                                                      
                                                                               Top                   
 Indo-British relations continued to be characterised by mutual trust and                            
 confidence, reflected in an intensification of high- level visits, including                        
 those of former Prime Minister Baroness Margaret Thatcher; President of the Board                   
 of Trade Michael Heseltine; Permanent Under Secretary for Defence Sir Christopher                   
 France; the Duke of Kent; Parliamentary Under Secretary of State Sir John Coles;                    
 Minister of State, Foreign and Commonwealth Office Jeremy Hanley; Minister for                      
 Overseas Development Baroness Chalker; Parlimentary Under Secretary for Science                     
 and Technology Ian Taylor; Minister of State for Environment Earl Ferrers; Deputy                   
 Speaker of the House of Commons Michael Morris; Home Secretary Michael Howard;                      
 Minister for Defence Production Arbuthnot; and President of the Board of Trade                      
 Ian Lang.                                                                                           
                                                                                                     
 From the Indian side, Minister of External Affairs Shri Pranab Mukherjee visited                    
 UK in May 1995 for the VE Day celebra-                                                              
 -71>                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 tions and in November 1995 to hold bilateral discussions. During his visit in                       
 November, the Minister of External Affairs had meetings with his counterpart,                       
 Foreign Secretary Malcolm Rifkind, Home Secretary Michael Howard and Defence                        
 Secretary Portillo. He also met leader of the Labour Party Tony Blair, Shadow                       
 Labour Foreign Secretary Robin Cook and leader of the Liberal Democrats Paddy                       
 Ashdown.                                                                                            
                                                                                                     
 The visit enabled a discussion on matters of bilateral, regional and                                
 international interest, besides providing an opportunity to convey to the British                   
 leadership and political opposition India's viewpoint on the Kashmir issue.                         
 Minister of State for External Affairs Shri R L Bhatia also visited the UK twice,                   
 once to attend meetings organised by the ethnic Indian community and the second                     
 time as the representative of the Congress Party to the Labour Party Conference.                    
 Seven State Chief Ministers also visited the UK mainly for purposes of investment                   
 promotion for their states.                                                                         
                                                                                                     
 There has been a spurt of economic activity between the two countries in recent                     
 years. A report submitted by the Co-Chairmen of the Indo-British Partnership                        
 Initiative to the two Prime Ministers in May 1995 has highlighted the fact that                     
 bilateral trade has increased by 50% over the last two years; 350 new                               
 collaborations have been agreed upon; and British investment in India has                           
 increased tenfold since 1992.                                                                       
                                                                                                     
 In order to cope with the growing interactions with the region, a new Consulate                     
 General was set up in Glasgow which has started functioning from 3 November 1995.                   
                                                                                                     
 Indo-German relations have made rapid strides in the last few years buttressed by                   
 a number of high level visits from both sides and considerable acceleration in                      
 the economic ties between the two countries. Minister of External Affairs Shri                      
 Pranab Mukherjee visited Germany from 8 to 11 July 1995 accompanied by an 11-                       
 member business delegation. He held talks with German Foreign Minister Dr Klaus                     
 Kinkel with whom he signed a Bilateral Investment Protection Agreement. Minister                    
 of External Affairs called on the German President and visited Stuttgart where he                   
 met the Minister-President of the State of Baden-Wuerttemberg. Finance Minister                     
 Dr Manmohan Singh visited Germany twice                                                             
 -72>                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 in 1995, once in June when he signed a revised Double Taxation Avoidance                            
 Agreement and Financial Cooperation Agreement for 1995 and the second time in                       
 December for the 12th session of the Indo- German Joint Commission meeting.                         
 German Minister for Labour and Social Affairs Norbert Blum visited India from 7                     
 to 13 April 1995 and the Minister of Agriculture Jochen Borchert visited India                      
 from 19 to 23 February 1996.                                                                        
                                                                                                     
 Relations with France received momentum with the visit of the Prime Minister to                     
 that country from 11 to 14 June 1995. The focus of discussions was on expansion                     
 of bilateral trade and economic relations; the two sides were in agreement on the                   
 need to bring these on par with the existing excellent political, cultural and                      
 scientific relations. A delegation led by Chairman of the Committee of Economic                     
 Affairs of the French Senate Francois Poncet visited India from 17 February to 2                    
 March 1996.                                                                                         
                                                                                                     
 The President of Italy Oscar Luigi Scalfaro paid a State visit to India from 9 to                   
 12 February 1995, the first ever Head of State level visit from Italy, coinciding                   
 with Italy's participation as "Partner Country" in the India Engineering Trade                      
 Fair (IETF) 1995. A Communique on Foreign Office Consultations was signed. As a                     
 follow-up, the Minister of External Affairs paid a visit to Italy on 24 and 25                      
 November 1995. Bilateral, regional and international issues of mutual interest                      
 were discussed between the two sides.                                                               
                                                                                                     
 Minister of External Affairs Shri Pranab Mukherjee, accompanied by an 8-member                      
 business delegation, visited Austria from 11 to 13 July 1995. During his stay,                      
 Minister of External Affairs called on the President, the Chancellor and the                        
 Speaker of the National Assembly of Austria. He also held official talks with the                   
 Vice Chancellor and Foreign Minister of Austria Wolfgang Schuessel. The Austrian                    
 Secretary-General for Foreign Affairs Wolfgang Schallenberg visited India for                       
 bilateral discussions. He had meetings with the Foreign Secretary and the                           
 Secretary (West) in the Ministry of External Affairs. An important exhibition on                    
 classical Indian art was held in Vienna in early 1995, jointly inaugurated by the                   
 Minister of State for Education & Culture Km Selja and the Vice Chancellor of                       
 Austria.                                                                                            
 -73>                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 The Minister of Trade and Tourism of Ireland Enda Kenny visited India with a                        
 group of 25 leading industrialists from 19 to 24 November 1995. This was followed                   
 by the visit of Irish Minister of Defence and Marine Sean Barret from 12 to 20                      
 January 1996.                                                                                       
                                                                                                     
 Relations with Portugal received an impetus with the visits of the President and                    
 the Minister of External Affairs to that country. During his transit visit, the                     
 President met the President of Portugal. The visit of Minister of External                          
 Affairs was at the invitation of his counterpart Bilateral relations, India's                       
 relations with neighbouring countries and international issues of mutual interest                   
 formed the main subjects of discussion between the two sides. A Communique on                       
 Foreign Office Consultations was signed between the two sides during the course                     
 of the visit.                                                                                       
                                                                                                     
 Minister for Information & Broadcasting P A Sangma, visited Portugal on 9 and 10                    
 March 1996 as India's representative to the investiture ceremony of the new                         
 President of Portugal.                                                                              
                                                                                                     
 A trade and investment mission led by Crown Prince Philippe and comprising the                      
 Minister of Trade of Belgium which visited India between 26 March and 1 April                       
 1995 in connection with the 8th meeting of the Indo-Belgian Joint Commission,                       
 signed contracts and initiated agreements which are expected to strengthen Indo-                    
 Belgian relations in the economic and commercial fields.                                            
                                                                                                     
 Relations with Luxembourg received thrust and momentum through the visit of a                       
 high level business delegation led by Crown Prince Henri, and the Luxembourg                        
 Minister of State for External Affairs, Foreign Trade and Development Cooperation                   
 from 14 to 21 May 1995. The signature of a trilateral Memorandum of Understanding                   
 between the Confederation of Indian Industry (CII), the Federation of Luxembourg                    
 Industrialists and the Chamber of Commerce of Luxembourg was the highlight of the                   
 visit, apart from the several memoranda signed between Indian and Luxembourg                        
 companies. As a follow up to the visit, the Luxembourg Secretary of State for                       
 External Affairs, Foreign Trade and                                                                 
 -74>                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 Development Cooperation led a business delegation to India between 27 and 29                        
 October 1995.                                                                                       
                                                                                                     
 The 10th meeting of the Indo-Swedish Joint Commission was held in New Delhi on 6                    
 November 1995. The discussions focussed on bilateral trade and investment.                          
                                                                                                     
 Prime Minister visited Copenhagen, Denmark from 8 to 11 March 1995 on the                           
 occasion of the World Summit for Social Development. He met the Danish Prime                        
 Minister. The Prime Minister of Denmark Poul Nyrup Rasmussen, accompanied by his                    
 wife, senior officials and a business delegation from 39 Danish companies,                          
 visited India from 5 to 15 September 1995. During his visit, a Bilateral                            
 Investment Protection Agreement and Memoranda of Understanding between the                          
 national airlines of the two countries on establishment of formal air services                      
 and on regular bilateral Foreign Office Consultations were signed.                                  
                                                                                                     
 The Minister of Commerce and Shipping of Norway Grete Knudson visited India from                    
 5 to 12 January 1996.                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 A Parliamentary Delegation from Cyprus visited India from 29 May to 4 June 1995.                    
 The Cypriot Minister for Agriculture Costas Petrides visited India from 27                          
 January to 2 February 1996 at the invitation of Agriculture Minister.                               
                                                                                                     
 Trade with the European Union (EU) grew at a very satisfactory rate. Europe                         
 continues to remain a major investment partner of India and an important source                     
 of technology. The 8th round of the Indo-EU Troika talks were held in Paris on 6                    
 April 1995. Minister of External Affairs Shri Pranab Mukherjee and the then                         
 French Foreign Minister Alain Juppe (representing the Presidency of the EU) led                     
 their respective delegations. While the agenda principally covered political                        
 subjects, discussions touched on economic relations as well. Prior to the Indo-EU                   
 Troika Meeting, there was a Foreign Secretary level meeting with Directors                          
 General of Political Affairs of the EU Troika.                                                      
                                                                                                     
 The 9th round of the Indo-EU Troika talks was held in New Delhi on 4 March 1996.                    
 Minister of External Affairs Shri Pranab Mukherjee and Foreign Minister of Italy                    
 Susanna Agnelli (representing the Presidency of the EU) led their                                   
 -75>                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 respective delegations. The other Ministers from the EU Troika were Foreign                         
 Minister of Spain Carlos Westendorp and Minister of State for Foreign Affairs of                    
 Ireland Gay Mitchell. The European Commission was represented by the                                
 Vice-President Manuel Marin. Bilateral, regional and international issues of                        
 mutual interest were discussed.                                                                     
                                                                                                     
 A Friends of India Group consisting of 60 MEN has been constituted in the                           
 European Parliament. Michael Hindley, Vice- Chairman of the Parliament's                            
 Committee on External Economic Relations visited India in March and December                        
 1995. On the invitation of the Speaker of the Lok Sabha, five MEPs belonging to                     
 the South Asia Delegation of the EP led by Philippe Monfils, visited India from 2                   
 to 8 December 1995. The delegation called on the President, the Minister of                         
 External Affairs, the Home Minister, the Minister of Parliamentary Affairs and                      
 the Minister of State for External Affairs.                                                         
                                                                                                     
 Vice President of the European Commission Sir Leon Brittan visited India at the                     
 invitation of the Minister of External Affairs from 22 December 1995 to 2 January                   
 1996.                                                                                               
 -76>                                                                                                
 1995                                                                                                
 The Americas/North America                                                                          
                                                                               Top                   
 Against the backdrop of the new partnership forged between the two countries when                   
 Prime Minister visited the USA in May 1994, expanding and strengthening relations                   
 with the USA remained an overarching feature of India's policy during 1995-96.                      
 The emphasis was on effective stewardship of relations. This was done by                            
 providing the thrust for rapid forward movement in areas where both sides saw                       
 clear mutual benefit in cooperation, and by taking care that outstanding                            
 differences were effectively managed so that they did not overshadow the                            
 relationship and its promise of constructive cooperation. The objective was to                      
 take full advantage of opportunities that rapidly opened up over the entire range                   
 of Indo-US relations.                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 The year was marked by several high level visits reflecting the growing                             
 cooperation between the two countries. These spanned the entire spectrum of                         
 interaction involving eminent private personalities, people in government,                          
 members of the Congress, business leaders, media and ' cultural figures,                            
 economists, scientists, etc. The visits underscored the multidimensional nature                     
 of the new partnership, and provided continuing depth to the relationship.                          
                                                                                                     
 High level consultations on international and bilateral issues                                      
 -77>                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 were held when Minister of External Affairs visited the USA in May 1995. In                         
 addition to the official programme which included discussions with the US                           
 Administration, Senators and Congressmen, the Minister also had meetings with the                   
 editorial boards of leading US newspapers, addressed think-tanks, and met members                   
 of the Indian-American community. Earlier, in April 1995, Foreign Secretary level                   
 talks were held in Delhi during the visit of US Under Secretary of State for                        
 Political Affairs Peter Tarnoff.                                                                    
                                                                                                     
 Defence Secretary visited Washington from 11 to 15 September 1995 for the first                     
 meeting of the Defence Policy Group (DPG) and the Joint Technical Group (JTG). It                   
 had been decided to establish these groups when US Defence Secretary William                        
 Perry visited India in January 1995. The DPG talks covered security issues and                      
 other areas of common interest, including peacekeeping operations. The JTG                          
 discussed cooperation in defence technology. As part of the on-going                                
 interactions, India and the USA also held a joint naval, exercise, Malabar II,                      
 from 10 to 15 May 1995.                                                                             
                                                                                                     
 The US Congress approved Senator Hank Brown's amendment to the Foreign Operations                   
 Appropriations Bill which provides, inter alia, for a one time waiver of the                        
 Pressler Amendment to enable the release to Pakistan of $ 368 million worth of                      
 advanced US military equipment embargoed since October 1990. India's serious                        
 concerns in this regard, including the legitimacy that this would accord to                         
 Pakistan's clandestine acquisitions of nuclear weapons and missiles, has been                       
 conveyed clearly to the US Administration and the Congress.                                         
                                                                                                     
 Differences with the USA remained on the approach to nuclear and missile                            
 non-proliferation issues. Differences also continued on the question of                             
 Pakistan's continued sponsorship of terrorism in India through the supply of                        
 arms, equipment, training and infiltration. The USA continued to maintain that                      
 available evidence did not warrant a finding under US law that Pakistan had                         
 repeatedly provided support for acts. of international terrorism.                                   
                                                                                                     
 The US Department of State Coordinator for Counter-Terrorism, Philip Wilcox led a                   
 US delegation of counter-terrorism experts to India from 19 to 21 October 1995.                     
 The potential for greater                                                                           
 -78>                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 counter- terrorism cooperation between the two. countries was discussed during                      
 the visit.                                                                                          
                                                                                                     
 Expansion of trade and investment continued apace. In 1994 the bilateral trade                      
 turnover rose to around Rs 24,000 crores with Indian exports reaching Rs 16,700                     
 crores. Approved investments from the USA for the period January-September 1995                     
 amounted to Rs 3,347 crores as against Rs 1,430 crores during the same period in                    
 1994 and Rs 3,488 crores during the whole of 1994.                                                  
                                                                                                     
 US Treasury Secretary Robert Rubin visited India from 17 to 21 April 1995. The                      
 US-India Commercial Alliance (USICA) which was launched in January 1995 held its                    
 first Board meeting during the visit of Minister of State for Commerce to the USA                   
 in June 1995. The Indo-US Sub-Commission on Economy and Commerce was reactivated                    
 during the visit of US Under Secretary of State for Economic & Agricultural                         
 Affairs Joan Spero in April 1995 '. It was decided to set up three Working                          
 Groups-on Trade and Commerce, on Finance and Investment, and a Joint Private                        
 Sector Working Group. US Under Secretary for Global Affairs Timothy Wirth visited                   
 India in April 1995 to sign a Common Agenda for bilateral cooperation on                            
 environmental issues.                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 Business delegations were also led to India by the Governors of Massachusetts                       
 (William Weld, 16-23 February 1995) and of Nebraska (Benjamin Nelson, 12-16                         
 November 1995). A Minnesota trade delegation visited India from 5 to 9 December                     
 1995. Three rounds of Indo-US Civil Aviation Talks held between September and                       
 December 1995 led to the conclusion of mutually satisfactory civil aviation.                        
 Arrangements. An increase in the density of air services and convenient                             
 connections are envisaged as a result of the arrangements agreed to.                                
                                                                                                     
 Differences, however, remained on issues such as intellectual property rights,                      
 market access, etc. Developments relating to ENRON (Dabhol project) and Kentucky                    
 Fried Chicken outlets caused some apprehension among US investors, but were eased                   
 with the moves towards resolution of these issues.                                                  
                                                                                                     
 The Indo-US Sub-Commission on Education and Culture met in New York on 19 and 20                    
 April 1995. The Indo-US JWG on                                                                      
 -79>                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 Narcotics held its sixth meeting on 12 and 13 September 1995 in Washington. Both                    
 sides recognised that illegal trafficking in narcotics continued to be a serious                    
 international problem and pledged to continue to attack it at all levels,                           
 including production, trafficking and drug abuse.                                                   
                                                                                                     
 The year also witnessed greater interaction with US Congressmen and Senators. The                   
 visits included those of Senators Hank Brown and Arlen Specter (25-27 August                        
 1995), Congressmen Charlie Rose (23-30 April 1995), Robert Borski (14-21 August                     
 1995), Maurice Hinchey (21-27 August 1995), Gary Ackerman (11-16 January 1996),                     
 Howard Berman (13-22 January 1996), and a group of Senate Staffers (27 August-3                     
 September 1995). Speaker, Lok Sabha also visited New York together with a                           
 delegation of Members of Parliament for the Special Session of the                                  
 Inter-Parliamentary Council in August-September 1995. Deputy Chairperson, Rajya                     
 Sabha delivered lectures to summer students at Harvard University and other US                      
 institutions in June-July 1995.                                                                     
                                                                                                     
 Other eminent US personalities who visited India during 1995 included the First                     
 Lady Hillary Clinton (28-31 March 1995), former US President George Bush (27-30                     
 November 1995), former US Secretary of State Dr Henry Kissinger (19-24 March and                    
 1-4 November 1995), and former US Congressman Stephen Solarz (15-18 March 1995                      
 and 31 October-8 November 1995).                                                                    
                                                                                                     
 India's policy objective in 1995-96 with regard to Canada was to realise the full                   
 potential of bilateral cooperation and thereby to deepen and broaden                                
 Indo-Canadian relations. It was recognised that as two parliamentary democracies                    
 with similar forms of government, shared values and ideals, and economies with                      
 considerable complementarities, the opportunities for cooperation were                              
 considerable, especially in the context of India's economic liberalisation and                      
 the end of the Cold War. There has, at the same time, been a significant increase                   
 of Canadian interest in India in the last few years, particularly as a trade and                    
 investment partner.                                                                                 
                                                                                                     
 Secretary of State in the Department of Foreign Affairs and International Trade                     
 Raymond Chan visited India in March                                                                 
 -80>                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 1995 with a 35-member business delegation. Ministers in the Provincial Government                   
 of British Columbia Moe Sihota and Ujjal Dosanjh who had visited India in                           
 January-February 1995 paid a second visit to India in November 1995 once again                      
 accompanied by a large business delegation. Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs                      
 Gordon Smith visited India in November 1995 for bilateral consultations                             
 preparatory to the Canadian Prime Minister's visit to India in January 1996.                        
                                                                                                     
 Canadian Prime Minister Jean Chretien visited India from 9 to 14 January 1996. He                   
 was accompanied by a "Team Canada" which, apart from 2 Federal Ministers,                           
 included Provincial Premiers, a large official delegation and over 250                              
 businessmen. Apart from Delhi, Chretien visited Bombay and Agra. In a Joint                         
 Statement issued at the end of the visit, the Prime Ministers of India and Canada                   
 expressed determination to provide a strong impetus for establishing close and                      
 broad based cooperation between the two countries. Commercial deals amounting to                    
 Rs 339 crores (C$3.39 billion) were finalised during this visit. A Double                           
 Taxation Avoidance Agreement and Memoranda of Understanding on cooperation in the                   
 fields of Telecommunications, Surface Transport and Heavy Oil Industry were also                    
 concluded during the visit. In Bombay, the Canadian Prime Minister addressed the                    
 CII Partnership Summit while in Delhi he addressed a Special Session of the                         
 Indo-Canada Joint Business Council.                                                                 
                                                                                                     
 From the Indian side, visits to Canada during the year included those of Minister                   
 of State for Petroleum and Natural Gas Captain Satish Sharma (June 1995), the                       
 then Minister of Agriculture Dr Balram Jakhar (October 1995) and Speaker, Lok                       
 Sabha Shri Shivraj Patil accompanied by Minister of State for Chemical &                            
 Fertilizers Shri Eduardo Faleiro and five Members of Parliament (September 1995).                   
                                                                                                     
 Chief Commissioner of the Canadian Human Rights Commission Maxwell Yalden visited                   
 India in February 1995. The Chairman of the National Human Rights Commission,                       
 Justice R Mishra visited Canada in November 1995. Discussions on cooperation                        
 between the two Commissions were held during Justice Mishra's visit.                                
 -81>                                                                                                
 In the period January-September 1995 Canada was the 5th largest investor country                    
 in India with an investment of Rs 398 crores. Bilateral trade from January to                       
 August 1995 amounted to Rs 1633 crores-an increase of 43 per cent over the same                     
 period in 1994. The number of Canadian corporate offices in New Delhi increased                     
 from 7 in 1993 to 40 in 1995. A Canadian Foreign office study on the potential                      
 for Canadian business in India entitled "Focus India" was released by the                           
 Canadian Minister of International Trade Roy MacLaren in June 1995. The study                       
 identified energy, telecommunications environmental products and services as the                    
 priority sectors of Canadian interest in India.                                                     
                                                                                                     
 The 8th Meeting of the Indo-Canada Joint Business Council (JBC) was held in                         
 Canada in June 1995. Apart from Toronto the delegation visited Montreal and                         
 Ottawa. The 9th meeting of the JBC was inaugurated by the Canadian Prime Minister                   
 in New Delhi in January 1996.                                                                       
                                                                                                     
 The Instruments of Ratification of the Mutual Legal Assistance Treaty which was                     
 signed in October 1994 were exchanged in October 1995 thus bringing into effect                     
 the provisions of the Treaty. India and Canada have continued to cooperate on the                   
 fight against terrorism which has led to some checks on the activities of                           
 militant elements of Indian origin in Canada. The Canadian Government has been                      
 urged to exercise greater control under their laws on anti-Indian and the                           
 communally provocative propaganda in the ethnic electronic and print media.                         
 Central and South America and the Caribbeans                                                        
                                                                               Top                   
 India maintains very good relations with all the" countries in the Central and                      
 South American and the Caribbean region. Indo- Latin American relations received                    
 a boost in 1995 because of four VVIP visits to countries in the region and                          
 contacts at various levels in India, in the region and at the United Nations.                       
 President visited Trinidad & Tobago and Chile and Prime Minister visited Colombia                   
 and Argentina.                                                                                      
                                                                                                     
 India has Missions in 13 countries in the region while 10 countries from the                        
 region have Missions in India. India has a                                                          
 -82>                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 number of honorary consuls in the region and many countries of the region have                      
 honorary consuls in India.                                                                          
                                                                                                     
 Presidential and General Elections were held in Argentina, Uruguay, Peru,                           
 Guatemala and Trinidad & Tobago and power transferred smoothly. Most of the                         
 countries in the region have embarked upon successful market liberalisation in                      
 many priority sectors which has helped reduce deficits and inflation. Overall                       
 growth in countries in the region has been remarkable.                                              
                                                                                                     
 Dr Carlos Saul Menem was re-elected as President of Argentina in May 1995. Prime                    
 Minister led a, high level delegation which included Minister of External                           
 Affairs, Minister of State in Prime Minister's Office and senior officers of the                    
 Government to participate in the G-15 Summit held in Buenos Aires from 5 to 7                       
 November. Prime Minister also addressed the conference of the Heads of Indian                       
 Missions in the region. A high level business delegation from CII, FICCI, FIEO                      
 also accompanied the Prime Minister to Buenos Aires. CII has signed a Memorandum                    
 of Understanding with Union Industrial Argentina (UAI) to promote industrial,                       
 technological and investment cooperation by both the countries.                                     
                                                                                                     
 Brazilian Minister for Science & Technology Dr Jose Israel Vargas visited India                     
 from 5 to 8 December 1995 in connection with the visit of the Brazilian President                   
 in January 1996 and held bilateral 'discussions with Minister of State (Science &                   
 Technology).                                                                                        
                                                                                                     
 President of Brazil Dr Fernando Henrique Cardoso accompanied by the Ministers of                    
 Foreign Affairs, Agriculture and Science & Technology, visited India from 24 to                     
 27 January 1996. President Cardoso was the Guest of Honour at the Republic Day                      
 celebrations. President Cardoso met the President, the Vice President and the                       
 Prime Minister. Both countries expressed their desire to strengthen bilateral                       
 relations and add substance to existing ties as well as to cooperation on global                    
 issues. A Joint Indo- Brazilian Declaration was issued and a Joint Agenda for                       
 Scientific and Technological Cooperation, the terms for the formation of an                         
 Indo-Brazil Commercial Council, and a Common Agenda on Environment were signed.                     
 It was also decided to set up a Bilateral Joint Commission.                                         
 -83>                                                                                                
 The then Minister of Railways Shri C K Jaffer Sharief visited Brazil to attend                      
 inauguration ceremony of newly elected President Fernando Henrique Cardoso who                      
 assumed charge of office on I January. The then Minister of Agriculture Dr Balram                   
 Jakhar visited Brazil from 28 to 30 August and a Memorandum of Understanding was                    
 signed between Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR) and Brazilian                         
 Agricultural Research Corporation (EMBARAPA) in the field of agricultural                           
 research. Minister of Food Shri Ajit Singh visited Brazil in September 1995.                        
 Brazilian Vice Minister of External Affairs Sebastiao de Rego Barros visited                        
 India on 14 and 15 November and held successful bilateral discussions to prepare                    
 for the Brazilian President's visit in January 1996. EXIM Bank of India has                         
 identified Brazil as a new market with high potential for Indian dye-stuff and                      
 chemicals exports. Confederation of Indian Industry (CID and Confederation of                       
 National Industries (CNI) of Brazil signed a Memorandum of Understanding in                         
 Buenos Aires during the Fifth G-15 Summit in November 1995. It has been decided                     
 to open a Consulate General in Sao Paulo.                                                           
                                                                                                     
 President Shanker Dayal Sharma paid a state visit to Chile in June 1995 with a                      
 high level delegation including Minister of State for External Affairs Shri                         
 Salman Khurshid, Members of Parliament and other dignitaries. During the visit a                    
 Memorandum of Understanding on bilateral consultations at Foreign Office level                      
 was signed by Minister of State for External Affairs and the Chilean Foreign                        
 Minister. Chilean Minister of Labour attended NAM's Labour Ministers' Conference                    
 held in Delhi in January 1995.                                                                      
                                                                                                     
 The then Minister of Agriculture Dr Balram Jakhar paid an official visit to Cuba                    
 in August 1995 to review the Work Plan with his counterpart in the field of                         
 agriculture. A two-member Cuban delegation led by Jorge Risquest attended CPI(M)                    
 Party Congress held in Chandigarh in April 1995. President of International                         
 Relations Committee of National Assembly of Cuba Jorge Lezeano Perez led a                          
 three-member Cuban Parliamentary delegation on an official visit from 8 to 14                       
 September 1995. The delegation called on President, Speaker of the Lok Sabha,                       
 Vice President and Minister of External                                                             
 -84>                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 Affairs. The delegation addressed a meeting of FICCI. An agreement on Cultural                      
 Exchange Programme (CEP) was signed between India and Cuba during the visit of                      
 Secretary (West) to Cuba in September 1995. A Government Senior Secondary School                    
 in New Delhi was renamed after the Cuban national hero Jose Marti in October                        
 1995.                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 Colombian Minister for External Relations Rodrigo Pardo Garcia- Pena visited                        
 India during 20-23 April and held successful discussions on bilateral and                           
 international issues. India and Colombia have signed a Memorandum of                                
 Understanding on annual bilateral consultations at Foreign Office level. Minister                   
 of Food Shri Ajit Singh led a high level delegation to Colombia from 12 to 16                       
 September 1995 to attend the International Conference of Sugarcane Technologists                    
 at Cali.                                                                                            
                                                                                                     
 Prime Minister Shri P V Narasimha Rao paid an official visit to Cartagena                           
 (Colombia) and led a high level delegation which included Minister of External                      
 Affairs, Minister of State in Prime Minister's Office and senior officers from                      
 Ministry of External Affairs to attend the XIIth NAM Summit from 16 to 20 October                   
 1995.                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 A 120-CRPF-men contingent has gone to Haiti (March-December 1995) as a part of a                    
 UN Mission to establish law and order under the operational command of UN forces.                   
                                                                                                     
 Diplomatic relations at the level of non-resident Ambassadors were established                      
 with Honduras in March 1995.                                                                        
                                                                                                     
 The then Chief Minister of Maharashtra Shri Sharad Pawar visited Mexico in early                    
 1995. India Trade Promotion Organisation (ITPO) signed a Memorandum of                              
 Understanding in May 1995 with Banco Nacional de Comercio Exterior providing for                    
 systematic exchange of information on market, trade conditions, facilitation of                     
 private investment, trade missions and cooperation.                                                 
                                                                                                     
 Minister for External Relations of Nicaragua Dr Ernesto Leal Sanchez paid an                        
 official visit to India from 18 to 22 April and held successful discussions on                      
 bilateral and international issues.                                                                 
 -85>                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 The third meeting of the Indo-Mexican Joint Commission held on 19 and 20 February                   
 at Mexico City identified a number of areas for enhancing cooperation in the                        
 fields of Economy & Commerce, Science & Technology and Culture & Education. A                       
 Memorandum of Understanding on Cooperation in Telecommunication and a Memorandum                    
 of Understanding between CII and its counterpart CONCAMIN was also signed during                    
 the meeting.                                                                                        
                                                                                                     
 In Peru, Presidential elections were held in April 1995. President Alberto                          
 Fujimori was re-elected President for the second term. He assumed charge in July                    
 1995. A Cultural Exchange Programme with Peru for 1996-98 was signed in New Delhi                   
 on 20 March 1996.                                                                                   
                                                                                                     
 In Uruguay, Presidential elections were held in February 1995. Dr Julio Maria                       
 Sanguinetti was sworn in as 42nd President on 1 March 1995.                                         
                                                                                                     
 Minister of State for Petroleum and Natural Gas Captain Satish Sharma paid a                        
 visit to Venezuela in September 1995 to participate in the Fourth International                     
 Energy Conference and also held successful discussions with the Venezuelan                          
 Minister for Energy and Mines. Commonwealth of Dominica closed its High                             
 Commission in New Delhi with the departure of the High Commissioner in July 1995.                   
                                                                                                     
 President Dr Shanker Dayal Sharma paid a three-day state visit from 29 May to                       
 Trinidad & Tobago. The high level delegation included Minister of State for                         
 External Affairs Shri Salman Khurshid, Members of Parliament and other                              
 dignitaries. The President and his delegation participated in the colourful                         
 celebrations of the 150th Anniversary of Arrival of Indians in Trinidad & Tobago.                   
                                                                                                     
 General elections were held in Trinidad & Tobago in November 1995. A leader of                      
 Indian origin Basdeo Panday became the Prime Minister at the head of a coalition                    
 Government. This was the first time that a person of Indian origin has become                       
 Prime Minister of Trinidad & Tobago.                                                                
                                                                                                     
 India took definitive steps to develop dialogue and interaction with regional                       
 groupings in the region. Minister of External                                                       
 -86                                                                                                 
                                                                                                     
 Affairs had the first-ever TROIKA-level discussions with the Rio Group Foreign                      
 Ministers in New York on 29 September 1995 during the UNGA. He also met the                         
 Foreign Ministers of the Central American countries in New York on 28 September                     
 1995. Secretary (West) met the Secretary General of the Association of Caribbean                    
 States in Port of Spain on 26 February 1996.                                                        
                                                                                                     
 A one-day Latin American and Caribbean "Business Mela", sponsored by the Minister                   
 of Commerce and organised by ITPO with the support of Chambers of Commerce &                        
 Industries, was held in Delhi in December 1995. This was inaugurated by Minister                    
 of State for Commerce.                                                                              
                                                                                                     
 A seminar on Emerging Business Opportunities with Latin America was organised by                    
 FICCI, FIEO and CII in October 1995. The seminar was also attended by the Heads                     
 of Missions from the region and Senior Officers from the Ministry. A FICCI                          
 delegation visited Brazil, Cuba and Colombia in November 1995 and a CII                             
 delegation visited Argentina for the G-15 Business forum in November 1995. The                      
 Third International Conference on Hispanic and Ibero-American Studies was                           
 organised in Delhi by the Centre of Spanish Studies of Jawaharlal Nehru                             
 University in cooperation with the Indian Council for Cultural Relations (ICCR)                     
 and the India International Centre (IIC).                                                           
 -87>                                                                                                
 1995                                                                                                
 United Nations and International Organisations                                                      
                                                                               Top                   
 The process of restructuring and reforming the UN, both in terms of institutions                    
 and concepts, continued with great vigour during its 50th anniversary year.                         
 India's efforts were focussed on influencing the debate and changes in accordance                   
 with her world view and her perceptions of the role of the UN. This involved                        
 painstaking negotiations in the various Working Groups set up by the General                        
 Assembly on UN Reforms. Recognising the imperatives of change, India endorsed new                   
 and emerging trends that do not alter the basic premise on which UN was founded.                    
 India also sought to ensure that the Agenda of Development is not altered to the                    
 detriment of the developing countries and that the significance of international                    
 cooperation on transfer of resources is not lost sight of in the emphasis on                        
 national strategies.                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 India was successful in generating international opinion in favour of a                             
 comprehensive reform of the UN Security Council and actively participated in the                    
 deliberations of the Open-Ended Working Group. Against the backdrop of the                          
 indefinite extension of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, India continued to                    
 highlight the importance of nuclear disarmament and the need for elimination of                     
 all nuclear weapons within a time-bound framework. The resolution on measures to                    
 eliminate                                                                                           
 -88>                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 international terrorism was adopted by the Sixth Committee by consensus. India                      
 continued her active participation in UN Peace Keeping Operations across the                        
 globe. Constructive contribution was made by India in the series of major                           
 conferences held during the year, namely, the World Summit for Social                               
 Development, Copenhagen, the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, the XI                      
 NAM Summit, Cartagena, and the Special Commemorative Meeting for UN's 50th                          
 Anniversary, New York.                                                                              
                                                                                                     
 India commemorated the 50th anniversary of the UN with a series of well-attended                    
 events, including the release of commemorative stamps and coins. The Indian                         
 National Committee supported a series of events including seminars and                              
 publication of books to bring the message of the UN to the people and trace                         
 India's consistent support for and active participation in the UN.                                  
                                                                                                     
 Special Commemorative Meeting of Heads of State/Government on the occasion of                       
 UN's 50th Anniversary                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 The year-long activities to mark the 50th anniversary of the founding of the UN                     
 and the entry into force of its Charter culminated at the Special Commemorative                     
 Meeting (SCM) of Heads of State/Government in New York from 22 to 24 October                        
 1995. The SCM was a demonstration by the international community that it                            
 continues to see the UN as a multilateral inter-Governmental institution which                      
 has a concrete role to play in the evolving structure of international relations.                   
                                                                                                     
 India was represented by a high-level delegation led by Prime Minister Shri P V                     
 Narasimha Rao. The SCM provided opportunity for reflection and introspection on                     
 the achievements of the UN and its future role in the next century. Addressing                      
 the SCM, Prime Minister articulated a vision for the future of the UN, a vision                     
 that would enhance its relevance particularly for developing countries. Prime                       
 Minister stated that if the relevance of the UN was to continue, it would need to                   
 address root causes of the problems that afflict mankind. These included the                        
 issues of nuclear disarmament, poverty and underdevelopment, international                          
 terrorism, fundamentalist trends based on intolerance and                                           
 -89>                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 exclusivism. He urged the international community to take urgent steps to                           
 eliminate all nuclear weapons within a stipulated timeframe. Condemning                             
 international terrorism, he said that when terrorism was sponsored and supported                    
 by States, it constituted another means of waging war and urged the international                   
 community to combat this menace since it threatened the very basis of peaceful                      
 societies. He also highlighted the crying need of a vast majority of nations for                    
 all-round development and the need for adequate presence of developing countries                    
 on the Security Council since , it was imperative that all nations felt that                        
 their stakes in global peace and prosperity were factored into UN decision                          
 making.                                                                                             
                                                                                                     
 Approximately, 142 Heads of State or Government addressed the SCM. A solemn                         
 Declaration was adopted by the SCM. India played an active role in the drafting                     
 of the Declaration and evolving a consensus on the many key issues including the                    
 concerns of developing countries. The Declaration inter alia:                                       
                                                                                                     
 recommits the UN to the greater service of humankind, particularly those who are                    
 suffering and deeply deprived;                                                                      
                                                                                                     
 extends support to UN, regional and national efforts on arms control, limitation,                   
 disarmament and non-proliferation of nuclear weapons, including biological and                      
 chemical weapons, etc; and calls upon the international community to act together                   
 to defeat threats to States and people posed by international terrorism in all                      
 its forms.                                                                                          
                                                                                                     
 On Development issues, the Declaration recognises the important role that the UN                    
 can play in promoting economic and social development. It recognises the growing                    
 disparities between developed and developing countries and the need for                             
 extraordinary measures, including international cooperation to tackle the                           
 problems of poverty.                                                                                
 1995                                                                                                
 Political Issues                                                                                    
                                                                               Top                   
 India continued to actively participate in UN. peace-keeping operations. India                      
 contributed one battalion troops to the UN Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM).                    
 The contingent was                                                                                  
 -90>                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 despatched in July 1995. An infantry battalion consisting of 800 troops and a                       
 Movement Control Unit, 22 military observers and 9 staff officers were also                         
 provided by India to UN Assistance Mission in Rwanda (UNAMIR). India had provided                   
 one CRPF company to the UN Assistance Mission in Haiti (UNMIH), Phase II. In                        
 addition, India provided five military observers to UN Observer Mission in                          
 Liberia (UNOMIL) and seven military observers to the UN Iraq Kuwait Observer                        
 Mission (UNIKOM). India has agreed to contribute up to one brigade troops to UN                     
 Standby Force.                                                                                      
                                                                                                     
 India also contributed actively to the debate and decisions of the Special                          
 Committee on peace-keeping operations and the NAM Working Group on peace-keeping.                   
 A major outcome this year was the introduction of a section containing guiding                      
 principles for peace-keeping.                                                                       
                                                                                                     
 Some developed countries focussed on strengthening of Department of peace-keeping                   
 operations and in particular the capacity for rapid response. A number of                           
 proposals advocated a more interventionist approach by the UN. India and                            
 like-minded countries were opposed to any interventionist approach but accepted                     
 the creation of a rapidly deployable headquarters capability. India and NAM                         
 called for careful consideration of the UNSG's proposal for a UN standing army in                   
 view of their political and legal implications.                                                     
                                                                                                     
 The Open-Ended Working Group (OEWG) of the UN General Assembly on the question of                   
 "equitable representation on an increase in the membership of the Security                          
 Council" continued its deliberation in 1995. The OEWG has been mandated to                          
 continue its work and submit "any agreed recommendations" before the end of the                     
 50th GA in September 1996. Important differences continue to exist on key issues,                   
 which require further in-depth consideration.                                                       
                                                                                                     
 India has consistently called for the expansion of both the permanent and                           
 non-permanent categories of membership on the basis of objective criteria for                       
 selecting permanent members. These criteria include population, size of economy,                    
 contribution to the maintenance of international peace and security and future                      
 potential. During his statement in the general                                                      
 -91>                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 debate in the 50th UNGA, the Minister of External Affairs Shri Pranab Mukherjee                     
 restated India's claim for permanent seat of the Security Council. India's                          
 position was further reiterated in Prime Minister's address both at the XI NAM                      
 Summit in Cartagena and the. Special Commemorative meeting of the UN.                               
                                                                                                     
 Bhutan, Cuba, Dominican Republic and Mauritius have declared support for India's                    
 candidature for permanent membership of the Security Council. A large number of                     
 other countries have supported a broad-based expansion of the Security Council                      
 which would include developing countries in the permanent members category. The                     
 Non-Aligned Movement at its XI Summit endorsed increased representation of                          
 nonaligned countries in the Security Council.                                                       
                                                                                                     
 On the broader issue of reform and re-structuring of the UN, an Open-Ended High                     
 Level Group of the GA on the Strengthening of the UN System was established at                      
 the 50th session of the UNGA. India is Co-Chairman along with New Zealand. The                      
 Group's report is expected to be submitted by the end of the 50th session of the                    
 GA. India also participated actively in the other working groups dealing with the                   
 financial situation, agenda for development, etc. India supports efforts to                         
 ensure strengthening and re- vitalisation of the GA and the ECOSOC to reorient                      
 the focus of UN towards development.                                                                
                                                                                                     
 India effectively countered Pakistan's attempts, including through the OIC, to                      
 keep alive the issue of self-determination on Kashmir as also the                                   
 non-implementation by India of Security Council resolutions on Kashmir. Apart'.                     
 from setting the record straight, a sustained and systematic effort was                             
 maintained to ensure that Pakistan's baseless allegations and ulterior objectives                   
 were defeated.                                                                                      
                                                                                                     
 Resolution on "Measures to Eliminate International Terrorism" was adopted by                        
 consensus at 50th UNGA reflecting the growing international realisation of the                      
 dangers of terrorism. The Resolution reaffirmed the Declaration on Measures to                      
 Eliminate International Terrorism, and urged all States to implement effectively                    
 and in good faith its provisions in all its                                                         
 -92>                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 aspects. It also urged all States to strengthen cooperation to ensure that those                    
 who participate in terrorist activities find no safe haven anywhere.                                
 Disarmament and International Security                                                              
                                                                               Top                   
 India continued to play a leading role in various multilateral disarmament                          
 fora-the Conference on Disarmament (CD) in Geneva, the UN Disarmament Commission                    
 (UNDC) and the First Committee of the UNGA. However, the indefinite extension of                    
 the NPT in May 1995 by states parties without securing any binding commitment                       
 from the Nuclear Weapon States (NWS) on nuclear disarmament and the continued                       
 nuclear testing by some Nuclear Weapon States in face of international criticism                    
 cast a shadow on any serious attempts to move towards the complete elimination of                   
 nuclear weapons. In keeping with her long-standing approach to nuclear                              
 disarmament as the first step towards general and complete disarmament, India was                   
 actively associated with global measures which would be essential for the                           
 elimination of nuclear weapons in a time bound manner. Progress was achieved to                     
 some extent in the area of a comprehensive test ban and a freeze in the                             
 production of fissile material for weapons.                                                         
                                                                                                     
 In 1995, negotiations continued at the ad hoc Committee. of the CD on Nuclear                       
 Test Ban (NTB) established in January 1994 with a full negotiating mandate to                       
 conclude a Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty (CTBT). A second draft "rolling text" of                   
 the CTBT was circulated in July 1995. India proposed a draft article on the scope                   
 of the treaty which would preclude any kind of nuclear testing activity. India                      
 made a statement at the CD on 25 January 1996 which contained the following                         
 points: (i) In order to be meaningful the CTBT should be securely anchored in the                   
 global disarmament context and be linked through treaty language to the                             
 elimination of all nuclear weapons in a time bound framework; (ii) The CTBT must                    
 not leave any loophole for activity, either explosive based or non-explosive                        
 based, aimed at the continued development and refinement of nuclear weapons.                        
 India tabled amendments to the text of the treaty at the Ad hoc Committee on 26                     
 January 1996.                                                                                       
 -93>                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 China continued its nuclear testing programme. The first Chinese test of 1995 was                   
 conducted three days after the indefinite extension of the NPT. Following an                        
 announcement on 13 June 1995, France resumed nuclear testing in the South Pacific                   
 in September 1995. The G-21 (which includes India) issued a statement condemning                    
 these developments. In a statement issued on 15 September, India expressed dismay                   
 over the recent nuclear tests and urged all countries to refrain from activities                    
 contrary to the objectives of the CTBT while the latter was being negotiated. In                    
 August, both France and the US expressed their commitment to a "zero test" ban.                     
 Subsequently, the UK also supported this position.                                                  
                                                                                                     
 On 11 May 1995, the states parties to the NPT adopted a decision to indefinitely                    
 extend the treaty. Despite the efforts of several non-nuclear weapon states, no                     
 binding commitment could be secured from the NWS on a phased programme of nuclear                   
 disarmament within a stipulated timeframe. During the NPT Review and Extension                      
 Conference, the states parties decided to give priority to the universalisation                     
 of the treaty and specifically called on India, Israel and Pakistan to join the                     
 treaty. India categorically stated on 12 May that the decision taken to                             
 indefinitely extend the treaty did not in any way change her position on the NPT                    
 which enjoyed national consensus. India will not sign the NPT in its present                        
 form. She will continue to work for achieving genuine non-proliferation through                     
 the elimination of all nuclear weapons.                                                             
                                                                                                     
 These developments have made it necessary for India to emphasise in all relevant                    
 multilateral fora that her support for CTBT and FMCT is based on the belief that                    
 they are not merely instruments for dealing with the risk "of horizontal                            
 non-proliferation but are an integral part of a step-by-step approach towards                       
 global nuclear disarmament. It is, therefore, essential that such measures be                       
 placed squarely within a framework of disarmament process and contain binding                       
 commitments on the part of the international community, especially the Nuclear                      
 Weapons States to take further measures within an agreed timeframe to move                          
 towards the creation of India's shared goal of a Nuclear Weapon free world. This                    
 year, India could not co-sponsor the CTBT resolution                                                
 -94>                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 in the UN General Assembly because Indian amendments linking the CTBT with global                   
 nuclear disarmament in a time bound framework did not find acceptance. However,                     
 India did not stand in the way of consensus.                                                        
                                                                                                     
 Further to the 1993 UN consensus resolution co-sponsored by India which called                      
 for negotiations on a Convention on the Prohibition of the Production of                            
 Fissionable Material for Weapons Purposes, a Special Coordinator was set up at                      
 the Conference on Disarmament in 1994. In March 1995, an ad hoc Committee was                       
 established which has not yet started functioning. While the mandate of the ad                      
 hoc Committee has not been spelt out, it is based on the compromise report of the                   
 Special Coordinator which, while basing it on the 1993 resolution, does not                         
 preclude the raising of any other issue. For the second year in succession no                       
 resolution could be adopted in the UNGA due to differences on the draft text of                     
 the resolution.                                                                                     
                                                                                                     
 A group of countries including India, Myanmar, Mexico, Egypt, Colombia and                          
 Pakistan co-sponsored a resolution in the First Committee, which, inter alia,                       
 calls on the Conference on Disarmament to establish on a priority basis an ad hoc                   
 committee on nuclear disarmament to commence negotiations in early 1996 on a                        
 phased programme of nuclear disarmament and for the eventual elimination of                         
 nuclear weapons within a time bound framework. The resolution was adopted in the                    
 first committee by 99 votes in favour, 39 against and 15 abstentions. This                          
 resolution was basically the outcome of an Indian initiative calling for global                     
 nuclear disarmament in a time bound framework which was strongly endorsed at the                    
 recently concluded XI NAM Summit at Cartagena.                                                      
                                                                                                     
 India also tabled her resolution on the subject of a Convention on the                              
 Prohibition of the Use and Threat of Use of Nuclear Weapons. The first committee                    
 of the UN adopted it with 95 votes in favour, 23 against and 31 abstentions. The                    
 voting pattern revealed that some of the Nuclear Weapons States and their allies                    
 continue to oppose the resolution. India's resolution on Scientific and                             
 Technological Developments and Their Impact on International Security was adopted                   
 by the First Committee with 98 votes in favour, 6 against and 51 abstentions.                       
 -95>                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 India continued efforts at the UNGA for the convening of a Fourth Special Session                   
 of the General Assembly devoted to Disarmament (SSOD-IV), initiated a year ago as                   
 a NAM resolution.                                                                                   
                                                                                                     
 India continued to be actively involved in the working of the ad hoc group of                       
 states parties to the Biological Weapons Convention to consider verification                        
 measures under the BWC. Three sessions of the ad hoc group were held in 1995.                       
                                                                                                     
 The Review Conference of the States Parties to the Convention on Prohibition or                     
 Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to be                   
 Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects (Inhumane Weapons                           
 Convention) was held at Vienna from 25 September to 13 October 1995. India is a                     
 state party to the Convention. The major issues related to Protocol II of the                       
 Convention which deals with restrictions on indiscriminate use of land mines.                       
 India expressed the view that in view of the large scale suffering of civilians                     
 by such weapons, states parties should take necessary measures to end                               
 indiscriminate use of land mines and their export. The Conference was unable to                     
 reach any conclusions and it was decided to hold two more sessions in 1996.                         
                                                                                                     
 India continued her principled opposition to ad hoc export control regimes such                     
 as the Australia Group, Nuclear Suppliers Group (NSG) and the Missile Technology                    
 Control Regime (MTCR) in various international fora and called for their                            
 conversion into universal, transparent, non-discriminatory treaties which clearly                   
 distinguish between civilian and military applications.                                             
                                                                                                     
 India's views on the Australia Group have been articulated time and again at the                    
 Preparatory Commission of the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical                          
 Weapons (OPCW) which meets in plenary sessions and expert level meetings at The                     
 Hague. India, which became an original signatory to the Chemical Weapons                            
 Convention (CWC) in January 1993 is fully involved in the activities of the three                   
 of the Expert Groups of the PREPCOM. Besides technical experts from concerned                       
 departments regularly participating in the inter-sessional                                          
 -96>                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 meetings, India has completed all internal procedures towards ratification and is                   
 committed to be one of the first 65 States to ratify the CWC.                                       
                                                                                                     
 Economic, Social and Humanitarian Issues                                                            
                                                                               Top                   
 The World Summit for Social Development was held in Copenhagen from 10 to 12                        
 March 1995. Prime Minister led a high 'level Indian delegation to the Summit                        
 which was attended by over 118 Heads of State or Government. The Summit adopted                     
 the Copenhagen Declaration and the Programme of Action. The Declaration commits                     
 the international community to ten commitments undertaken for the common pursuit                    
 of social development, aimed at social justice, solidarity, harmony, and equality                   
 within and among countries. As a developing country devoted to social uplift,                       
 India was gratified to see the international community focussing its energies on                    
 the crucial issues of poverty eradication, employment generation and social                         
 development. India played a catalytic role in forging a global consensus on a                       
 range of development issues at this Summit and is continuing to work actively in                    
 UN and other fora to ensure that the painstakingly negotiated commitments are                       
 implemented through effective follow-up action.                                                     
                                                                                                     
 The Fourth World Conference on Women was held in Beijing, China from 1 to 15                        
 September 1995. This was preceded by the NAM Ministerial Meeting on Women on                        
 Development (2-3 September 1995) and Commonwealth Ministerial Meeting (3                            
 September 1995). A series of ancillary meetings including an IPU Conference and                     
 an NGO forum were also organised around this Conference. A high level Indian                        
 delegation comprising Members of Parliament, Members of Legislative Assemblies,                     
 senior' officials and women activists led by the then Minister for Human Resource                   
 Development Shri Madhavrao Scindia participated in the Conference. Over 500                         
 Indian NGOs made their presence felt at the NGO forum, while over 100 NGOs were                     
 accredited to the Conference itself                                                                 
                                                                                                     
 The Beijing Conference adopted a Declaration ' and Platform of Action. India                        
 played a catalytic role in the Conference, ensuring that the concerns of the                        
 majority of women who reside in                                                                     
 -97>                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 developing countries were addressed, particularly on poverty eradication, health                    
 care and education. India was instrumental in securing the categorical commitment                   
 to new additional financial resources and above all in ensuring that human rights                   
 of women, particularly the right to equality, are guaranteed without any                            
 qualifications. India particularly highlighted the special needs of the girl                        
 child which are often lost sight of in the larger picture of development of                         
 women.                                                                                              
                                                                                                     
 India continued to play an active role in the Economic and Social Council, the                      
 Second Committee of the UN, the Governing Boards of the specialised agencies and                    
 various international meetings on social and environmental issues. India sought                     
 to ensure that development issues remained high on the agenda of UN. Following                      
 the establishment of WTO, India's efforts were directed towards promoting an                        
 open, fair and equitable international environment conducive to sustained                           
 economic growth.                                                                                    
                                                                                                     
 In all these fora, India's attempt was to project the concerns of developing                        
 countries, to highlight the importance of attaching priority to the eradication                     
 of poverty, to stress the need for new and additional resources to be made                          
 available to developing countries to meet their sustainable development                             
 requirements, to project their needs and concerns in the areas of finance, trade,                   
 technology flows, debt, etc. .                                                                      
                                                                                                     
 India also participated in the discussions in the Group of 77, in the ECOSOC and                    
 GA regarding the elements that should constitute a new Agenda for Development.                      
 This is currently being discussed in the UN and would be negotiated in a working                    
 group of the GA next year to define the framework in the coming years of the role                   
 of UN and parameters of international cooperation in development.                                   
                                                                                                     
 Currently, discussions are going on in the UN regarding an effective follow up to                   
 the series of UN conferences held over the past five years. India is working with                   
 the Group of 77 to ensure that the UN is involved in this process in a                              
 coordinated manner, that the question of resources, particularly international                      
 resources, gets adequate attention and that national plans and priorities of                        
 developing countries are the basis.                                                                 
 -98>                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 Discussions are also going on regarding reform of the UN in the economic and                        
 social sectors, in particular of ECOSOC and its subsidiary machinery. India                         
 supports the streamlining and a more efficient operation of the UN. However, the                    
 objective has to be to strengthen it to promote the cause of development and the                    
 interests of developing countries rather than approaching reform purely as a                        
 budget reduction exercise. India has worked along these lines with the G-77.                        
                                                                                                     
 India actively participated in various conferences and discussions on environment                   
 issues aimed at the implementation of the agreements reached at UNCED and Agenda                    
 21. The specific areas of activities are given below:                                               
                                                                                                     
 (i) The third session of the Commission on Sustainable Development (CSD)                            
 including the High-Level Segment was held in New York during 11 to 28 April 1995.                   
 The Session reviewed in detail the follow-up at national and global levels of                       
 chapters 10-16 of Agenda 21 relating to land and land use, forests, agriculture,                    
 deforestation, mountain development and bio- diversity. In addition, the cross                      
 sectoral themes of financial resources, transfer of technologies, changing                          
 consumption patterns were also discussed. The Commission established an                             
 Inter-Governmental Panel on Forests. Secretary, Environment & Forests Shri N R                      
 Krishnan was appointed as Co-Chair of the Forestry Panel. The CSD highlighted the                   
 question of financial support for national efforts in developing countries and                      
 countries with economies in transition. It expressed concern at the inadequate                      
 availability of new and additional resources which would constrain effective                        
 implementation of Agenda 21 and undermine the process of global partnership for                     
 sustainable development. It was felt that unless there was an increase in ODA                       
 levels and an improvement in the international economic climate, it would be                        
 difficult to translate the Rio commitment into action.                                              
                                                                                                     
 The CSD has proved to be a catalyst for policy action for numerous areas. It has                    
 motivated numerous government meetings and workshops related to the                                 
 implementation of Agenda 21, fostered coordination on sustainable develop-                          
 -99>                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 ment within the UN system and helped to defuse much of the resistance to NGO and                    
 major group activities and action aimed at sustainable development at the                           
 international, national and local levels.                                                           
                                                                                                     
 (ii) As a follow up of the meeting of the first Conference of Parties to the                        
 Framework Convention on Climate Change held in March 1995 in Berlin, the ad hoc                     
 Group on the Berlin Mandate met in August and in October, 1995 in order to                          
 commence the process of strengthening the commitments of the developed countries.                   
 Progress was achieved in narrowing down the range of issues which had to be                         
 identified in order to set new quantified emission targets for the developed                        
 countries by 1997.                                                                                  
                                                                                                     
 (iii) The XII meeting of the Open Ended Working Group of the Montreal Protocol                      
 was held in Geneva in August/September 1995. India was active in projecting her                     
 interests especially on issues concerning the inadequacy of funding for the                         
 multilateral fund, transfer of technology, phasing out of certain ODS's and the                     
 definition of the term "basic domestic need" in the Protocol.                                       
                                                                                                     
 (iv) The 7th session of the Inter Governmental Negotiating Committee for                            
 Desertification UNCD) was held in Nairobi on 7 and 8 August 1995. Among the                         
 issues discussed were the global nature of the Convention including the needs of                    
 Asia, the modalities of the financial mechanism and the replenishment of the                        
 Special Voluntary Fund for participation of developing countries.                                   
 (v) India participated in the second meeting of the Conference of Parties (COP)                     
 to the Convention on Biological Diversity in Jakarta, Indonesia during 6-17                         
 November 1995. The Agenda included item on technology transfer, protocol on                         
 biosafety, access to genetic resources, intellectual property rights (IPRs)                         
 relating to use of biological resources and the Rules of Procedure. the COP                         
 decided in favour of Montreal, Canada as the location for the permanent                             
 Secretariat of the Convention. Two other important decisions related to                             
 establishing a Clearing House Mechanism (CHM) in the secretariat for exchange                       
 -100>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 of information and expertise and continuation of global environment facility                        
 (GEF) as the interim institutional financial mechanism for the convention. The                      
 COP also decided to establish an open-ended ad hoc working group to develop a                       
 Protocol on Biosafety under the Convention. India along with most of the                            
 developing countries had argued in favour of such a protocol right from the                         
 beginning.                                                                                          
                                                                                                     
 (vi) The UN Conference on Conservation and Management of Straddling Fish Stocks                     
 and Highly Migratory, Fish Stocks concluded its deliberations and the Final Act                     
 of the Agreement was opened for signature in New York during the 50th UNGA. As a                    
 coastal State, India had participated actively in the Conference and has signed                     
 the Final Act.                                                                                      
 Human Rights                                                                                        
                                                                               Top                   
 India continued to participate constructively in deliberations on human rights                      
 issues in UN fora in keeping with her commitment to promotion and protection of                     
 human rights at home and abroad. During the year, the UN High Commissioner for                      
 Human Rights Jose Ayala Lasso visited India at the invitation of the Government                     
 of India. Apart from discussions in Delhi, he visited Jammu & Kashmir and Punjab.                   
 The UNHCHR expressed his appreciation for India's policy of transparency in                         
 promotion and protection of human rights.                                                           
                                                                                                     
 The 51st Session of the Commission on Human Rights was held from 31 January to 11                   
 March 1995. The Indian delegation was led by the Minister of Civil Aviation Shri                    
 Ghulam Nabi Azad. Finance Minister Dr Manmohan Singh also addressed the                             
 Commission. As in previous years, this Session also saw a concerted and sustained                   
 campaign by Pakistan to attack India on human rights issues through statements of                   
 the Pak delegation and Pak-backed NGOs. The main objective of Pakistan in raising                   
 human rights violations in Jammu & Kashmir was to draw maximum international                        
 attention to its allegations and thereby to continue its campaign of                                
 internationalising the Jammu & Kashmir issue. Throughout the course of the                          
 Session, the Indian delegation effectively countered Pakistan's offensive through                   
 statements, rebuttals                                                                               
 -101>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 of Pak Government and NGO-backed propaganda, and lobbying with other Government                     
 delegations.                                                                                        
                                                                                                     
 India played a major role in the discussions and deliberations of this Session of                   
 the Commission on various human rights issues including those relating to                           
 administration of justice, minorities, indigenous people, women and the impact of                   
 terror ' ism on human rights. The Commission adopted a resolution titled "Human                     
 Rights and Terrorism" which described terrorism as aggression aimed at the                          
 destruction of, human rights, fundamental freedoms and democracy,, threatening                      
 territorial integrity and security of States, destabilising legitimately                            
 constituted Governments, undermining pluralistic civil society and having adverse                   
 consequences on the economic and social development of States.                                      
                                                                                                     
 The 47th Session of Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection                   
 of Minorities met in Geneva from 31 July to 25 August 1995. This is an expert                       
 body which deliberates on the range of human rights issues. The Sub-Commission,                     
 inter alia, discussed thematic issues relating to minorities, administration of                     
 justice, economic and cultural rights, abolition of contemporary forms of                           
 slavery, indigenous people and the effects of terrorism on human rights. A                          
 Chairman's text condemning the practice of Hostage Taking (by Al Faran in Jammu &                   
 Kashmir) was adopted by the Sub-Commission.                                                         
                                                                                                     
 A Memorandum of Understanding was signed between the Government of India and the                    
 International Committee of Red Cross (ICRC) granting access to ICRC to all                          
 persons arrested and detained in connection with prevailing situation in Jammu &                    
 Kashmir. The Memorandum of Understanding lays down the procedures for these                         
 visits which are to be conducted in an independent, impartial and constructive                      
 spirit.                                                                                             
                                                                                                     
 India participated in the 26th International Conference of the Red Cross and Red                    
 Crescent Societies held in Geneva from 3 to 7 December 1995. The Conference                         
 provided a useful and timely opportunity for constructive interaction of                            
 promotion of cooperation among the Geneva conventions, for furthering the                           
 humanitarian mission of movement and for fostering respect                                          
 -102>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 for humanitarian values. India's strong commitment to respecting her obligations                    
 under the Geneva Conventions was re-affirmed at the conference. The 26th                            
 International Conference adopted a number of resolutions related to the                             
 implementation and dissemination of IHL, the protection of civilians in periods                     
 of arm conflict, the principles and action in international humanitarian                            
 assistance and protection, the strengthening of the capacity of national                            
 societies to provide humanitarian and' development assistance as well as                            
 protection to the most vulnerable during natural or man-made disasters.                             
                                                                                                     
 Administrative and Budgetary Issues                                                                 
                                                                               Top                   
 The UN Secretary-General in his annual report to the General Assembly referred to                   
 the acute financial crisis being faced by the UN arising from non-payment of dues                   
 both to the regular and peace-keeping budget. India, which has fulfilled her                        
 payment obligations on a regular and timely basis, continued to participate                         
 actively in the work of the Fifth Committee.                                                        
                                                                                                     
 The Open-Ended High Level Working Group on the Financial Situation of the United                    
 Nations which commenced its deliberations early in 1995 discussed various aspects                   
 relating to the financial crisis, including inter alia issues relating to timely                    
 payment of contributions, the problem of arrears owed by Member States to the UN                    
 and possible changes in the methodology of calculating the scales of assessment.                    
 No agreement was reached and the Working Group will resume in early 1996. Some                      
 progress was made in ' advancing the argument that the question of arrears needs                    
 to be dealt with along with other measures if the membership is to find viable                      
 solutions to the financial crisis. The Working Group also agreed to deliberate on                   
 the issue of payment of debts owed to member states including India for earlier                     
 peace-keeping operations (ONUC and UNEF I) and on ways of addressing concerns of                    
 troop contributors. An intensified level of discussion is anticipated from early                    
 1996 in the ' Working Group, especially in the light of statements from the                         
 Secretary General that the organisation will be facing an unprecedented                             
 -103>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 crisis with no usable reserves and overwhelming debts by mid-                                       
 1996.                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 Within the Fifth Committee the focus was on continued efforts at reform and                         
 budgetary management, especially in the context of the proposed programme budget                    
 for 1996-97. India was positive towards various proposals to introduce reform in                    
 current procurement and asset management polcies and procedures, and the                            
 strengthening of internal and external oversight. Further progress is expected to                   
 be made next year. Budget discussions are still underway and efforts to protect                     
 funds for promotion of development and to ensure funds for implementation of the                    
 declaration on the elimination of international terrorism and the right to                          
 development are continuing.                                                                         
                                                                                                     
 With regard to India's claims for troops and equipment provided to peace-keeping                    
 operations, full reimbursement has been made for her participation in PKOs in                       
 Mozambique and Cambodia. Some amounts are st ill outstanding for troop                              
 contributions to Somalia, Rwanda and Angola and for contingent owned equipment                      
 provided by India for PKOs.                                                                         
                                                                                                     
 Elections and Appointments                                                                          
                                                                               Top                   
 During the year, India was elected or nominated by acclamation/consensus to the                     
 following bodies:-                                                                                  
                                                                                                     
 1 Dr (Smt) Najma Heptullah, Deputy Chairman of the Rajya Sabha to the Executive                     
 Council of the Inter Parliamentary Union (IPU) for a period of four years.                          
                                                                                                     
 2 Council of International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO) Part II for the                       
 period 1995-98.                                                                                     
                                                                                                     
 3 Council of International Maritime Organisation, Category B for two-year term                      
 beginning January 1996.                                                                             
                                                                                                     
 4 The Advisory Committee on Administrative & Budgetary Questions (ACABQ).                           
                                                                                                     
 5 Shri S G Somiah, Comptroller & Auditor General of India re- elected as member                     
 of the UN Board of Auditors for a three-year term beginning January 1996.                           
 -104>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 6 Shri Narendra Sharma of India elected as one of the Vice Chairmen of the Asia                     
 Pacific Telecommunity for the period 1996- 1997.                                                    
                                                                                                     
 7 The World Food Council for a three-year term beginning January 1996.                              
                                                                                                     
 8 The Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme for a                           
 four-year term beginning January 1996.                                                              
                                                                                                     
 9 The Commission on Human Settlement for a four-year term beginning January 1996.                   
                                                                                                     
 10 Shri N R Krishnan, Secretary (E&F) appointed as the Chairman of the Board of                     
 Governors of the International Centre for Integrated Mountain Development for one                   
 year from November 1995. He was also nominated by acclamation to co-chair the                       
 Inter- Governmental Panel on Forests for one year (1995-96).                                        
                                                                                                     
 11 Dr A V S Reddy elected as Director, Centre for Integrated Rural Development                      
 for Asia and Pacific (CIRDAP), with headquarters at Dhaka for a period of 2                         
 years.                                                                                              
                                                                                                     
 12 The Council of the FAO for a period of three years.                                              
                                                                                                     
 13 The Programme and Budget Committee of UNIDO for a period of two years.                           
                                                                                                     
 14 At the 28th General Conference of UN Educational, Scientific and Cultural                        
 Organisation (UNESCO) held at Paris during 25 October-16 November 1995, India was                   
 elected to the following:                                                                           
                                                                                                     
 (a) Council of the International Bureau of Education for a period of 4 years.                       
                                                                                                     
 (b) International Coordination Council of Programme of Man and Biosphere for a                      
 period of 4 years.                                                                                  
                                                                                                     
 (c) Inter-Governmental Council for the International Hydrological Programme for a                   
 period of 4 years.                                                                                  
                                                                                                     
 (d) Inter-Governmental Committee for promoting the return of Cultural Property to                   
 its Countries of Origin or its restitution in case of illicit appropriation for a                   
 period of 4 years.                                                                                  
 -105>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 International Law: Developments and Activities                                                      
                                                                               Top                   
 The Forty Seventh Session of the International Law Commission (ILC) was held at                     
 Geneva from 2 to 22 May 1995. Joint Secretary in the Legal & Treaties Division                      
 was elected as Chairman of the Commission for this year. At this session, the                       
 Commission considered the Draft Code of Crimes against the Peace and Security of                    
 Mankind in its second reading and agreed' to initially work on a limited set of                     
 four crimes as opposed to twelve crimes taken up earlier in the first reading. On                   
 State Responsibility, the Commission discussed, the legal consequences of                           
 internationally wrongful acts characterised as "crimes"; finalised articles with                    
 commentaries, on proportionality and prohibited countermeasures, and on                             
 settlement of disputes. On the topic of international. liability, the Commission                    
 made further progress and finalised four more articles and discussed proposals on                   
 the definition of harm to environment. The Commission also commenced work in a                      
 preliminary way on two other topics, namely, the law of reservations to treaties                    
 and the impact of State succession on nationality.                                                  
                                                                                                     
 The United Nations Commission on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL) held its                        
 Twenty Eighth session from 2 to 26 May 1995 at Vienna. During the session, the                      
 main focus of the Commission was on completion of the draft United Nations                          
 Convention on Independent Bank Guarantees and Standby Letters of Credit. The                        
 purpose of the Convention is to establish uniform rules for independent bank                        
 guarantees and stand-by letters of credit in particular with regard to prevention                   
 of fraudulent or abusive payments, demands, under such instruments. The other                       
 substantive items considered by the Commission were the draft Model Law on Legal                    
 Aspects of Electronic Data in International Trade. This is an effort by the                         
 Commission to eliminate legal obstacles to the wider use of "Electronic Data                        
 Interchange" in trade transactions. The Commission also reviewed amendments to                      
 the Draft Notes on Organising Arbitral Proceedings with a view to making arbitral                   
 proceedings more practicable and efficient.                                                         
 -106>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 The main agenda items considered at the Fiftieth Session of the United Nations                      
 General Assembly, by the Sixth (Legal) Committee held from 26 September to 29                       
 November 1995 were: the work of the International Law Commission (ILC); the                         
 United Nations Commission on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL); the                                
 Sub-Committee on the Charter of the United Nations and on the Strengthening of                      
 the Role of the Organisation; Measures to Eliminate International Terrorism;                        
 Establishment of an International Criminal Court; Review of the Role of                             
 Trusteeship Council; decision to delete article 11 of the Statute of the United                     
 Nations Administrative Tribunal; and Status of the Diplomatic Courier and                           
 Diplomatic Bag not accompanied by diplomatic courier.                                               
                                                                                                     
 The Indian delegation participated actively in the Committee's deliberations,                       
 including its consultations on several matters and commented on the progress made                   
 by the International Law Commission and on the question of preparation of Statute                   
 for an International Criminal Court.                                                                
                                                                                                     
 On the recommendation of the Sixth Committee, the General Assembly:                                 
                                                                                                     
 (i) adopted resolutions which strongly condemned all acts of terrorism as                           
 criminal and unjustifiable, urged States not to provide safe havens to terrorists                   
 and called upon them to implement obligations under existing international                          
 conventions and to contribute to further development of international law;                          
                                                                                                     
 (ii) decided to establish a Preparatory Committee to discuss further major                          
 substantive and administrative issues with a view to preparing a widely                             
 acceptable consolidated text of a Convention for an International Criminal Court;                   
                                                                                                     
 (iii) decided to initiate the procedure to amend the UN Charter to delete the                       
 "enemy- State" clauses;                                                                             
                                                                                                     
 (iv) adopted the UN Model Rules for the Conciliation of Disputes between States;                    
                                                                                                     
 (v) decided to delete Article 11 of the Statutes of the UN Administrative                           
 Tribunal which would abolish the                                                                    
 -107>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 Committee to Review the Decisions of the Administrative Tribunal;                                   
                                                                                                     
 (vi) decided that the Special Charter Committee will be open to all                                 
 member-States;                                                                                      
                                                                                                     
 (vii) adopted a resolution on implementation of the Charter provisions relating                     
 to assistance to third States affected by the application of sanctions; and                         
                                                                                                     
 (viii) decided to seek the views of States on the proposal for inclusion of a new                   
 item on "diplomatic protection" on the agenda of the International Law                              
 Commission.                                                                                         
                                                                                                     
 Pursuant to a resolution of the General Assembly at its Fortyninth Session, the                     
 UN Congress on Public International Law was held from 13 to 17 March 1995 at UN                     
 Headquarters as part of the UN Decade of International Law. A senior Indian                         
 Professor of International Law Shri B S Murty presented a paper, placing him in a                   
 select group of twenty-five international lawyers chosen for this purpose. L&T                      
 Division participated in the Congress.                                                              
                                                                                                     
 The Legal Sub-Committee of the UN Committee on Peaceful Uses of Outer Space held                    
 its regular annual session at Vienna in March/April 1995. During this session the                   
 Sub-Committee discussed mainly the subjects of delimitation and definition of                       
 Outer Space, legal principles relating to the geo-stationary orbit, rational                        
 utilisation of Outer Space taking into particular account the needs and interests                   
 of developing countries. In addition, the Sub-Committee also discussed the                          
 question of the review and possible revision of the Principles relating to the                      
 use of nuclear power sources in outer space. The Sub-Committee also prepared a                      
 questionnaire for seeking the views of States on a possible legal regime for                        
 "aerospace" objects. Although the discussions registered progress, no final                         
 agreement has been reached during the session.                                                      
                                                                                                     
 The Thirty-Fourth Annual Session of the Asian African Legal Consultative                            
 Committee(AALCC) was held at Doha, Qatar from 17 to 22 April 1995. The Committee                    
 considered the report on the work of the International Law Commission, including                    
 the work of the Commission on international rivers, Law of the                                      
 -108>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 Sea, Status of refugees, the work of the United Nations Commission on                               
 International Trade Law and Agenda for Peace. The Committee also considered                         
 matters arising out of the decision taken at its thirty-second session regarding                    
 shifting of its headquarters to Doha, Qatar.                                                        
                                                                                                     
 The L&T Division participated in the preparation of a revised Model Agreement on                    
 Protection of Bilateral Investments and in the bilateral negotiations with                          
 Australia, Argentina, Canada, Denmark, France, Germany, Israel, Italy, Malaysia,                    
 Singapore, South Africa, South Korea and Switzerland. Agreements on Protection of                   
 Foreign Investment were signed with Denmark, Germany, The Netherlands, Malaysia                     
 and Turkmenistan. Agreements with France, Italy and South Africa were also                          
 finalised.                                                                                          
                                                                                                     
 The Division has prepared the draft periodic report under Article 18 of the                         
 Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women on the                   
 basis of the material collected from the concerned administrative                                   
 Ministries/Departments.                                                                             
                                                                                                     
 As a follow up to the International Conference on International Humanitarian Law                    
 (IHL) organised by the Government of Switzerland in September 1993, the meeting                     
 of Intergovernmental Experts for the Protection of War Victims was held in                          
 January 1995 to study practical means of promoting full respect for and                             
 compliance with IHL. The twenty sixth International Conference of the Red Cross                     
 and Red Crescent held at Geneva in December 1995 endorsed the recommendations of                    
 the Experts meeting and adopted several resolutions regarding the protection of                     
 civilian populations in periods of armed conflict with special reference to                         
 women, children, refugees and displaced persons.                                                    
                                                                                                     
 The International Convention on the International Return of Stolen or Illegally                     
 Exported Cultural Objects was adopted by a Diplomatic Conference held at Rome                       
 front 7 to 24 June 1995 on the basis of a draft prepared by the International                       
 Institute for the Unification of Private Law (UNIDROIT).                                            
                                                                                                     
 Negotiations for conclusion of Extradition treaties were held with Thailand.                        
 Consultations and exchange of drafts took place                                                     
 -109>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 with Mauritius, while pursuing different negotiations already commenced with                        
 countries like the USA.                                                                             
                                                                                                     
 As in previous years, the Ministry undertook negotiations and processed for                         
 signature, ratification, and accession several multilateral and bilateral                           
 treaties involving India.                                                                           
                                                                                                     
 India became a party to several multilateral conventions including the United                       
 Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea 1982 and the Agreement Relating to the                     
 Implementation of Part XI thereof; Convention on the prohibition of the                             
 development, production, stockpiling and use A chemical weapons and their                           
 destruction; International Convention on Salvage; and the Agreement on SAARC                        
 Preferential Trading Arrangement (SAPTA). India also signed the Agreement for the                   
 establishment of Indian Ocean Tuna Commission and the Agreement establishing the                    
 International Institute for Democracy and Electoral Assistance. Some important                      
 bilateral agreements signed during the year include the mutual cooperation                          
 agreement with Egypt and Joint Declaration with Tunisia to Combat Illicit                           
 Trafficking in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances. A list of Treaties                       
 entered into by India during the year- is given at Appendix 111. A list of Full                     
 Powers issued during 1995 for signing Agreements is at Appendix IV and a list of                    
 Instruments of Ratification of Treaties, Agreements, Conventions and Protocols is                   
 at Appendix V.                                                                                      
                                                                                                     
 Non-Aligned Movement                                                                                
                                                                               Top                   
 The Eleventh Non-Aligned Conference of Heads of State and Government was held in                    
 Cartagena, Colombia from 18 to 20 October 1995. The Summit was preceded by the                      
 Senior Officials meeting (14-15 October 1995) and the Ministerial level Meeting                     
 (16-17 October 1995). Out of 113 NAM member countries, 108 attended,                                
 approximately 45 at Head of State/Government level. Prime Minister led a high                       
 level Indian delegation that included Minister of External Affairs, Minister of                     
 State in Prime Minister's Office, Foreign Secretary and other senior officials.                     
 This was the second Summit to be held in Latin America after the Havana Summit in                   
 1979.                                                                                               
 -110>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 The Summit focussed on the continuing relevance and role of NAM in the changed                      
 international scenario and NAM's priorities, goals and responses to new                             
 challenges. The question of UN reforms, international security and disarmament,                     
 development, human rights, social issues and South-South Cooperation were debated                   
 extensively during the Conference. Prime Minister's address set the tone of                         
 discussions on various issues of interest to India, including. economic and                         
 social issues and the elimination of nuclear weapons. Turkmenistan was admitted                     
 as a full member and Ukraine as a guest. Discussions on other requests of Bosnia                    
 & Herzegovina and Costa Rica for membership and Japan and Macedonia for guest                       
 status were inconclusive.                                                                           
                                                                                                     
 The Summit adopted a Final Document and a shorter Declaration- "The Call from                       
 Colombia". The Indian delegation played a key role in drafting these documents                      
 and in evolving a consensus on the key issues. The salient                                          
 conclusions/recommendations of the Summit, inter alia, included the following:                      
                                                                                                     
 The Final Document reaffirms the continuing validity and relevance of the                           
 principles and objectives of NAM and stresses that the Movement should work                         
 towards cooperation and a sense of full partnership in the international field                      
 for the promotion of peace and social and economic development.                                     
                                                                                                     
 The section on disarmament reflects India's concerns since it establishes the                       
 priority for nuclear disarmament. It also calls for and endorses: (a) Adoption of                   
 an Action Plan for elimination of all nuclear weapons within la time bound                          
 framework. This is in keeping with the 1998 Action Plan; (b) Consideration of                       
 CTBT as an important step in the process leading to complete nuclear disarmament                    
 within a specific time frame; (c) Endorsement of the Indian initiative for                          
 lobbying a resolution in UNGA for "Nuclear Weapons Elimination Treaty" and for                      
 negotiations to be undertaken in the Conference on Disarmament; (d) Endorsement                     
 of SSOD IV to be held in 1997.                                                                      
 -111>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 On the issue of Security Council restructuring the Summit endorsed comprehensive                    
 expansion of Security Council to reflect the universal character of the world                       
 organisation and a substantial increase in representation of NAM countries.                         
                                                                                                     
 The paras on Terrorism, Human Rights, Peace-keeping Operations reflected India's                    
 major concerns. On economic issues deliberations at the Summit dwelt on the                         
 centrality of the role of the UN in development, the need for reform in                             
 international economic institutions, and coherence between them, particularly                       
 Bretton Woods Institutions, market access to developing countries exports in the                    
 post Uruguay round, coercive new conditionalities and the need to strengthen                        
 South-South cooperation.                                                                            
 The Coordinating Bureau of the Non-Aligned Countries met at Ministerial level in                    
 Bandung (Indonesia) from 25 to 27 April 1995. While the objective was to prepare                    
 for the 11th NAM Summit at Cartagena, the meeting also commemorated the 40th                        
 anniversary of the First Asian African Conference which was held in April 1955 in                   
 Bandung. A high level Indian delegation led by Minister of External Affairs                         
 participated in the Ministerial Meeting. The final communique adopted clearly                       
 acknowledged that the Asian Relations Conference in March 1947 in New Delhi along                   
 with 1955 Asian African Conference provided the underpinning for the Non- Aligned                   
 Movement. The communique also touched on the range of issues central to the                         
 agenda of the Movement including the review of the international situation, the                     
 question of Security Council expansion, reform and re-structuring of the UN,                        
 international economic issues, disarmament.                                                         
                                                                                                     
 Commonwealth                                                                                        
                                                                               Top                   
 The Auckland Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting (CHOGM) was held between 10                   
 to 13 November 1995. Of the 48 countries which attended the meeting, 33 were                        
 represented by Heads of State or Prime Ministers. The Indian delegation was led                     
 by the Minister of External Affairs.                                                                
 -112>                                                                                               
 The Summit reiterated support for the fundamental political values of the                           
 Commonwealth relating to democracy, development, human rights and the rule of the                   
 law as enshrined in the Harare Commonwealth Declaration of 1991. A separate                         
 statement, endorsed. by "the overwhelming majority of Heads of Government",                         
 without naming France and China, "condemned the continued nuclear testing which                     
 was inconsistent with the undertaking given by the Nuclear Weapon States to                         
 exercise utmost restraint so as not to affect the on-going negotiations for the                     
 conclusion of the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty in 1996". The Summit also                           
 welcomed the reform and revitalisation of the UN and called for an end to                           
 "wasteful spending and duplication". It endorsed the proposal to expand the                         
 Security Council.                                                                                   
                                                                                                     
 The conference also emphasised the importance of the social and economic                            
 development programmes of the Commonwealth, crucial to conferring the benefit of                    
 Commonwealth membership to states. In response to requests from the Commonwealth                    
 Secretary General pertaining to resource constraints facing the Commonwealth Fund                   
 for Technical Cooperation (responsible for the Commonwealth's programmes of                         
 technical cooperation), India announced an increase in her contribution to the                      
 CFTC from the present Pounds 400,000 to Pounds 600,000.                                             
 -113>                                                                                               
 1995                                                                                                
 10. Foreign Economic Relations                                                                      
                                                                               Top                   
 In the year under review India experienced a new phase of intense international                     
 economic interaction. The establishment of the World Trade Organisation (WTO) of                    
 which India became founder member, the on-going review of the Bretton Woods                         
 Institutions-the IMF and World Bank-as well as the economic role and functions of                   
 the UN, the evolution of G-7 as well as G-77 perspectives, the consolidation and                    
 formation of regional economic groupings as well as the continuing spurt in                         
 India's trade and investment relations with key countries provided a dynamic                        
 setting for her economic diplomacy. The Ministry of External Affairs played an                      
 important promotional, facilitating In the year under review India experienced a                    
 new phase of intense international economic interaction. The establishment of the                   
 World Trade Organisation (WTO) of which India became founder member, the on-going                   
 review of the Bretton Woods Institutions-the IMF and World Bank-as well as the                      
 economic role and functions of the UN, the evolution of G-7 as well as G-77                         
 perspectives, the consolidation and formation of regional economic groupings as                     
 well as the continuing spurt in India's trade and investment relations with key                     
 countries provided a dynamic setting for her economic diplomacy. The Ministry of                    
 External Affairs played an important promotional, facilitating and enabling role                    
 in India's efforts to project and promote abroad her economic capabilities and                      
 interests-bilaterally, regionally and multilaterally. The Economic Division and                     
 the Multilateral Economic Relations (MER) Division were able to provide key                         
 inputs for India's economic policy-making in terms of gleaning the relevant                         
 experiences of other countries and institutions. They also played an important                      
 role in ascertaining positions and rallying support on issues of vital interest                     
 to the present and future growth and well-being of the Indian economy.                              
                                                                                                     
 The information role played by the Divisions became crucial particularly in terms                   
 of responding to enquiries from Indian Missions and providing them the                              
 informational wherewithal to carry out their economic and commercial. functions                     
 effectively. Ranging from simple trade enquiries from Indian                                        
 -114>                                                                                               
 exporters and Indian Missions to details about India's policy, legislation and                      
 procedures on various aspects of trade and investment, the Economic Division                        
 provides a regular and quick response service.                                                      
                                                                                                     
 The Economic Division undertook a major review of the information                                   
 infrastructure-hardware and software as well as personnel requirement of India's                    
 Missions-for effectively carrying out commercial and economic work. A                               
 consolidated proposal factoring in these requirements into the administrative and                   
 budgetary framework is on-going.                                                                    
                                                                                                     
 The Economic Division participated actively in trade promotion efforts of                           
 Government and industry particularly in terms of informing and catalysing                           
 participation of foreign business in Indian Trade Fairs and Indian business in                      
 foreign trade fairs, seminars, road shows, buyer-seller meets, etc. The attempt                     
 is to get a balance of general and sectoral, country-specific and regional focus.                   
 The Economic Division facilitated, through contact with foreign Missions in India                   
 and Indian Missions abroad and in collaboration with apex Chambers, the visits of                   
 business delegations to and from India.                                                             
                                                                                                     
 The Economic Division has been contributing to crisis management as well as                         
 crisis prevention on a number of trade related problems and issues affecting                        
 India's exports and imports. Thus, for example, the problems on account of                          
 perceptions about some of India's export sectors using child labour was sought to                   
 be countered through speedy despatch of information and advice on approaches to                     
 be followed by Indian Missions and briefing concerned foreign delegations. The                      
 Division has prepared appropriate publicity brochures on this issue for use by                      
 target Indian Missions. Similarly on issues such as the problem of azo- dyes in                     
 India's textiles export, policy regarding handling, export and import of                            
 hazardous waste, attempts to use environmental and phyto-sanitary and other                         
 regulations to restrict India's exports, the issue of dual use technology, the                      
 Division is able to gather information about the emerging patterns with regard to                   
 these policies as well as on the best ways to cope with non-tariff barriers of                      
 this kind.                                                                                          
                                                                                                     
 The Division has played a supportive role in meeting the special and additional                     
 facilitation needs of India's Small Scale                                                           
 -115>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 Industry (SSI) sector particularly in helping them to link up with successful                       
 Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs) institutionally and sectorally in other                         
 countries and in their export efforts. The Economic Division has also stimulated                    
 private sector initiative for SSI cooperation with countries in Africa and                          
 South-East Asia.                                                                                    
                                                                                                     
 The Economic Division is associated with a number of economic policy-making                         
 bodies of the Government of India whether it be of inter-ministerial nature or on                   
 the boards of public sector undertakings/industry associations. This enables the                    
 Ministry of External Affairs to provide the political as well as larger regional                    
 and global perspective on policy issues from the vantage point of having direct                     
 contact with, and knowledge of comparable policies and issues in, other                             
 countries.                                                                                          
                                                                                                     
 The Multilateral Economic Relations Division's think-tank, policy and event                         
 monitoring as well as normative functions vis-a-vis regional and trans-regional                     
 economic groupings and alliances around the world continue to evolve in the light                   
 of rapid developments in the global economy and the regionalisation process                         
 itself. The MER Division closely followed macro-economic global trends, policy                      
 considerations and evolution, and attempted to relate them to the Indian context.                   
 Emerging issues for possible multilateral negotiations and rule-making were                         
 identified, studied and thinking and consideration of the Government of India                       
 stimulated. Analysis and monitoring of G-7 meetings and policy pronouncements,                      
 Quad policies on World Trade Organisation (WTO), Organisation for Economic                          
 Cooperation and Development (OECD), policy thinking, studies and recommendations                    
 of bodies such as UNCTAD on traditional and new issues were areas of focus.                         
                                                                                                     
 Apart from following developments relating to regional, sub- regional and                           
 trans-regional economic groupings and preferential and free trade areas, MER                        
 Division has attempted to assess and relate these to India's international                          
 economic objectives and trade and investment flows to and from India. Attempts                      
 have been made to establish a dialogue with many of these groupings or to                           
 contribute and participate in them on                                                               
 -116>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 the basis of geographical proximity and degree of economic interdependence.                         
                                                                                                     
 Beyond India's own sub-region and SAARC, India is participating in the                              
 Inter-governmental Indian Ocean Rim Initiative (IORI) on regional economic                          
 cooperation, involving Mauritius, South Africa, Australia, Singapore, Oman and                      
 Kenya. India sees this as a recovery of the littoral economic, social and                           
 cultural community that existed in the Indian Ocean for centuries and as a                          
 natural corollary of the global trend towards setting up contiguity based                           
 geo-economic spaces. In keeping with the global focus on economic advancement and                   
 dynamism, India wants IORI to concentrate on economic cooperation and to be a                       
 bridgehead between Africa, Asia and Australia. Conditions now exist for taking                      
 the present level of intra-trade and investment of 20% to much higher levels                        
 given the natural resource endowment, large population base and market, and                         
 rapidly growing and competitive productive capacities in agriculture,                               
 manufacturing and services as well as the emerging                                                  
 complementarity-competitiveness continuum among these countries.                                    
                                                                                                     
 The Mauritius IORI was launched in March 1995 and constitutes a structured                          
 inter-government process of a tripartite consultative nature including                              
 representatives of business and academia. It has adopted a set of principles and                    
 objectives and outlined the scope of activities. At the Working Group meeting of                    
 the IORI in August 1995 a decision was taken on gradual expansion of the group,                     
 the idea being to achieve universal regional membership over a period of time                       
 through consensus while maintaining cohesion and effectiveness of the process of                    
 cooperation. India is working with other countries to formulate a charter and                       
 work programme for- the IORI which would be adopted at a high level inter-                          
 governmental meeting in mid-1996. Indian Ocean Rim Business Forum (IORBF) and an                    
 Indian Ocean Rim Academic Group (IORAG) will provide the intellectual input and                     
 practical business component respectively to IORI The focus is on cooperation in                    
 the areas of trade liberalisation, facilitation, promotion, investment promotion,                   
 trade infrastructure, science and technology, tourism and human resource                            
 development.                                                                                        
 -117>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 India also participated in the second track, informal, nongovernmental and wider                    
 consultative process initiated by Australia. Relevant ideas from this track could                   
 be picked up by the first track Mauritius process. As part of this, Indian Ocean                    
 Business Consultative Network (IOBCN) and Indian Ocean Research Network (IORN)                      
 were held in New Delhi in December 1995.                                                            
                                                                                                     
 In the context of India's attempts to establish trans-regional networks of                          
 cooperation amongst developing countries, India continued to take an active part                    
 in furthering the G-15, i.e., the 15-nation Group for South-South Consultation                      
 and Cooperation (Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Mexico, Peru, Venezuela, Jamaica,                        
 Malaysia, Indonesia, India, Algeria, Egypt, Nigeria, Senegal, Zimbabwe). Prime                      
 Minister attended the Fifth G-15 Summit held in Argentina from 5 to 7 November.                     
 From India's perspective, 3 major results were achieved: (i) operationalisation                     
 of a dynamic mechanism to formulate, assist, monitor and follow-up on initiatives                   
 relating to intra-G-15 trade and investment liberalisation, facilitation and                        
 promotion, transfer of technology and cooperation in infrastructure for which                       
 full business participation and support is to be ensured; (ii) the issue of                         
 terrorism was discussed at Summit Retreat and a strong indictment against                           
 terrorism was issued particularly that which is based on fanaticism and fed from                    
 abroad (G-15 consultations are to be held from time to time to reinforce on-going                   
 international efforts to combat terrorism); and (iii) the Joint Communique set                      
 out a clear agenda for international economic cooperation for the year 2000 and                     
 included important elements of India's concern vis-a-vis the international                          
 economic system as well as developed country policies. The message, that support                    
 for India's equitable integration into the international trading system was a                       
 must, was forcefully given in Prime Minister's statement on behalf of Asia as                       
 well as in the Joint Communique.                                                                    
                                                                                                     
 As an integral part of India's 'Look East' policy in keeping with the rapid                         
 consolidation of ASEAN and the acceleration and expansion of the ASEAN Free Trade                   
 Area, India continued to engage the ASEAN in the four sectors of her Sectoral                       
 Dialogue Partnership with them. The second meeting of the                                           
 -118>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 ASEAN-India Sectoral Dialogue Committee was held in February 1995, and                              
 ASEAN-India Round Table Conference involving policy makers and captains of                          
 industry on both sides was held in September 1995. Both these meetings gave an                      
 impetus to trade and investment between ASEAN and India whilst also establishing                    
 the necessary informational and institutional linkages. Signal progress was                         
 registered in Indo-ASEAN Cooperation in Science and Technology when an Indian                       
 team participated in the ASEAN Science and Technology week in September 1995 and                    
 had intensive interaction with their counterparts and institutions. Concrete                        
 projects are on the anvil for joint research and development and                                    
 commercialisation in the three leading edge areas of information technology,                        
 advanced materials and bio-technology. On tourism, bilateral linkages are being                     
 complemented through cooperation between India's tourism sector and ASEAN Tourism                   
 Association (ASEANTA). It is hoped that concrete progress in India's Sectoral                       
 Dialogue partnership will incrementally take her to new and higher levels of                        
 interaction with ASEAN.                                                                             
                                                                                                     
 This hope was realised when- the Fifth ASEAN Summit in Bangkok on 14 and 15                         
 December 1995 took the decision to upgrade India's Sectoral Dialogue Partnership                    
 to the status of full Dialogue Partnership. This is a major positive development                    
 for India having far-reaching implications. As part of the full Dialogue                            
 Partnership process, India will be participating in the Post- Ministerial                           
 Consultations (PMCs) at the time of the ASEAN Ministerial Meeting scheduled for                     
 July 1996. India will also be interacting with ASEAN under the auspices of a                        
 Dialogue Committee. Singapore has been named as the 'Country Coordinator' on the                    
 ASEAN side for its dialogue partnership with India. Under this higher level of                      
 dialogue relationship, cooperation between ASEAN and India is bound to further                      
 intensify not only in the four select areas of trade, investment, science &                         
 technology, and tourism identified under the Sectoral Dialogue Partnership, but                     
 also in new areas expected to be mutually identified for bilateral cooperation.                     
 Moreover, the full Dialogue Partnership would enable comprehensive consultation                     
 and dialogue with ASEAN on all matters including political and security.                            
 -119>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 MER Division has been monitoring with interest the progression of an important                      
 inter-regional economic cooperation-the APEC-since the 18-member countries                          
 account for 55% of the foreign investment that India receives and 44% of her                        
 exports. At the Third Osaka Summit of November 1995, APEC adopted an Action                         
 Agenda for free trade in the region encompassing unilateral commitments for                         
 liberalisation and facilitation towards achieving the goals of free trade and                       
 investment in the region by the year 2010 (for developed members) and 2020 (for                     
 developing members). The APEC, it is hoped, will continue on the path of "open                      
 regionalism" and non-discriminatory Most Favoured Nation Treatment particularly                     
 vis-a-vis non-member developing countries like India. India has conveyed her                        
 interest in APEC membership as well as in participating in some of its working                      
 groups, stressing mutual benefit.                                                                   
                                                                                                     
 A new chapter in India's economic interaction with the developed countries was                      
 opened when she became policy dialogue partner of the 26-member developed country                   
 think-tank and policy consultation and evolution forum-the OECD. As part of this                    
 dialogue, India participated in discussions that the OECD had with select Dynamic                   
 Non-member Economies of South-East Asia, China and Latin American countries on                      
 investment and trade policy issues. The dialogue has provided India a window into                   
 intra- developed country policy thinking especially on emerging issues that would                   
 impact on her economy and the liberalisation process. It also provides India an                     
 opportunity to give inputs from her particular perspective and interest. The MER                    
 Division has utilised this dialogue as well as bilateral interactions with                          
 developed and developing countries to consult and develop a coherent view on the                    
 new issues that are appearing on the international trade and investment agenda                      
 such as those relating to environment, quality and standards, competition policy,                   
 a multilateral investment regime, international labour standards and                                
 intellectual, property rights.                                                                      
                                                                                                     
 This consultative and policy dialogue process was taken further during the visit                    
 of the OECD Secretary General to India in January 1996. India has been invited to                   
 participate in four policy dialogue workshops with Dynamic Non-Member                               
 -120>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 Economies dealing with foreign investment, taxation (transfer pricing), trade                       
 policies and trade relations, and steel trade and adjustment issues.                                
                                                                                                     
 India continued to play an important role within the Group of 77 in evolving a                      
 common developing country platform on a number of long-standing as well as new                      
 issues, particularly as efforts have been on-going in some quarters to stress                       
 differentiation rather than commonality of interests among them. Whether on the                     
 question of follow-up to landmark international conferences on development or in                    
 respect of the Agenda for Development and institutional reform being attempted in                   
 the UN, India has made both conceptual and practical contributions. The stress                      
 has been on how India can help shape a positive external economic environment for                   
 herself and other developing countries in the new competitive context of                            
 liberalisation and globalisation.                                                                   
                                                                                                     
 The Indian Technical and Economic Cooperation (ITEC) Programme is the primary                       
 instrument for promoting technical and economic cooperation with developing                         
 countries on official bilateral basis. In September 1995 the ITEC Programme,                        
 Special Commonwealth African Assistance Programme (SCAAP) and Aid to Disaster                       
 Relief were hived off from the Economic Division to form the new ITEC Division so                   
 as to give greater focus on India's economic diplomacy by expanding and                             
 broadening India's Economic Cooperation with Developing Countries (ECDC) and                        
 Technical Cooperation with Developing Countries (TCDC) activities under ITEC and                    
 SCAAP Programmes.                                                                                   
                                                                                                     
 The ITEC Programme covers areas such as feasibility studies, consultancy                            
 services, deputation of India's experts, project related assistance, study visits                   
 to India and provision of training courses in Indian civilian and defence                           
 institutions for candidates from partner countries.                                                 
                                                                                                     
 During the year 1995-96, 814 training slots for nominees of foreign governments                     
 have been allocated under ITEC Programme. At present, regular courses are offered                   
 in various fields such as Audit and Accounts, Banking, Computers, Cooperatives                      
 Management, Diplomacy, Fertilisers, Man-power                                                       
 -121>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 Planning, Packaging, Parliamentary Studies, Poultry, Rural Development,                             
 Sericulture, Small Industry Development, Standardisation, etc. In addition to the                   
 regular courses, during the year new courses like DNA Technology, Potato                            
 Research, Budget Execution and Financial Control in India, Management of Human                      
 Development Programmes for Rural Reconstruction were also offered. Major                            
 beneficiaries of ITEC Programmes are countries like Ghana, Nigeria, Uganda,                         
 Mauritius, Vietnam, Sudan, Sierra Leone, Zimbabwe and Mongolia.                                     
                                                                                                     
 The ITEC Division is also a nodal point for organising military training in the                     
 prestigious defence institutions in India for nominees from friendly foreign                        
 countries. Slots are also offered under ITEC Programmes on reciprocal or on                         
 self-financing basis. On an average, 260 ITEC sponsored slots are offered and                       
 another 100 under the Self-Financing Scheme. Courses range from the National                        
 Defence College (NDC)/Defence Services Staff College, (DSSC)/Indian Military                        
 Academy (IMA) to relatively short-term technical courses in the Army, Navy and                      
 Air Force.                                                                                          
                                                                                                     
 While African countries have been the primary beneficiaries of ITEC since the                       
 inception of the Programme, countries in Eastern Europe and Central Asia are                        
 participating in increasing numbers. With a view to facilitating admission of                       
 nominees from non- English speaking countries the special courses on English                        
 language are being arranged to raise their academic pre- requisites. The terms                      
 and conditions of the ITEC programme are also being revised to make the training                    
 courses more attractive by increasing, inter alia, the living, accommodation and                    
 book allowances. These revised' terms and conditions will be effective from the                     
 next financial year 1996-97.                                                                        
                                                                                                     
 Under the ITEC Programme, projects are executed with India's assistance. Such                       
 projects are meant to share India's developmental experience and expertise                          
 acquired over the past four decades and more in areas like agriculture, small                       
 scale industries, dairy farming, employment generation, solar energy, information                   
 technology, etc. Among major projects executed during the period are the                            
 Vocational Training Centres                                                                         
 -122>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 in Vietnam, Mongolia and Cuba. A Mobile Eye Clinic in Ghana has been                                
 commissioned. A Remote-Sensing Centre, a Road Rehabilitation Programme and a                        
 Programme for setting up a Bal Bhavan in Mauritius are under execution.                             
                                                                                                     
 Feasibility study in connection with setting up of a Vocational Training Centre                     
 in Senegal has been completed by Hindustan Machine Tools Ltd while National                         
 Small-Scale Industries Corporation (NSIC) has completed feasibility studies for                     
 setting up a Technology Demonstration Centre in Namibia.                                            
                                                                                                     
 Study visits by foreign delegations to India also take place under ITEC to                          
 provide exposure to India's significant advancements, capabilities and to                           
 identify specific areas of cooperation. Five study visits-one from Kenya, two                       
 each from Ghana and Laos-have taken place.                                                          
                                                                                                     
 Thirty experts are currently stationed in various developing countries on                           
 long-term deputations as on 15 September 1995. They have been deputed to                            
 Cambodia, Laos, Uzbekistan, Gambia, Ghana, Mauritius, Namibia, Seychelles,                          
 Tanzania, South Africa, Uganda and Guyana in the fields of agriculture, medicine,                   
 engineering, teaching, accountancy, small scale industry and irrigation.                            
                                                                                                     
 Under Special Commonwealth African Assistance Plan (SCAAP), technical assistance                    
 is extended by India to 17 Commonwealth countries of Africa. Under the Programme,                   
 550 slots have been allocated for providing training facilities in Indian                           
 institutions to nominees from Benin, Botswana, Gambia, Ghana, Kenya, Lesotho,                       
 Malawi, Mauritius, Namibia, Nigeria, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, South Africa,                        
 Swaziland, Tanzania, Zanzibar, Uganda, Zambia and Zimbabwe during the current                       
 financial year.                                                                                     
                                                                                                     
 During 1995-96, India continued to extend disaster relief assistance to countries                   
 afflicted with calamities like earth quake, flood, epidemics, hurricanes, fire,                     
 etc. Among the countries for which disaster relief assistance has been/is being                     
 extended include Zambia, Myanmar, Laos, Burkina Faso, Togo, Iraq, Rwanda,                           
 Namibia, North Korea, Kyrghyzstan, Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan, Antigua & Barbuda,                     
 Caribbean                                                                                           
 -123>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 countries, Nauru, etc. North Korea was assisted to overcome post- flood epidemics                   
 and Namibia was given food assistance for the drought-affected parts of the                         
 country. India extended further relief assistance to Ghana by providing essential                   
 medicines/drugs at a cost of Rs 5 lakhs to overcome post-flood epidemics. India                     
 has also supplied 25,000 phials of indelible ink to Sierra Leone at a cost of Rs                    
 20 lakhs as a gesture of goodwill in the conduct of general elections on 26                         
 February 1996. Such humanitarian gestures play an important role in cementing                       
 bilateral relations with these countries by creating goodwill                                       
                                                                                                     
 Financial & Economic Adviser to the Senegalese Prime Minister A M M Lo visited                      
 India from 18 to 28 December 1995. Lo called on Secretary (ER) in the Ministry,                     
 Commerce Secretary and Directorate General of CSIR in respect of cooperation in                     
 the field of cotton cultivation, industrial estate, vocational training centre,                     
 etc. He also met representatives of FICCI and COSSIA. Lo visited the Punjab                         
 Agricultural University, Ludhiana to explore the possibility of collaboration in                    
 the field of agriculture.                                                                           
                                                                                                     
 A 4-member medical team from Baghdad visited India from 11 to 18 January 1996 to                    
 explore the possibilities for mutual cooperation in the medical field. The                          
 delegation held discussions. with. the representatives of AIIMS, New Delhi,                         
 Directorate General of Health Services and Indian Drug Manufacturers Association.                   
 The team also visited Ranbaxy Research & Development Centre, Gurgaon and Dabur                      
 Research & Development Centre, Ghaziabad.                                                           
                                                                                                     
 A 3-member delegation visited Suriname, Guyana, Panama and Nicaragua from 20                        
 January to 3 February 1996 in order to add greater economic content to bilateral                    
 relations through identification of concrete projects for bilateral cooperation                     
 in industrial, agricultural and human resource development sectors.                                 
                                                                                                     
 A seminar on Micro-Industries was held on 8 and 9 February 1996 in Mozambique                       
 under ITEC programme.                                                                               
 -124>                                                                                               
 1995                                                                                                
 Trade and Investment Promotion                                                                      
                                                                               Top                   
 India's programme of economic reforms was launched in July 1991 and wide ranging                    
 changes affecting virtually every sector of the economy were initiated. The                         
 integration of the Indian economy with the global economy having started, the                       
 Ministry played an active role in facilitating the process and projecting the                       
 India advantage and mutual benefit to her trade and investment partners.                            
                                                                                                     
 Foreign investments were given a prime role to bridge the gap between the needs                     
 of the economy and the resources that could be raised internally. Investments in                    
 India by multinational firms from the industrialised countries, including United                    
 States of America and Europe as well as non-resident Indians have increased                         
 significantly in response to the enabling business environment, structural                          
 changes, reforms in the financial and capital markets, improvement in                               
 macro-economic indicators, deregulation of foreign investments, etc. However, the                   
 perceptions of foreign investors, though changing at a slow pace, continued to be                   
 overshadowed by prejudices and ignorance of the rapid developments in India,                        
 increasing ever more the need to disabuse them of these preconceptions. This                        
 needed a reorientation of India's projection abroad with emphasis on latest,                        
 user-friendly techniques available and acceptable worldwide, and specially so in                    
 selected advanced countries which formed the target group for                                       
 -125>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 the Ministry's concerted publicity efforts. The perception has to some extent                       
 altered and investors are forming realistic judgements, inter alia, on the basis                    
 of the information provided by the Ministry through Indian Missions abroad. This                    
 is evident from the foreign investment approvals accorded numbering 3803                            
 amounting to Rs 39,000 crores till September 1995.                                                  
                                                                                                     
 The Ministry of External Affairs in close liaison with the concerned                                
 Ministries/Departments of the Government of India, the apex Chambers of Commerce                    
 and Industry and various think-tanks kept the Missions informed of the                              
 developments for projecting India's potential and capacity for absorption of                        
 foreign capital and state of the art technology. It continued its concerted                         
 efforts for attracting investments, both from Foreign Institutional Investors as                    
 well as Foreign Direct Investments. This was accomplished by initiating bilateral                   
 agreements and treaties on economic matters, servicing of Joint Commissions,                        
 assisting in the work of Joint Business Councils at non- governmental levels and                    
 other available avenues.                                                                            
                                                                                                     
 Ministry's investment promotion exercise included dissemination of sector                           
 specific information, in collaboration with concerned Ministries. Special                           
 emphasis was laid on highlighting India's strengths and complementarities with                      
 various target countries. Among the countries which received special attention                      
 were Japan, Germany, Singapore, Malaysia, Thailand, USA and Canada. Co-opting of                    
 the private sector as well as apex Chambers of Commerce and Industry formed the                     
 key component of Ministry's strategy for investment promotion.                                      
                                                                                                     
 Back-up support to Missions and Posts                                                               
                                                                               Top                   
 Close liaison with Indian Missions and Posts abroad was maintained and they were                    
 provided with back-up support for the various promotional measures undertaken by                    
 them. A number of Missions had been bringing out economic newsletters                               
 highlighting business opportunities, some of them in local languages and                            
 distributing them to targeted audiences. They were kept posted with latest                          
 developments, topical news items                                                                    
 -126>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 and updates on policy issues as changes took place in India. Floppy diskettes and                   
 revised quarterly were supplied to Missions on a regular basis to ensure that                       
 information databases are up- to-date. Weekly summary of important economic                         
 events, produced in conjunction with Press Trust of India (PTI) and analyses                        
 thereof were sent to the Missions to enable them to keep local business and                         
 industry apprised of the developments.                                                              
                                                                                                     
 External Economic Publicity                                                                         
                                                                               Top                   
 The visit by a 3-member delegation of journalists from Japan's leading financial                    
 daily in September/October 1995 was part of the special efforts being made in                       
 co-ordination with the External Publicity Division to reach out to business                         
 journalists in foreign countries. Their report has been published in a book form                    
 in Japanese language.                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 A 16-page flier "Opportunity India" presenting the salient features of India's                      
 economic reforms programme and various advantages as a country to invest in was                     
 produced. Region specific fliers for the major investment target areas such as                      
 USA, UK, France, Germanyand Japan and in their respective regional languages are                    
 being prepared.                                                                                     
                                                                                                     
 A set of 8 sector-specific brochures and 4 region-specific brochures is being                       
 prepared in collaboration with a reputed economic consultancy organisation. The                     
 sectors to be covered are Agro processing and packaging, chemicals,                                 
 pharmaceuticals, textiles, electronics and electronic components, automobile                        
 ancillaries and tourism-related infrastructure. The sets of the brochures "India                    
 Means Business" published by the Ministry for distribution through Indian                           
 Missions were extremely well received and several reprints were made. In addition                   
 to information on the economic profile of the Indian economy, these brochures                       
 contain useful information on trade, investment, the financial sector, the size                     
 of the market and opportunities in specific sectors.                                                
                                                                                                     
 The Ministry's composite brochure entitled "India-Business Perspectives"                            
 published in collaboration with a professional management consultant, containing                    
 up-to-date information on                                                                           
 -127>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 the regulatory environment, incentives for foreign investment, banking and                          
 finance, the Indian Tax System, Company Law and Accounting is also being                            
 thoroughly revised and expected to go in print soon.                                                
                                                                                                     
 Information on the Indian economy and the business environment is also being made                   
 available on floppy diskettes, with the Ministry linking up with the Centre for                     
 Monitoring Indian Economy (CMIE), one of India's premier economic research                          
 organisations. The material is constantly updated by means of a quarterly                           
 revision of the contents.                                                                           
                                                                                                     
 Indian Missions have been encouraged to put the material from the floppy diskette                   
 and other relevant material onto the Internet to enable worldwide and                               
 instantaneous access. This material incorporates inputs received from virtually                     
 every single Ministry in the Government of India involved in the investment                         
 promotion exercise.                                                                                 
                                                                                                     
 Important Trade and Investment Promotion Events                                                     
                                                                               Top                   
 The occasions of the Prime Minister's visits to France, USA, Malaysia and                           
 Argentina, as well as visits by Ministers and prominent economic personalities                      
 were utilised to highlight the opportunities for economic collaborations and                        
 business tie-ups and all assistance rendered with regard to the business                            
 components of such visits.                                                                          
                                                                                                     
 Among the more important events coordinated for visiting economic delegation by                     
 the Ministry were the visits of the 35-member Ministry of International Trade and                   
 Industry (MITI) Study Team despatched by the Government of Japan in November 1995                   
 and the Hong Kong Trade Development Council (HKTDC) delegation in April 1995. The                   
 MITI Study Team was the third economic mission sent to India by the Government of                   
 Japan after the launch of India's liberalisation programme. The main purpose of                     
 the Study Team was to analyse the investment environment in India. The Hong Kong                    
 Business Mission was jointly sponsored by the Hong Kong Trade Development Council                   
 (HKTDC) and the Hong Kong Indian Chamber of Commerce and consisted of leading                       
 Hong Kong businessmen, both Chinese as well as Indians.                                             
 -128>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 The Ministry arranged for all these delegations substantive interaction with                        
 senior Ministers and officials in concerned Ministries as well as representatives                   
 of Indian trade and industry. The visits resulted in a positive appreciation by                     
 these delegations of the progress achieved by India on the economic front and                       
 optimistic prognosis for heightened interest and commitment by their trade and                      
 industry in the opportunities that India has to offer.                                              
                                                                                                     
 High level interactions with panels of Secretaries to Government of India were                      
 arranged for visiting economic delegations, especially those accompanying foreign                   
 dignitaries, e.g., the MITI Study Team which accompanied MITI Vice-Minister.                        
                                                                                                     
 The Ministry was also closely involved in various investment promotion seminars                     
 organised in India by other Ministries as well as apex chambers and other                           
 economic organisations. Prominent among these were INVESMART organised in 1996 by                   
 Ministry of Industry in collaboration with UNIDO. Brochures and other information                   
 pertaining to these Fairs were despatched to. all Indian Missions/Posts which                       
 were actively involved in obtaining participation from foreign companies and                        
 Government agencies.                                                                                
 -129>                                                                                               
 1995                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 Policy Planning & Research                                                                          
                                                                               Top                   
 Policy Planning and Research Division is one of the core Divisions in the                           
 Ministry of External Affairs. The Division was actively engaged in preparing                        
 briefs, background papers on important topics/issues in the rapidly changing                        
 international situation. The papers also covered issues of medium and long term                     
 interest to India's foreign policy and immediate reaction to unfolding events.                      
 These contributed to discussion and decision making on the issues concerned.                        
                                                                                                     
 The Division served as nodal point for interaction with Joint Intelligence                          
 Committee, the University Grants Commission and its affiliates and Area Study                       
 Centres attached to various universities. These activities were further                             
 diversified and consolidated during the year.                                                       
                                                                                                     
 The Division extended financial assistance to institutions in different parts of                    
 the country for conducting seminars and conferences on important foreign policy                     
 issues. These seminars and conferences which were financially supported by the                      
 Division, covered subjects like Indians in Caribbeans, Asian Security, Peaceful                     
 use of Atomic Energy, Proliferation of Small Arms and Light Weapons, Emerging                       
 situation in South-East Asia, Conflict and Confidence building in South Asia,                       
 Ethnic & Religious conflicts in India and Russia, Sino-Indian relations,                            
 Enlarging CBMs between India & China, Inter-                                                        
 -130>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 national Security in Post Cold War, Role of UN Peace Keeping, Arms Control, Non                     
 Proliferation, Adapting foreign policies in the post-Cold War World, US and                         
 Indian security perceptions.                                                                        
                                                                                                     
 The Division also financed study and research projects undertaken by scholars and                   
 academic organisations on subjects relevant to the Ministry of External Affairs.                    
                                                                                                     
 One important task of the Division is to edit and publish the Annual Report of                      
 the Ministry on the basis of material received from various Divisions in the                        
 Ministry. "The Annual Report of the Ministry is a very important and valuable                       
 document as it is a compendium of India's interaction with other countries in the                   
 world in the political, socio-economic and cultural fields including the views of                   
 the Government of India on issues of international importance and significance.                     
 It is a record of India's achievements in the implementation of her foreign                         
 policy and her contributions towards promotion of world peace.                                      
                                                                                                     
 The Division rendered all possible assistance to the territorial Divisions as                       
 well as Indian Missions abroad on issues relating to India's international                          
 boundary or whenever any specific information or document on international                          
 relations was required. The Research Wing examined the incorrect depiction of                       
 India's international boundaries in maps printed in foreign publications, both                      
 official and private. The matter of incorrect maps was then taken up with the                       
 concerned government or the publisher through Indian Missions abroad for                            
 necessary corrective measures. The Division also scrutinised foreign publications                   
 containing maps depicting India's external boundaries before these were imported                    
 into the country and offered its views to the Ministries dealing with such                          
 matters. It coordinated grant of permission for publication of new maps by Survey                   
 of India. It coordinated with the Survey of India and the Ministry of Defence the                   
 supply of map-sheets to various Government and semi-Government agencies for use                     
 in their official work. The Division also processed requests for supply of                          
 restricted and gridded map-sheets and deciding the classification of such                           
 map-sheets.                                                                                         
 -131>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 The Research Wing dealt with the requests from research scholars in consultation                    
 with the concerned Territorial Division for access to the records of the Ministry                   
 relating to the restricted areas or the closed period as laid down in the Access                    
 Rules. It also scrutinised the excerpts of the closed period records                                
 requisitioned by the research scholars for clearance in consultation with the                       
 concerned Territorial Divisions. The Division coordinated the distribution of                       
 periodical reports of the Indian Missions abroad.                                                   
                                                                                                     
 To support the research efforts, a library equipped with modern Information                         
 Technology equipments and with large resource material is maintained with over                      
 one hundred thousand books and documents plus large number of maps, microforms                      
 and Official Documents in its collection. The Library subscribes to 600                             
 periodical titles.                                                                                  
                                                                                                     
 Library has in-house computer system with 12 terminals two of which support data                    
 entry and retrieval in Indian languages; CD- ROM Drive and CD-ROM databases on                      
 foreign affairs and current affairs; a microfilm/fiche reader printer; a plain                      
 paper photocopier and a VTR & colour monitor. A Laser Printer with DTP software                     
 is also available and is being utilised for better presentation of publications                     
 and documents of the Division.                                                                      
                                                                                                     
 Documentation/Bibliographic Services as well as other library operations and                        
 services have been computerised using an integrated library software package                        
 developed in India. Information about all books and selected periodical articles                    
 received in Library since 1986, maps, documents as well as publications etc                         
 pertaining to pre-1986 period and in active use is available on-line through each                   
 terminal-Information to Library material can also be accessed on-line through                       
 each terminal and through remote login via dial-up mode. All new documents                          
 received in Library-books, maps, microforms, selected articles from periodicals,                    
 etc-are being fed into the in-house computer system to create Database on Foreign                   
 Affairs. Using this Database and CD-ROM Databases, the Library provides Current                     
 Awareness Service, Bibliographical and Reference Services. In addition, the                         
 Library regularly issued monthly publications: "Chronicle of Events", monthly                       
 abstracts of selected periodical articles; "Foreign Affairs                                         
 -132>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 Documentation Bulletin"; and an annotated monthly list of publications added to                     
 the Library "Recent Additions".                                                                     
                                                                                                     
 Library users including Research Scholars are welcome to access on-line                             
 computer-based information in different Databases, including CD-ROM Databases,                      
 through Foreign Affairs Information Retrieval System (FAIRS). Photocopying and                      
 Computer Print-out facilities are also available to all Library users including                     
 research scholars.                                                                                  
                                                                                                     
 During 1995-96 the Division continued with the work of compiling and then                           
 publishing a Compendium , of Bilateral Treaties and Agreements signed by India                      
 with other countries during the period 1971-1980 and 1995.                                          
 -133>                                                                                               
 1995                                                                                                
 External Publicity                                                                                  
                                                                               Top                   
 Information projection, which is a vital tool in the implementation of foreign                      
 policy, is the essential function of the External Publicity (XP) Division. The                      
 task involves the dissemination of news about developments pertaining to India                      
 and India's views and concerns on national and international issues externally                      
 and acquainting people abroad about her perspectives on developments in India in                    
 the political, economic, social and cultural spheres with particular reference to                   
 issues which have a bearing on India's external relations and foreign policy.                       
                                                                                                     
 The focus of attention during the year was the strengthening of the information                     
 "supply" or "service" function for Indian Missions and Posts abroad, in order to                    
 enable them to discharge their press, information and publicity duties more                         
 effectively.                                                                                        
                                                                                                     
 The Division continued to perform its principal function of setting out the                         
 policy framework as well as guiding and supervising the functioning of the                          
 information and publicity wings of all Indian Missions and Posts abroad.                            
                                                                                                     
 In its key function as the office of the official spokesman of the Government of                    
 India on all matters pertaining to India's external affairs, it strove to orient                    
 the domestic and international media on India's external affairs perspectives and                   
 on topical issues through regular briefings and public relations efforts.                           
 -134>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 The Division's news dissemination function includes press releases and statements                   
 issued by the spokesman, news bulletins sent out to India's Missions and Posts                      
 abroad on a twice-daily basis and a newspaper clipping service on external                          
 affairs coverage from the national media for Indian Missions abroad, besides the                    
 handling of special requests. Over 360 press releases/statements were issued by                     
 the Division this year which are being compiled and brought out for information                     
 and record purposes on a quarterly basis. The "Foreign Affairs Record", another                     
 compilation of visits, agreements and other significant diplomatic developments,                    
 is being brought out on a monthly basis.                                                            
                                                                                                     
 With regard to features and other information material, the Division commissioned                   
 or procured articles, publications, feature films and documentaries,                                
 transparencies, photographs, floppies and other publicity material for                              
 distribution to Missions and Posts on a regular basis and on special                                
 commemorative occasions such as Independence Day 1995, the 125th birth                              
 anniversary celebrations of Mahatma Gandhi, and Republic Day 1996. A                                
 rationalisation of existing feature services has enabled the Division to make the                   
 feature service more meaningful, to increase the number of Missions to whom it is                   
 being supplied and to start a regular weekly economic feature service to Missions                   
 as part of twice-daily XP transmissions. Twenty new documentary programmes, 5 of                    
 them in 16mm/35mm film format, were acquired from Government and independent                        
 sources and distributed to Missions. Some of these have been telecast on foreign                    
 television networks through Indian Missions. Over 35 Missions arranged telecasts                    
 on the occasion of Independence Day 1995. Some 42 Indian Missions also brought                      
 out special supplements in local newspapers on the occasion. Six fresh TV                           
 programmes have been offered to Missions for use on Republic Day 1996.                              
 Sixty-three new book titles, 5 new magazines and over 400 new transparencies and                    
 several thousand photographic prints on various aspects of India, especially the                    
 economy, were also acquired and distributed to Missions and Posts abroad.                           
 Activities connected with the 125th birth anniversary of Mahatma Gandhi                             
 continued. Books, postcards, photographs, exhibitions, articles and films on                        
 Gandhi were circulated to responsive Missions.                                                      
 -135>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 On the production side, the Division completed a six-part special educational                       
 documentary on India, covering India's history, geography and culture and three                     
 video films on the SEWA Bank for Women, on wasteland development and on Buddhism,                   
 highlighting the themes of upliftment of women, environmental management and                        
 India's religious and cultural heritage respectively. Dubbing of films previously                   
 made or acquired in foreign languages has been extended to cover more films.                        
 Documentaries in film and video previously produced by the Division, notably                        
 those on women, Sufism in India, and the new business environment in India also                     
 received wide circulation and exposure abroad and within India. A 35 mm                             
 documentary commissioned by the Division, 'Rasayatra', on the late Hindustani                       
 classical music vocalist Mallikarjun Mansur was awarded the best documentary film                   
 award at the 1995 National Film Festival.                                                           
                                                                                                     
 As regards new publications, the Division completed a French version of "Muslims                    
 in India Vol 11", for distribution amongst French speaking people in Europe and                     
 Africa, as an extension of its previous highly successful publication on the same                   
 subject with a view to highlighting the contribution of Indian Muslims in various                   
 facets of national life. A revised and updated version of "India: A Dynamic                         
 Democracy", a staple publicity booklet and another larger publication, "India:                      
 Continuity in Change" is currently under preparation. Compilations bf speeches by                   
 the Prime Minister Shri P V Narasimha Rao on foreign policy since 1991 and                          
 speeches made by Heads of Indian delegations to the UN since 1945 are also under                    
 publication.                                                                                        
                                                                                                     
 The demand for the Ministry's flagship publication, "India Perspectives", now                       
 printed in 10 languages, continued to grow. Fifty thousand copies of this monthly                   
 magazine containing a lively mix of articles on all facets of life in India,                        
 accompanied by illustrations and photographs were distributed through Indian                        
 Missions abroad.                                                                                    
                                                                                                     
 As part of its entertainment and cultural publicity work, the Division helped                       
 organise the presentation of over 200 Indian feature films drawn mainly from the                    
 XP Division but also from the Directorate of Film Festivals and National Centre                     
 -136>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 for Childrens' Films (NCYP) at over 50 films events/festivals. The Division also                    
 assisted. in the organisation of the 1996 India International Film Festival and                     
 the Bombay International Documentary Film Festival. As part of its on-going                         
 programme of developing a comprehensive library of Indian film classics covering                    
 popular, mainstream and art cinema, the Division also acquired subtitled prints                     
 and video cassettes of feature films by the legendary director Ritwik Ghatak, and                   
 prints of other accomplished film producers/directors such as Mani Ratnam, Adoor                    
 Gopalakrishnan and Aravindam.                                                                       
                                                                                                     
 Further, the Division assisted Missions in processing their requirements of                         
 satellite dish antennae, video projectors, TVs and VCRs and other equipment                         
 necessary for effective information work.                                                           
                                                                                                     
 The Division continued another major function which was to monitor, with the help                   
 of the information wings of Indian Missions abroad, international media coverage                    
 on India and issues of special interest to India, to enable it to respond                           
 appropriately to recognisable trends and distortions in the shape of suitable                       
 corrective action. Of special importance in this connection were the                                
 international perceptions and reportage on the progress of India's economic                         
 reform process, developments relating to India's relations with neighbouring                        
 countries, human rights, Kashmir, the future of the UN, the Non-Aligned Movement,                   
 disarmament issues and bilateral relations with individual countries. Promotion                     
 of, and feedback on, Doordarshan's new international service and monitoring of                      
 All India Radio's External Service was also followed up.                                            
                                                                                                     
 As part of the on-going programme of inviting foreign journalists to acquaint                       
 themselves first-hand "With India, XP Division hosted 20 journalists from nearly                    
 11 countries during the year from economically advanced countries, the Islamic                      
 world and India's neighbours. Journalists from UK, Ireland, Turkey, UAE,                            
 Kazakhstan and others were amongst those covered under this programme. The                          
 Division also rendered assistance to over 20 other foreign journalists from                         
 different parts of the world visiting India on their own. These visits led to a                     
 considerable degree in generating goodwill and promoting a more balanced picture                    
 of India abroad.                                                                                    
 -137>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 As the nodal agency responsible for media arrangements for incoming visits of                       
 Heads of State and Governments, XP Division facilitated coverage of events in                       
 India by media teams which accompanied them during the course of the year. Visits                   
 at Head of State and/or Government level during the period included, inter alia,                    
 those from Iran, Nepal, Mali, Denmark and Canada. Media arrangements were also                      
 done for VVIP visits abroad such as those relating to the visit of the President                    
 of India Dr Shanker Dayal Sharma to Portugal,- Trinidad & Tobago, Chile, Zimbabwe                   
 and Namibia in May-June 1995 and the visit of the Prime Minister of India Shri P                    
 V Narasimha Rao to Maldives in April 1995, France in June 1995, Malaysia in                         
 August 1995, Turkmenistan and Kyrghyz Republic in September 1995, Egypt, Colombia                   
 and USA in October 1995 and Burkina Faso, Argentina and Ghana in November 1995.                     
 Besides these, assistance was rendered to Indian journalists going abroad on                        
 specific assignments, notably to China, under an exchange programme and to                          
 Auckland to cover the CHOGM Summit, etc, The XP Division also set up an                             
 international media centre at Vigyan Bhavan for media persons covering the 8th                      
 SAARC Summit held in New Delhi and facilitated media arrangements for the meeting                   
 of SAARC Finance and Planning Ministers that took place in the Indian capital in                    
 January 1996.                                                                                       
                                                                                                     
 The XP Division also serves as a facilitation centre for foreign journalists                        
 based in, or visiting, India. It assisted them in getting accreditation as                          
 journalists, while facilitating their visas and extension thereof. A few news                       
 organisations opened new India-Bureaus. It also liaised with other 'Government                      
 Ministries and Departments to process and facilitate proposals for the making of                    
 documentary programmes by foreign producers in India. Approximately, 240 such                       
 proposals were approved and cleared during the year.                                                
                                                                                                     
 In keeping with developments in the international media scene, the Division has                     
 been gearing itself to open dip a Home Page on the Internet World Wide Web,                         
 utilise and exploit new information technologies and contribute to the efforts to                   
 give Indian television software a greater global reach and visibility through the                   
 satellite and cable TV revolution.                                                                  
 -138>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 Efforts continue to develop and refine a more purposeful advertisement campaign                     
 projecting a new image of India as a promising economic and business destination.                   
 Advertisements were released in leading local and English newspapers in Kuala                       
 Lumpur and in regional magazines like the Far Eastern Economic Review, the Asian                    
 Wall Street Journal, etc during Prime Minister Shri P V Narasimha Rao's visit to                    
 Malaysia in August 1995, in the "London Times" on India's Independence Day, in                      
 the "Washington Post" during the World Bank-IMF Meet and in leading American                        
 newspapers during, the 50th Anniversary of the UN.                                                  
                                                                                                     
 The nature and volume of media coverage of India has changed significantly in                       
 recent times. While areas of adverse publicity remain, the area of positive                         
 publicity has vastly improved. In terms of domestic policies, an increasing                         
 acceptance of India as a genuine functioning democracy has been accompanied by an                   
 appreciation of India's ability to contain and weather formidable domestic                          
 challenges. Economically, the liberalisation programme has been the single                          
 greatest factor behind the interest in India shown by the international media.                      
 The liberalisation measures have been seen as releasing hitherto suppressed                         
 economic and enterpreneurial energies and have placed India amongst a select                        
 group of attractive investment destinations and emerging markets.                                   
 -139>                                                                                               
 1995                                                                                                
 Protocol                                                                                            
                                                                               Top                   
 During the period from 1 April 1995 to 31 March 1996, Heads of the Diplomatic                       
 Missions of the following thirty-five countries presented their credentials to                      
 the President of India:-                                                                            
 1                China                             19 Kazakhstan                                    
 2                Norway                            20 Eritrea                                       
 3                Ivory Coast                       21 Brazil                                        
 4                Croatia                           22 Zambia                                        
 5                Nepal                             23 Ireland                                       
 6                Spain                             24 Mexico                                        
 7                Turkmenistan                      25 Belgium                                       
 8                Sri Lanka                         26 Finland                                       
 9                Trinidad & Tobago                 27 Egypt                                         
 10               Cambodia                          28 Tunisia                                       
 11               Switzerland                       29 Japan                                         
 12               Italy                             30 Jordan                                        
 13               Panama                            31 Israel                                        
 14               Bangladesh                        32 Turkey                                        
 15               Zimbabwe                          33 Afghanistan                                   
 16               Namibia                           34 Jamaica                                       
 17               South Africa                      35 Nepal                                         
 18               Yemen                                                                              
 -140>                                                                                               
 During the period from 1 April 1995 to 31 March 1996, Heads of the Diplomatic                       
 Missions of the following twenty-five countries left India on completion of their                   
 assignment:-                                                                                        
 1   Spain        14 Tunisia                                                                         
 2   Switzerland  15 Belgium                                                                         
 3   Italy        16 Egypt                                                                           
 4   Bangladesh   17 Japan                                                                           
 5   Yemen        18 Israel                                                                          
 6   Mexico       19 Ethiopia                                                                        
 7   Brazil       20 Nepal                                                                           
 8   Ireland      21 Afghanistan                                                                     
 9   Dominica     22 United Kingdom                                                                  
 10  Turkey       23 Poland                                                                          
 11  Finland      24 European Community                                                              
 12  Zambia       25 Romania                                                                         
 13  Jordan                                                                                          
 During the same period, there were numerous visits by VVIPs to India at the level                   
 of Head of State/Government, Vice President, Foreign Minister and other                             
 distinguished personalities. Details are at Appendix XV. During the same period,                    
 there were 10 outgoing visits by the President, the Vice President and the Prime                    
 Minister of India as per details at Appendix XVI.                                                   
                                                                                                     
 The Conference Cell in the Protocol Division of the Ministry is also responsible                    
 for organising international conferences. The Conference Cell also extends                          
 logistic support and provides consultancy services to other                                         
 Ministries/Departments of the Government of India in organising international                       
 conferences. A list of conferences/meetings organised by the Conference Cell and                    
 conferences organised by other Ministries/Departments where the Cell extended                       
 assistance is given at Appendix XVII.                                                               
 -141>                                                                                               
 1995                                                                                                
 Passport and Consular Services and Indians Overseas                                                 
                                                                               Top                   
 During the year 1995 (January-December), the 23 Regional Passport                                   
 Offices/Passport Offices in India issued 1754515 passports. Miscellaneous                           
 services like renewals, change of name, inclusion of child's name, emigration                       
 clearance not required (ECNR) stamp, amounted to 729963 in 1995, which is almost                    
 50% of the issue of fresh passports. Detailed input and output figures for the                      
 year are at Appendix-VI. Statement showing the Revenue and the Expenditure of                       
 Regional Passport Offices and Passport Offices during the year is at Appendix-VIL                   
                                                                                                     
 Due to a concerted effort by the Ministry to reduce the backlog and provide                         
 efficient services to the public, total pendency in Passport Offices was brought                    
 down to a reasonable level of 2.8 lakhs at the end of the year 1994. It has                         
 remained stabilised around the same level at the end of 1995.                                       
                                                                                                     
 During the year 1995 while the overall emphasis was on reducing pendency of                         
 passport applications, special attention was given to certain offices, especially                   
 those in Punjab which had large arrears due to long delays in issue of passports.                   
 Efforts were directed at reducing the pendency in these Passport Offices and                        
 reducing the time taken to issue passports. These efforts showed good results and                   
 at the end of the year the delay in issue of passports in Chandigarh and                            
 Jalandhar offices had been considerably reduced.                                                    
 -142>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 Special measures have been initiated during the year for streamlining procedures                    
 and systematisation of rules. Special mention could be made of the following:-                      
                                                                                                     
 (i) A simplified revised passport application form was introduced during the year                   
 1995. This new application form is clear and easy to fill for the public.                           
                                                                                                     
 (ii) Passport booklet in machine readable form conforming largely to                                
 International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO) specifications has been                            
 introduced. Although machine printing and machine readability will take time to                     
 be introduced, the introduction of the booklet in machine readable format is a                      
 step in the direction of achieving the twin objective of machine printing of                        
 passports as also their machine readability.                                                        
                                                                                                     
 (iii) Introduction of greater security features in the passport booklet to make                     
 it less prone to fraud by unscrupulous elements.                                                    
                                                                                                     
 (iv) Computerisation of more Passport Offices continued during the year. The                        
 Passport Offices in Bangalore, Bombay, Chandigarh, Cochin, Delhi, Goa, Hyderabad,                   
 Kozhikode, Madras, Trichy, Trivandrum and Lucknow are now fully computerised.                       
                                                                                                     
 (v) A "Jumbo". passport booklet having 60 pages has been introduced for the sake                    
 of convenience of frequent travellers. This step will obviate the need for                          
 persons required to frequently travel on business trips etc to obtain additional                    
 visa sheets or additional booklets.                                                                 
                                                                                                     
 (vi) Finalisation of the format of visa sticker is at an advanced stage and it is                   
 expected that the visa stickers will be introduced within the course of the next                    
 year.                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 The Passport Offices in Hyderabad and Jaipur moved to more spacious and modern                      
 premises. Ministry is of the view that improvement in the work environment and                      
 the facilities available would result in greater productivity in the Passport                       
 Offices.                                                                                            
                                                                                                     
 In an effort to provide better promotional prospects for the Central Passport                       
 Organisation (CPO) staff, a Departmental                                                            
 -143>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 Promotion Committee under the Chairmanship of UPSC was held to draw up a panel                      
 for the post of Public Relations Officer. Following this meeting, 27                                
 Superintendents have been promoted to the post of Public Relations Officer.                         
                                                                                                     
 A cadre review of the Central Passport Organisation was carried out. The review                     
 is presently under consideration with the Ministry of Finance.                                      
                                                                                                     
 A Collection Centre was opened in Amritsar in June 1995 to facilitate deposit of                    
 passport applications for persons living in that area. A Collection Centre in                       
 Mangalore started functioning in January 1996.                                                      
                                                                                                     
 Consular work remains an area of focus in Indian Missions abroad. The Missions                      
 provide assistance to Indians in settling differences with their sponsors,                          
 arrange for the repatriation of destitute Indians, maintain contacts with Indians                   
 in foreign jails and assist in formalities for performance of last rites or                         
 return of the dead bodies of Indians to India who have died abroad. With the                        
 growing number of Indians going abroad for employment specially to the Gulf                         
 countries, consular work is an area requiring constant attention of the Missions.                   
 Indian Missions have regularly taken up with the governments in the countries of                    
 their accreditation for redressal of general and specific problems concerning                       
 Indians and for promotion of a better working environment for Indian nationals.                     
                                                                                                     
 Figures regarding various categories of cases where consular services were                          
 provided in India and abroad may be seen at Appendix VIII.                                          
                                                                                                     
 While problems of Indian nationals living abroad remain the main focus of                           
 attention of Indian Missions abroad, the well-being of persons of Indian origin                     
 are also followed carefully by the Missions. Government is sensitive to the fact                    
 that even though persons of Indian origin have acquired foreign nationality, they                   
 have strong cultural bonds with India and need to nurture their roots. Indian                       
 Missions all over the world maintain close contacts with overseas Indian                            
 associations and associations of people of Indian origin.                                           
 -144>                                                                                               
 1995                                                                                                
 Administration and Organisation                                                                     
                                                                               Top                   
 Minister of External Affairs Shri Pranab Mukherjee and Ministers of State for                       
 External Affairs Shri R L Bhatia and Shri Salman Khurshid continued to hold their                   
 respective portfolios. During the year 1995-96, new Missions have been opened in                    
 Bratislava (Slovak Republic) in August 1995 and Ouagadougou (Burkina Faso) in                       
 October 1995. Consulates General were opened in Houston (USA) in July 1995 and                      
 Glasgow (UK) in September 1995. Indian Mission in Kabul (Afghanistan) was                           
 reopened in May 1995. The Government of India has also decided to open Missions                     
 in Zagreb (Croatia), Port Moresby (Papua New Guinea) and a Consulate General in                     
 Sao Paulo (Brazil). Action to open these Missions/Posts is underway. At present                     
 Government of India has as many as 154 Resident Missions/Posts abroad. The total                    
 strength of IFS(A) and IFS(B) cadre is 3,580 including some posts on the budget                     
 of Ministry of Commerce as well as those posts which are held in abeyance or                        
 ex-cadred. Details are in Appendix X. The details of officers qualified in                          
 different foreign languages is at Appendix XI. A statement showing appointments                     
 made in various groups in the Ministry and data on reservations during the year                     
 1995 may be seen in Appendix XII. A list of Heads of Missions who took over                         
 charge since April 1995 is given at Appendix IX.                                                    
 -145>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 On the recommendation of the Estimates Committee, a 4-member Expert Committee                       
 under the Chairmanship of Shri S M H Burney has been appointed to review the                        
 recruitment system of the Indian Foreign Service.                                                   
                                                                                                     
 The area of responsibility of the Establishment Division comprises                                  
 purchase/construction/renting of property for the offices of the Ministry and its                   
 subordinate units as also residential accommodation for the officers and members                    
 of staff working in Missions/Posts abroad. In addition, the Establishment                           
 Division looks after maintenance of government owned properties abroad, liaison                     
 with the CPWD for maintenance of Ministry's office buildings in India,                              
 determination of allowances payable to the officials serving in Missions/Posts                      
 abroad, purchase of office equipment, stationery, furniture and Objects d'Art for                   
 the Ministry and Indian Missions. A summary of the major tasks undertaken by the                    
 Establishment Division in 1995-96 is given in the succeeding paragraphs.                            
                                                                                                     
 In keeping with Ministry's policy to acquire/construct properties abroad, with a                    
 view to minimising expenditure on rentals, Ministry instructed those Missions                       
 where rental liabilities were the highest, to locate suitable properties for                        
 purchase. As a result of sustained efforts, properties were purchased in Kiev and                   
 Kampala (Chancery buildings), and residences in The Hague (Counsellor's                             
 residence), Bangkok (apartments for First Secretaries), Berne (apartment for                        
 Attache) and Brussels (apartment for First Secretary). Other purchase proposals                     
 were also actively considered in the Ministry from Missions/Posts at Prague                         
 (Embassy Residence), Glasgow (Chancery and Consul General's residence), Houston                     
 (Consul General's residence), Rome (Chancery-cum-residential premises), Frankfurt                   
 (Chancery), Berlin (plot) and Wellington (Chancery). These could not be finalised                   
 due to non-fulfilment of financial and administrative requirements as also                          
 non-availability of funds.                                                                          
                                                                                                     
 Construction work on Riyadh project (Chancery, Embassy Residence and 44                             
 residences) progressed on schedule and is expected to be completed in March 1996.                   
 Construction of the boundary wall for the Indian Cultural Centre in Mauritius was                   
 completed in June 1995. Construction of the boundary wall                                           
 -146>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 for Foreign Service Institute in the old JNU Campus was started in December 1995                    
 and construction work on the main project is expected to begin by April 1996.                       
 Other construction projects under process relate to Indian Missions in Mauritius,                   
 Abu Dhabi, Beijing, Brasilia, Dhaka, Islamabad, Kathmandu, Minsk, Moscow, ICCR                      
 Complex at Calcutta, construction of building of the Ministry of External Affairs                   
 office on Janpath, housing project in Papankala and Chanakyapuri. Implementation                    
 of the above projects would depend upon fulfilment of administrative and                            
 financial requirements and availability of budgetary resources.                                     
                                                                                                     
 During the year 1995, the Regional Passport Office in Cochin shifted into a new                     
 building. The interior works for the new building for the Regional Passport                         
 Office in Hyderabad has also been taken up and the one in Kozhikode is near                         
 completion. Ministry has also acquired a 3 acre land for construction of its                        
 Passport Office in Bangalore.                                                                       
                                                                                                     
 A pilot project of computer networking that was initiated last year was taken up                    
 for implementation. Computer cabling of South Block was completed and the                           
 required hardware has been installed. The network is proposed to be connected to                    
 the telex room to enable officers to receive/send telex messages from their own                     
 computers. In the next phase, it is proposed to link South Block network to other                   
 buildings of the Ministry and later on to Indian Missions/Posts abroad through                      
 E-mail using NIC's NICNET. Additional hardware was purchased for headquarters and                   
 approvals were accorded to Missions/Posts abroad for purchase of required                           
 hardware locally. In a significant development in the computerisation programme                     
 of the Ministry, the delegation of financial powers to Heads of Indian Missions                     
 abroad were enhanced to avoid frequent references to the Ministry on such                           
 purchases.                                                                                          
                                                                                                     
 Revision of existing rules on other matters pertaining to Establishment Division                    
 are also under active consideration. As a result of this, rules pertaining to                       
 life span of government-owned furniture in Missions were revised. Similarly an                      
 exercise is underway to revise rules pertaining to prescribed space norms for                       
 construction and purchase of properties, and                                                        
 -147>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 also for comprehensive insurance of official vehicles in Missions aboad.                            
                                                                                                     
 The Foreign Service Inspectors' team inspected Indian Missions in Tripoli, Rabat,                   
 Madrid, Lisbon, Bogota, Caracas, Santiago, Brasilia, Paramaribo, Dhaka, Kathmandu                   
 and Thimpu till end- November 1995 to assess the qualitative and quantitative                       
 aspects of the functioning of these Missions.                                                       
 -148>                                                                                               
 1995                                                                                                
 Foreign Service Institute                                                                           
                                                                               Top                   
                                                                                                     
 The Foreign Service Institute continued its regular activities during the year                      
 1995. Stress was laid on improvement of the quality and content of each course                      
 based on past experience and to suit the changing requirements. This was achieved                   
 by giving more attention to qualitative performance in different areas.                             
                                                                                                     
 The following courses were held in the year under report:                                           
                                                                                                     
 Professional Course in Diplomacy and International Relations for Indian Foreign                     
 Service Probationers (1994 Batch);                                                                  
                                                                                                     
 Basic Professional Course for IFS(B) personnel posted abroad;                                       
                                                                                                     
 Professional Course for Foreign Diplomats;                                                          
                                                                                                     
 Familiarisation Programme for Resident Foreign Diplomats;                                           
                                                                                                     
 Induction Course for Freshly Recruited Personal Assistants;                                         
                                                                                                     
 Computer Course;                                                                                    
                                                                                                     
 Language Courses;                                                                                   
                                                                                                     
 Hindi Typing Course for MEA officials; and                                                          
                                                                                                     
 Orientation Course for Non-MEA Officers.                                                            
 -149>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 The year-long Professional Course in Diplomacy and International Relations for 15                   
 IFS Probationers of the 1994 batch consisted of the following modules: Diplomatic                   
 Practice & Protocol; International Relations; India's Foreign Policy;                               
 Multilateral Diplomacy; International Law; Administration, Establishment, Finance                   
 and Accounts; Cultural Diplomacy; External Publicity; International Economic                        
 Environment; Commercial Work; Parliamentary Procedures & Proceedings;                               
 Representational Skills; Hindi; Consular work; Economic Reforms; Regional                           
 Economic Groupings; Assignments/Projects; Communication and Security; Management                    
 Skills; French Language; Attachment with the Armed Forces; Computer Appreciation                    
 and Driving. The Institute also organised District Training Programme for the IFS                   
 Probationers during the year. The probationers went on a study tour to Jammu &                      
 Kashmir and to the India-Tibet border.                                                              
                                                                                                     
 Officials of the Ministry upto the rank of Section Officers posted abroad                           
 attended the Basic Professional Courses which cover all aspects of functioning in                   
 Missions abroad. As part of this Course, six short courses on computer                              
 appreciation, word processing and data base management were organised so as to                      
 enable the participants to familiarise themselves with modern office management                     
 tools and techniques.                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 Based on the language need of the country of posting, eleven language courses                       
 were also arranged for IFS(B) personnel, one in German, three each in French and                    
 Russian and four in Arabic. Language tapes and books have been provided on demand                   
 and individual officials and their families have taken advantage of the                             
 facilities available in the Language Laboratory. Special English coaching classes                   
 have also been arranged for the participants of the PCFDs.                                          
                                                                                                     
 The Professional Course for Foreign Diplomats (PCFD) arranged by the FSI has                        
 become popular over the years. The course design covers the following areas:                        
 Introduction to Diplomacy; International Relations; Regional Focus on East Asia,                    
 South-East Asia, South Asia, Central Asia, West Asia, North America, West Europe,                   
 East Europe and Russia, Africa; Special Focus on India; International Law and New                   
 Areas of International Relations; International Organisations; International                        
 -150>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 Economic Relations and Commercial Diplomacy; Defence and Security; Diplomatic                       
 Practice and Protocol; International Communications and Information Technology;                     
 Communication Skills; International Negotiations; Management Concepts and                           
 Techniques; Cultural Diplomacy; Representational Skills; Computer Appreciation.                     
 The PCFD held from 9 October to 15 December 1995 was attended by 26 diplomats                       
 from Belarus, Bhutan, Ghana, Guyana, Ivory Coast, Kazakhstan, Kyrghyzstan, Laos                     
 PDR, Latvia, Lebanon, Lithuania, Malawi, Moldova, Myanmar, Namibia, Niger, Oman,                    
 Sri, Lanka, Sudan, Syria, Tanzania, Trinidad & Tobago, Uganda, Uzbekistan, Zambia                   
 and Zimbabwe. The 8th PCFD was organised from 18 March to 12 April 1996                             
 exclusively for 27 senior diplomats from South Africa.                                              
                                                                                                     
 A Familiarisation Programme for Resident Foreign Diplomats in New Delhi was held                    
 from 4 to 8 September 1995. A total of 29 Diplomats from 19 Countries and 5 UN                      
 and International Organisations attended the same. An induction Course for                          
 freshly recruited Personal Assistants was conducted in the current year. The                        
 course covered areas such as Administration, Establishment and Finance as well as                   
 Computer Appreciation. The Institute conducted one Hindi typing course during the                   
 year in which 14 officials qualified. Orientation Programmes were organised for                     
 Non-MEA Officers proceeding abroad to join Indian Missions.                                         
                                                                                                     
 The FSI continued to maintain contacts with other training institutes abroad.                       
 Dean (FSI) participated in the meeting of the Association of Directors and Deans                    
 of Diplomatic Academies and Institutes of International Relations (ADDAIR) in                       
 Vienna in September 1995.                                                                           
                                                                                                     
 The FSI organised periodic meetings of Foreign Secretary and other Secretaries                      
 with scholars, foreign policy specialists and media analysts for discussions on                     
 major policy issues.                                                                                
 -151>                                                                                               
 1995                                                                                                
 Implementation of Official Language Policy andPropagation of Hindi Abroad                           
                                                                               Top                   
 During the year under review, efforts were made to implement the Official                           
 Language Policy of the Government of India and to propagate Hindi abroad. The                       
 implementation position of the Official Language Policy has been reviewed from                      
 time to time.                                                                                       
                                                                                                     
 During the year under review, a Hindi module for Indian Foreign Service                             
 probationers of 1994 batch was organised.                                                           
                                                                                                     
 The three sub-committees of the Committee of Parliament on Official Language                        
 inspected some Indian Missions abroad with a view to assessing the implementation                   
 of Official Language Policy therein.                                                                
                                                                                                     
 With a view to creating an atmosphere conducive to the use of Hindi in official                     
 work, 'Hindi Week' was observed and various competitions organised at                               
 Headquarters as well as in some of the Indian Missions abroad and Passport                          
 Offices in India.                                                                                   
                                                                                                     
 The Ministry made arrangements for Hindi translation and typing for 2 weeks                         
 during the 50th session of UN General Assembly to help the non-official members                     
 of Indian delegation.                                                                               
 -152>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 The Ministry continued to be actively engaged in propagation of Hindi abroad                        
 through Indian Missions. As in the past, Standard Hindi literature comprising                       
 books in Hindi on Indian art, history, culture, literature, language, religion,                     
 philosophy, etc was sent to specific Indian Missions abroad for their library and                   
 for gifting to educational and voluntary organisations engaged in teaching Hindi.                   
 The year 1995-96 saw an upsurge of interest taken by foreigners in Hindi as                         
 reflected in the demands for teaching aid material, text books, dictionaries,                       
 typewriters, etc received from a number of Indian Missions. In addition to Hindi                    
 classes for foreigners being conducted by Indian Missions in Budapest, Ulaan                        
 Baatar, Port-of-Spain, proposals for starting Hindi classes by Indian Missions in                   
 Tehran and Zagreb were also approved. Hindi text books, audio cassettes for                         
 learning Hindi, dictionaries, etc were sent in large numbers to Indian Missions                     
 in Colombo, Tripoli, The Hague, Paramaribo, Vladivostok, Kathmandu, Damascus,                       
 Bonn, Wellington, Houston, etc. Indian Missions in Kathmandu, Port Louis,                           
 Colombo, Paramaribo, Budapest, Seoul and The Hague were particularly active in                      
 promoting Hindi by organising Hindi competition, gifting Hindi books,                               
 typewriters, etc to local organisations and individuals. A one time grant of Rs                     
 10,00,000 was sanctioned for Hindi Speaking Union, a recently formed non-                           
 governmental organisation in Mauritius. Support was also extended to the cause of                   
 Hindi abroad by sponsoring delegations for the Diamond Jubilee celebrations of                      
 the Hindi Pracharini Sabha, Mauritius and First anniversary celebrations of the                     
 Hindi Speaking Union, Mauritius.                                                                    
                                                                                                     
 On a specific request from the Hindi Nidhi of Trinidad who are organising the Vth                   
 World Hindi Conference from 4 to 8 April 1996 in Trinidad, the Government of                        
 India is extending assistance to them in certain key areas such as putting up a                     
 book-cum-photo exhibition, bringing out a souvenir from Indian side, deputing                       
 cultural troupes, screening of classical Hindi films, getting the banners and                       
 badges made for the said conference, etc.                                                           
 -153>                                                                                               
 1995                                                                                                
 Cultural Relations                                                                                  
                                                                               Top                   
 The Indian Council for Cultural Relations (ICCR) was formally set up in 1950 with                   
 the primary objective of establishing, reviving and strengthening cultural                          
 relations and mutual understanding between India and other countries. The Council                   
 has worked steadfastly towards the attainment of these objectives. The main                         
 activities of the Council are:                                                                      
                                                                                                     
 Administration of scholarship schemes on behalf of the Government of India for                      
 international students;                                                                             
                                                                                                     
 Exchange of scholars, academicians, opinion-makers, artists and writers;                            
                                                                                                     
 Exchange of exhibitions;                                                                            
                                                                                                     
 Exchange of performing arts groups;                                                                 
                                                                                                     
 Organisation of and participation in seminars and symposia;                                         
                                                                                                     
 Administration of the Jawaharlal Nehru Award;                                                       
                                                                                                     
 Organisation of the Maulana Azad Memorial Lecture and the Maulana Azad Essay                        
 Competition;                                                                                        
                                                                                                     
 Maintaining Indian Cultural Centres abroad and supporting special bilateral                         
 programmes;                                                                                         
                                                                                                     
 Establishing and maintaining Chairs and Professorships for India Studies abroad;                    
 -154>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 Publications; and                                                                                   
                                                                                                     
 Presentation of books/musical instruments.                                                          
                                                                                                     
 Scholarships and Welfare of International Students                                                  
                                                                                                     
 One of the important activities of the Council was the continued implementation                     
 of the scholarship programme. The Council offers about 1000 scholarships annually                   
 under its various scholarship schemes for studies in graduate, postgraduate, and                    
 doctoral programmes as well as for pursuing professional courses such as                            
 medicine, engineering and pharmacy.                                                                 
                                                                                                     
 The scholarship programme fulfils an important role in building bridges of                          
 understanding and developing better appreciation of India. The thrust of the                        
 scholarship programme is towards the developing nations with a special focus on                     
 India's neighbours in South Asia. As many as 1000 new students were admitted this                   
 year from 60 different countries. The largest contingent of around 300 scholars                     
 was received from the neighbouring countries, namely, Afghanistan, Bangladesh,                      
 Bhutan, Nepal and Sri Lanka.                                                                        
                                                                                                     
 The general welfare of international students is also a part of the ICCR mandate.                   
 In pursuance of this, the Council organised various activities throughout the                       
 year to familiarise the international students with the political, economic,                        
 social and cultural milieu of India, besides helping them to make friends through                   
 shared experiences. The major activities are listed below:                                          
                                                                                                     
 (i) A cultural programme for international students was organised in New Delhi on                   
 11 November 1995 on the occasion of the birth anniversary of the founder                            
 President of the ICCR Maulana Abul Kalam Azad. Overseas scholars from different                     
 countries presented performances of music and dance from their countries. The                       
 programme was attended by 4000 students from all over the country. Indian                           
 Missions abroad also celebrated 11 November as International Students Day;                          
                                                                                                     
 (ii) Two educational tours to Bombay and Goa were organised for 90 international                    
 students studying in various                                                                        
 -155>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 universities throughout India from 22 February to 5 March 1995. Apart from                          
 visiting historical and educational monuments during the tours, the students also                   
 called on high-ranking political dignitaries;                                                       
                                                                                                     
 (iii) A visit to the Parliament was organised for 72 international students on 15                   
 March 1995 to watch the proceedings of the Lok Sabha and the Rajya Sabha with the                   
 objective of providing them with first-hand experience of the functioning of the                    
 Indian democratic system;                                                                           
                                                                                                     
 (iv) Two summer camps were organised in June 1995 in Kullu-Manali and                               
 Bangalore-Ooty for overseas scholars;                                                               
                                                                                                     
 (v) An All India International Students Advisors' meeting was organised in New                      
 Delhi on 5 April 1995 to review and discuss matters relating to the placement and                   
 welfare of international students, streamlining of admission procedures, and                        
 exploring ways to solve the accommodation problem; and                                              
                                                                                                     
 (vi) A decision has been made to revise the scholarship stipends and other                          
 allowances of international students commensurate with the rising cost. The new                     
 rates would be at par with rates for University Grants Commission scholars. The                     
 decision is being implemented retrospectively for the 1995-96 academic year.                        
                                                                                                     
 Performing Arts                                                                                     
                                                                                                     
 In 1995 the Council's programme of strengthening India's relations with other                       
 countries through cultural exchanges was specially directed towards Russia,                         
 Central Asia and South-East Asia.                                                                   
                                                                                                     
 The Council presented a major programme of Russian performing arts under the                        
 "Days of Russian Culture in India" which was organised from 2 to 17 December                        
 1995. The Prime Minister Shri P V Narasimha Rao inaugurated the programme at a                      
 special function on 1 December 1995 alongwith the Vice-Premier of the Russian                       
 Federation Yuri F Yarov. The events included performances by the renowned Russian                   
 Kremlin Ballet                                                                                      
 -156>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 and the Russian Circus. The groups performed in several cities in India,                            
 including Delhi, Bombay, Calcutta, Madras, Bangalore, Goa, Ahmedabad, Pune,                         
 Lucknow, Chandigarh and Gwalior. Earlier, ICCR presented a mixed music and dance                    
 ensemble from Turkmenistan from 7 to 14 June 1995.                                                  
                                                                                                     
 "Days of Vietnamese Culture" were organised by ICCR in September 1995. The events                   
 included an exhibition of Vietnamese handicrafts and performances by a cultural                     
 troupe from Vietnam which presented programmes in Delhi, Bombay and Calcutta.                       
                                                                                                     
 Performing arts troupes from the Central Asia Republics and Mongolia gave special                   
 performances from 17 to 19 December 1995 in Delhi, coinciding with a major                          
 seminar on Central Asia sponsored by ICCR.                                                          
                                                                                                     
 The focus of ICCR's outgoing promotional activities in 1995 was Thailand where a                    
 year-long Festival of India was inaugurated by Her Royal Highness Princess                          
 Mahachakri Sirindhorn and the then Minister of Human Resource Development Shri                      
 Madhavrao Scindhia on 13 December 1995. The Festival which includes a concert by                    
 Pandit Ravi Shankar, an exhibition of Shri M F Hussain's paintings and a play on                    
 the life of Emperor Ashok amongst others, is part of the SSSS 50th anniversary                      
 celebrations of the accession to the throne of His Majesty King Bhumibhol of                        
 Thailand. The theme of the Festival highlights the Buddhist message of tolerance                    
 and peaceful co- existence.                                                                         
                                                                                                     
 ICCR also arranged to send folk dance and music ensemble to North Korea where a                     
 folk dance performance was held at the "13th April Spring Friendship Art                            
 Festival" At Pyong Yang. The ensemble subsequently visited Mongolia and had a                       
 performance in Ulaan Baatar.                                                                        
                                                                                                     
 A 12-member folk dance and music group led by Kohinoor Langa from Rajasthan                         
 performed from 28 June to 2 July 1995 in Russia, Byelorussia, Estonia, Germany,                     
 Finland and finally in Minsk to participate in the Krasnoyarsk Festival of Folk                     
 Dance and Music held there.                                                                         
                                                                                                     
 Among Indian musicians who were deputed abroad for performances, mention may be                     
 made of well-known play-back                                                                        
 -157>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 singer from Bombay Shri Sonu Nigam who performed in Kyrghyzstan in August 1995 in                   
 connection with the 1000th anniversary of the Epic 'MANAS'.                                         
                                                                                                     
 The dance group of Smt Usha Venkateshwaran was sent to perform at the Art Summit                    
 1995 held between 7 November and 28 November 1995 to celebrate the 50th                             
 anniversary of Indonesia's Independence Day.                                                        
                                                                                                     
 In addition to these programmes and special programmes for VVIPs (details in                        
 Appendix XXV), the Council continued to sponsor visits of incoming and outgoing                     
 cultural Troupes. During the period from April to December 1995 the Council                         
 sponsored the visits of 33 cultural troupes to countries in Asia, Europe, South                     
 America, North America and South Africa (Appendix XXIII). During April to                           
 December 1995 the Council also received 16 cultural troupes from countries all                      
 over the world. (Appendix XXIV).                                                                    
                                                                                                     
 Exhibitions                                                                                         
                                                                                                     
 The Council sponsored an exhibition of paintings, drawings and manuscripts by                       
 Gurudev Rabindranath Tagore for the Tagore Week held in Abu Dhabi, United Arab                      
 Emirates from 21 to 26 May 1995. A number of films based on Tagore's works were                     
 also sent for screening. The Council sent a Photographic Exhibition of Mughal                       
 monuments and publications on Islam in India to the Istiklal Mosque Festival held                   
 in Jakarta on the occasion of the 50th anniversary of Indonesian Independence.                      
 Exhibitions were also held in Panama, Guyana, UK and Germany. An exhibition of                      
 Vietnamese handicrafts was presented by the Council at the Lalit Kala Akademi                       
 Gallery during October 1995. The Council presented sculptured busts of Mahatma                      
 Gandhiji to USA, Panama and Norway under its presentation programme. (Details are                   
 given in Appendix XXVI)                                                                             
 Seminars An important component of the Council's activities involves the holding                    
 of seminars and discussions to build and foster a better understanding between                      
 India and other countries.                                                                          
 -158>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 Several international seminars were organised in 1995 focussing on Central Asia                     
 and South-East Asia.                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 A Seminar on "Central Asian Geo-Politics" in collaboration with the Society of                      
 Geo-politics, Chandigarh was held from 3 to 10 December 1995 in Chandigarh.                         
 Another Seminar on India and Central Asia was organised in Delhi from 17 to 20                      
 December 1995 alongwith the Himalayan Research and Cultural Foundation. The                         
 seminar was attended by important Government dignitaries, experts and                               
 academicians "from all the Central Asian Republics. The Seminar discussed ways of                   
 strengthening political, economic and cultural links between India and Central                      
 Asia.                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 A seminar on "Continuities and Convergences in the performing Arts Traditions in                    
 South and South-East Asia" was held in Calcutta on 11 and 12 December 1995.                         
 Eminent Academics from India and South-East Asia participated in the seminar. The                   
 Council organised a seminar and workshop in collaboration with the British                          
 Council and the Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry (FICCI) on                   
 8 and 9 September 1995 with business leaders, industrialists, artists,                              
 administrators and policy- makers primarily to discuss relationships between                        
 sponsors and promoters of arts.                                                                     
                                                                                                     
 ICCR alongwith the India International Centre also organised a seminar on                           
 "Culture and Sustainable Development". The inaugural address was given by the                       
 Nobel Prize winning scientist Ilya Prigogine.                                                       
                                                                                                     
 Jawaharlal Nehru Award for International Understanding                                              
                                                                                                     
 The Council functions as the Secretariat for the Jawaharlal Nehru Award for                         
 International Understanding. The Jury for the Award nominated the pro-democracy                     
 leader from Myanmar Daw Aung San Suu Kyi for the prestigious award for 1993. The                    
 Presentation ceremony took place at Rashtrapati Bhavan, New Delhi on 14 November                    
 1995 on Nehru's birthday. The award was accepted on her behalf by Daw Than E, a                     
 close family friend of Aung San Suu Kyi. A special video-taped acceptance address                   
 from Aung San Suu Kyi was shown during the ceremony at Rashtrapati Bhavan.                          
 -159>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 Maulana Abul Kalam Azad Memorial Lecture                                                            
                                                                                                     
 This lecture series instituted in 1958 has continued with persons of eminence and                   
 stature delivering the lecture. The 30th Memorial Lecture on the subject "Asia in                   
 the 21st Century" was delivered on 19 December 1995 by the Minister of Foreign                      
 Affairs of Sri Lanka Lakshman Kadirgamar.                                                           
                                                                                                     
 Maulana Abul Kalam Azad Essay Competition                                                           
                                                                                                     
 The Council organises an Essay Competition annually for citizens of SAARC                           
 countries below the age of 30, years. The Essay "Maulana Azad and Secularism" was                   
 the topic for the 1993-94 Essay Competition. The Prize winners were given a                         
 certificate and a cash award of Rs 10,000/- each at a ceremony at Rashtrapati                       
 Bhavan on 11 November 1995 by the President of India. The topics for the year                       
 1994-95 Essay Competition are "Your Vision Of The Future Of South Asia And How                      
 Such A Future Can Be Realised" in English, 'Maulana Ki Nazron Mein Shiksha Aur                      
 Sanskritt' in Hindi and "Maulana Azad's Concept Of Education" in Urdu. The essays                   
 received from participants in India and other SAARC countries are currently being                   
 evaluated.                                                                                          
                                                                                                     
 Visitors Programme                                                                                  
                                                                                                     
 During the period April to November 1995, the Council sponsored and assisted                        
 visits of 58 Indian scholars, intellectuals, academicians and artists to                            
 participate in seminars, symposia, study tours and conferences abroad (details in                   
 Appendix XXVII). During the same period the Council received 29 visitors from 20                    
 countries under the distinguished visitors programme (details in Appendix                           
 XXVIII).                                                                                            
                                                                                                     
 Publications                                                                                        
                                                                                                     
 As part of its publication programme the Council brought out several issues                         
 during the year. These included a special issue of the Africa Quarterly entitled                    
 "Mightier Than The Machete" on African Literature. A special issue of the Spanish                   
 Quarterly on India's links with the Hispanic World entitled "Distant Seas, Near                     
 Voices" was brought out on the occasion of the international Hispanic Conference                    
 held in Delhi in                                                                                    
 -160>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 November 1995. The French Quarterly also brought out a special issue on Mahatma                     
 Gandhi on the occasion of his 125th Birth Anniversary.                                              
                                                                                                     
 Publications of journals already brought out in different languages by the                          
 Council, namely, "Indian Horizons", "Africa Quarterly" (English), "Gagananchal"                     
 (Hindi), "Recontre Avec l' Inde" -(French), "Papeles de la India" (Spanish) and                     
 "Thaqafat- ul-Hind" (Arabic) continued during the period. A new German quarterly                    
 has also been added to the list of publications with a special issue on Mahatma                     
 Gandhi-125 years. Of other publications brought out, mention may be made of a                       
 special issue on Indian Cinema entitled "Reflections on Indian Cinema" and on                       
 Children's literature entitled "Telling Tales".                                                     
                                                                                                     
 ICCR Library                                                                                        
                                                                                                     
 The ICCR Library Houses Maulana Abul Kalam Azad's entire personal collection of                     
 books and manuscripts. Under a programme of preservation, rare books and                            
 manuscripts from this collection are being laminated. This year 300 such                            
 documents were covered.                                                                             
                                                                                                     
 Presentation of Books/Musical Instruments                                                           
                                                                                                     
 During the period April-December 1995 the Council gifted 2335 books to                              
 institutions, distinguished persons, academicians and opinion makers from 76                        
 countries under its Presentation Programme. This excludes gifts of books                            
 published by the Council. In addition, the Council presented 214 musical                            
 instruments, 275 art objects including audio/video tapes to institutions from 27                    
 countries. ICCR prepared a special presentation set of five lecture demonstration                   
 Video cassettes on Indian classical dance forms which have been supplied to                         
 Indian Cultural Centres and Missions abroad (Appendix XXX).                                         
                                                                                                     
 Cultural Centres Abroad                                                                             
                                                                                                     
 To promote greater awareness and appreciation of India's composite culture                          
 abroad, the Council has set up Cultural Centres in Georgetown (Guyana), Jakarta                     
 (Indonesia), Moscow (Russia), Port Louis (Mauritius), Paramaribo (Suriname),                        
 Cairo (Arab Republic of Egypt), Berlin (Germany),                                                   
 -161>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 London (UK), Tashkent (Uzbekistan) and Almaty (Kazakhstan). A Cultural Centre at                    
 Johannesburg (South Africa) has also been opened, with a branch office at Durban.                   
 A proposal has also been mooted for establishing a Cultural Centre in Port of                       
 Spain (Trinidad & Tobago).                                                                          
                                                                                                     
 The activities of the Cultural Centres reflect the needs of the local population.                   
 In all these Centres for instance, with the exception of the ones in Berlin and                     
 London, Indian music, dance and languages are taught. The Centres at Moscow,                        
 Cairo, Paramaribo, Mauritius and Jakarta also conduct courses on Yoga. All                          
 Centres have libraries and reading rooms and organise lectures, symposia,                           
 exhibitions, performances of dance and music, screening of films and publication                    
 of news bulletins. The Centres develop and maintain contacts with the local                         
 citizens, particularly students, teachers, academicians, policy makers and                          
 cultural personalities.                                                                             
                                                                                                     
 Regional Offices                                                                                    
                                                                                                     
 Regional Offices of the Council are situated in Bombay, Bangalore, Hyderabad,                       
 Trivandrum, Madras, Chandigarh, Lucknow and Calcutta to coordinate regional work                    
 and to establish regular contacts with the State cultural bodies as well as to                      
 assist the international students of the area for admission and other activities.                   
 Throughout the year, the Regional Offices carried out various programmes in                         
 cooperation with the State and zonal cultural centres for the benefit of                            
 international students and promotion of culture.                                                    
                                                                                                     
 Visiting Professors and Chairs of India Studies Abroad                                              
                                                                                                     
 The Council deputes visiting professors to teach Indology, Indian languages and                     
 other related subjects abroad. Deputation of professors abroad is done under the                    
 bilateral cultural exchange programmes and where institutional arrangements exist                   
 with ICCR. ICCR presently has arranged deputation of 17 professors for teaching                     
 Hindi, Sanskrit, Tamil, Anthropology and Sociology as per list at Appendix XXIX.                    
                                                                                                     
 Indo-US Sub-Commission on Education and Culture                                                     
                                                                                                     
 The Council functions as the Secretariat for the Indo-US Sub- Commission on                         
 Education and Culture. The annual joint                                                             
 -162>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 meeting of the Indo-US Sub-Commission was held in New York in April 1995. The                       
 Indian Delegation was led by the Co-Chairman of the Sub-Commission Shri Ram Niwas                   
 Mirdha.                                                                                             
                                                                                                     
 Administration                                                                                      
                                                                                                     
 ICCR has undertaken a major effort to renovate its office premises including the                    
 Auditorium and Art Gallery. Upgradation of office equipment and computerisation                     
 and networking have also been undertaken.                                                           
 -163>                                                                                               
 1995                                                                                                
 APPENDICES                                                                                          
                                                                               Top                   
 Ministry of External Affairs-List of Divisions.                                                     
                                                                                                     
 Specialised. and Support Divisions                                                                  
                                                                                                     
 1 Administration Division                                                                           
 2 Bureau of Security                                                                                
 3 Coordination Division                                                                             
 4 CPV & OI Division                                                                                 
 5 Economic Division                                                                                 
 6 Establishment Division                                                                            
 7 External Publicity Division                                                                       
 8 Finance Division                                                                                  
 9 Foreign Service Institute                                                                         
 10 Investment Publicity Unit                                                                        
 11 Legal & Treaties Division                                                                        
 12 MER Division                                                                                     
 13 Policy Planning & Research Division                                                              
 14 Protocol (including Conference Division)                                                         
 15 Special Kuwait Cell                                                                              
 16 SAARC Division                                                                                   
 17 Special Unit                                                                                     
 18 UN Division                                                                                      
                                                                                                     
 Territorial Divisions                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 1 Africa Division                                                                                   
 2 AMS Division                                                                                      
 3 BSM Division                                                                                      
 4 Central Asia Division                                                                             
 5 East Asia Division                                                                                
 6 Europe East Division                                                                              
 7 Europe West Division                                                                              
 8 Gulf Division (including Haj Cell)                                                                
 9 IPA Division                                                                                      
 10 LAC Division                                                                                     
 11 Northern Division                                                                                
 12 Southern Division                                                                                
 13 WANA Division                                                                                    
 -167>                                                                                               
 1995                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 APPENDIX-II Division-wise List of Countries and Regions                                             
                                                                                                     
 Ministry of External Affairs-Division-wise List of Countries and Regions.                           
                                                                                                     
 AFRICA DIVISION                                                                                     
 1   Angola                                16 Gabon         31 Nigeria                               
 2   Benin                                 17 Gambia        32 Rwanda                                
 3   Botswana                              18 Ghana         33Sao Tome&Principe                      
 4   Burkina Faso                          19 Guinea        34 Senegal                               
 5   Burundi                               20 Guinea Bissau 35 Seychelles                            
 6   Cameroon                              21 Kenya         36 Sierra Leone                          
 7   Cape Verde Islands                    22 Lesotho       37 South Africa                          
 8   Central African Republic              23 Liberia       38 Swaziland                             
 9   Chad                                  24 Madagascar    39 Tanzania                              
 10  Comoros                               25 Malawi        40 Togo                                  
 11  Congo                                 26 Mali          41 Uganda                                
 12  Cote d'Ivoire                         27 Mauritius.    42 Zaire                                 
 13  Equatorial Guinea                     28 Mozambique    43 Zambia                                
 14  Eritre                                29 Namibia       44 Zimbabwe                              
 15  Ethiopia                              30 Niger                                                  
 AMS DIVISION                                                                                        
 1 Canada  2 United States 3 The Bahamas of America                                                  
 BSM DIVISION                                                                                        
 1     Bangladesh                  3 Myanmar              4 Sri Lanka                                
 2     Maldives                                                                                      
 CENTRAL ASIA DIVISION                                                                               
 1            Azerbaijan            4 Tajikistan         6 Turkmenistan                              
 2            Kazakhstan            5 Turkey             7 Uzbekistan                                
 3            Kyrghyzstan                                                                            
 -168>                                                                                               
 EAST ASIA DIVISION                                                                                  
 1     China                  4 Mongolia                   7 Taiwan                                  
 2     Hong Kong              5 North Korea                                                          
 3     Japan                  6 South Korea                                                          
 EE DIVISION                                                                                         
 1  Albania            10 Hungary                                   15 Poland                        
 2  Armenia            11 Latvia                                    16 Romania                       
 3  Belarus            12 Lithuania                                 17 Russia                        
 4  Bosnia-Herzegovina 13 Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia     18 Slovak                        
                       (FYROM)                                      Republic                         
 5  Bulgaria                                                        19 Slovenia                      
 6  Croatia                                                         20 Ukraine                       
 7  Czech Republic     21 Yugoslavia(FYR-Serbia and Montenegro)                                      
 8  Estonia            14 Moldova                                                                    
 9  Georgia                                                                                          
 EW DIVISION                                                                                         
 1  Andorra         10 Germany, Federal  18 Malta                                                    
 2  Austria         Republic of          19 Netherlands                                              
 3  Belgium         11 Greece            20 Norway                                                   
 4  Commonwealth    12 Holy See, The     21 Portugal                                                 
 5  Cyprus          13 Iceland           22 San Marino                                               
 6  Denmark         14 Ireland           23 Spain                                                    
 7  European Union  15 Italy             24 Sweden                                                   
 8  Finland         16 Liechtenstein     25 Switzerland                                              
 9  France          17 Luxemberg         26 United Kingdom of Great Britain                          
 GULF DIVISION (INCLUDING HAJ CELL)                                                                  
 1      Bahrain  4 Oman               7 Saudi Arabia                                                 
 2      Iraq     5 Qatar              8 United Arab Emirates                                         
 3      Kuwait   6 Republic of Yemen                                                                 
 -169>                                                                                               
 IPA DIVISION                                                                                        
 1     Afghanistan                    2 Iran           3 Pakistan                                    
 LAC DIVISION                                                                                        
 1   Anguilla                 14 Dominican Republic 27 Panama                                        
 2   Antigua & Barbuda        15 Ecuador            28 Paraguay                                      
 3   Argentina                16 El Salvador        29 Peru                                          
 4   Barbados                 17 Grenada            30 St Christopher                                
 5   Belize                   18 Guatemala          and Nevis                                        
 6   Bolivia                  19 Guyana             31 St Lucia                                      
 7   Brazil                   20 Haiti              32 St Vincent and the                            
 8   Cayman Islands           21 Honduras           Grenadines                                       
 9   Chile                    22 Jamaica            33 Suriname                                      
 10  Colombia                 23 Netherlands        34 Trinidad & Tobago                             
                                                    Antilles                                         
 11  Costa Rica               24 Mexico             35 Turks and Caicos Islands                      
 12  Cuba                     25 Montserrat                                                          
 13  Commonwealth of Dominica 26 Nicaragua          36 Uruguay                                       
 37  Venezuela                                                                                       
 NORTHERN DIVISION                                                                                   
 1                Bhutan                       2 Nepal                                               
 SOUTHERN DIVISION                                                                                   
 1  Australia  9 Nauru              17 Solomon Islands                                               
 2  Brunei     10 New Caledonia     18 Tavalu                                                        
 3  Cambodia   11 New Zealand       19 Thailand                                                      
 4  Fiji       12 Palau             20 Tonga                                                         
 5  Indonesia  13 Papua New Guinea  21 UN Trust Territories                                          
 6  Kiribati   14 Philippines       in South Pacific                                                 
 7  Laos       15 Singapore         22 Vanuatu                                                       
 8  Malaysia   16 Society Islands   23 Vietnam                                                       
                                    24 Western Samoa                                                 
 -170>                                                                                               
 WANA DIVISION                                                                                       
 1         Algeria             7 League of Arab 13 SADR (Sahrawi                                     
                               States Arab Democratic Republic)                                      
 2         Arab Maghreb Union  8 Lebanon                                                             
 3         Djibouti            9 Libya                               14 Somalia                      
 4         Egypt               10 Mauritania                         15 Sudan                        
 5 Israel  11 Morocco          16 Syria                                                              
 6 Jordan  12 Palestine        17 Tunisia                                                            
 -171>                                                                                               
 1995                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 APPENDIX-III Treaties/Conventions/Agreements concluded or                                           
 renewed by India                                                                                    
 Treaties/Conventions/Agreements concluded or renewed by India with other coun                       
 tries in 1995-96.(*)                                                                                
 S NO  TITLE OF CONVENTIONS/      DATE OF     DATE OF      DATE OF                                   
       TREATIES/AGREEMENTS        SIGNATURE/  RATIFICATION/  ENTRY                                   
       ETC                        ADOPTION    ACCESSION OR   INTO                                    
                                              ACCEPTANCE     FORCE                                   
 MULTILATERAL                                                                                        
 1  Agreement for the Estab-                 13.3.1995                                               
    lishment of the Indian Ocean                                                                     
    Tuna Commission approved by                                                                      
    the Council of Food and Agri-                                                                    
    culture Organisation (FAO) at                                                                    
    its Hundred and Fifth Session                                                                    
    on 25 November 1993                                                                              
                                                                                                     
 2  The Agreement on SAARC        11.4.1993  22.8.1995  7.12.1995                                    
    Preferential Trading Arrange-                                                                    
    ment (SAPTA)                                                                                     
                                                                                                     
 3  Grains Trade Convention 1995,            27.6.1995  1.7.1995                                     
    adopted at London on                                                                             
    7.12.1994                                                                                        
                                                                                                     
 4  United Nations Convention     10.12.1982 29.6.1995  29.6.1995                                    
    on the Law of the Sea, 1982                                                                      
                                                                                                     
 5  The Agreement Relating to the 29.7.1994  29.6.1995  29.6.1995                                    
    Implementation of Part XI of                                                                     
    the United Nations Convention                                                                    
    on the Law of the Sea, 1982                                                                      
                                                                                                     
 6  The Agreement Establishing    18.9.1995                                                          
    the International Institute                                                                      
    for Democracy and Electoral                                                                      
    Assistance, adopted at                                                                           
    Stockholm on 27.2.1995                                                                           
                                                                                                     
 7  Memorandum of Understanding   21.11.1995                                                         
    Concerning Conservation                                                                          
    Measures for the Siberian                                                                        
    Cranes                                                                                           
                                                                                                     
 8  International Convention on              18.10.1995 18.10.1995                                   
    Salvage 1989 adopted at                                                                          
    London on 28.4.1989                                                                              
                                                                                                     
 9  Resolution A. 724 (17) amen-             18.10,1995 18.10.1995                                   
    ding International Maritime                                                                      
    Organisation Convention of                                                                       
    International Maritime                                                                           
    Organisation Assembly adopted                                                                    
    on 7.11.1991                                                                                     
                                                                                                     
 * This list is not exhaustive.                                                                      
 -172>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 10 Resolution A. 735 (18) amend-            14.11.1995 14.11.1995                                   
    ing the International Mari-                                                                      
    time Organisation Convention                                                                     
    of International Maritime                                                                        
    Organisation Assembly adopted                                                                    
    on 4.11.1993                                                                                     
                                                                                                     
 TRIPARTITE                                                                                          
                                                                                                     
 11 Agreement on the determina-   27.10.1993 8.9.1994   24.5.1995                                    
    tion of the trijunction point                                                                    
    between India, Myanmar and                                                                       
    Thailand in the Andaman Sea                                                                      
                                                                                                     
 INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATIONS                                                                         
                                                                                                     
 12 Memorandum of Understanding   22.6.1995                                                          
    between the Government of the                                                                    
    Republic of India and the                                                                        
    International Committee of                                                                       
    the Red Cross (ICRC)                                                                             
                                                                                                     
 13 Agreement between the Govern- 5.7.1995                                                           
    ment of India and the UN                                                                         
    World Food Programme to                                                                          
    provide Food Assistance under                                                                    
    ICDS scheme                                                                                      
                                                                                                     
 14 Recognising the International 14.9.1995             14.9.1995                                    
    Legal Personality of the                                                                         
    International Rice Research                                                                      
    Institute (IRRI)                                                                                 
                                                                                                     
 BILATERAL                                                                                           
                                                                                                     
    Armenia                                                                                          
                                                                                                     
 15 Agreement between the Govern  14.12.1995            14.12.1995                                   
    ment of the Republic of India                                                                    
    and the Government on the                                                                        
    Republic of Armenia on Coope-                                                                    
    ration in the spheres of Cul-                                                                    
    ture, Arts, Education, Tou-                                                                      
    rism, Sports and Mass-Media                                                                      
                                                                                                     
 16 Treaty of Friendship and      14.12.1995                                                         
    Cooperation between the Re-                                                                      
    public of India and the Re-                                                                      
    public of Armenia                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 17 Agreement between the Govern- 14.12.1995            14.12.1995                                   
    ment of the Republic of India                                                                    
    and the Government of the Re-                                                                    
    public of Armenia on Economic                                                                    
    and Technical Cooperation                                                                        
 -173>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
    Bangladesh                                                                                       
                                                                                                     
 18 Protocol on Inland Water      22.8.1995             4.10.1995                                    
    Transit and Trade                                                                                
                                                                                                     
    Bhutan                                                                                           
                                                                                                     
 19 Agreement on Trade and        28.2.1995             2.3.1995                                     
    Commerce between the Govern-                                                                     
    ment of the Republic of India                                                                    
    and the Government of the                                                                        
    Kingdom of Bhutan Brazil                                                                         
                                                                                                     
 20 Memorandum of Understanding   30.8.1995             30.8.1995                                    
    between the Indian Council of                                                                    
    Agricultural Research and the                                                                    
    Brazilian Agriculture                                                                            
    Research Corporation                                                                             
                                                                                                     
 21 Joint Indo-Brazilian Decla-   27.1.1996             27.1.1996                                    
    ration                                                                                           
                                                                                                     
    Brunei                                                                                           
                                                                                                     
 22 Air Services Agreement bet-   6.11.1995                                                          
    ween Government of India and                                                                     
    Brunei                                                                                           
                                                                                                     
    Burkina Faso                                                                                     
                                                                                                     
 23 Trade Agreement between the   4.11.1995                                                          
    Government of the Republic of                                                                    
    India and the Government of                                                                      
    the Burkina Faso                                                                                 
                                                                                                     
    Cambodia                                                                                         
                                                                                                     
 24 Memorandum of Understanding   18.1.1996             18.1.1996                                    
    on Economic and Technical                                                                        
    Cooperation between the                                                                          
    Government of the Republic of                                                                    
    India and the Government of                                                                      
    Cambodia                                                                                         
 25 Cultural Agreement between    31.1.1996             31.1.1996                                    
    the Government of the Re-                                                                        
    public of India and the                                                                          
    Government of the Kingdom                                                                        
    of Cambodia                                                                                      
                                                                                                     
    Canada                                                                                           
                                                                                                     
 26 Treaty between the Government 24.10.1994 15.6.1995  25.10.1995                                   
    of Canada and the Government                                                                     
    of the Republic of India on                                                                      
    Mutual Assistance in Criminal                                                                    
    Matters                                                                                          
                                                                                                     
 27 Memorandum of Understanding   11.1.1996             11.1.1996                                    
    between the Department of                                                                        
    Industry of Canada and the                                                                       
    Ministry of Communications of                                                                    
    India on Cooperation in Tele-                                                                    
    communications                                                                                   
 -174>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
    Chile                                                                                            
                                                                                                     
 28 Agreement between the Govern- 2.6.1995              2.6.1995                                     
    ments of India and Chile to                                                                      
    institutionalise their bila-                                                                     
    teral annual consultation at                                                                     
    the foreign office level                                                                         
                                                                                                     
    China                                                                                            
                                                                                                     
 29 Agreement between the Govern- 17.6.1995                                                          
    ments of India and China to                                                                      
    cooperate in the field of                                                                        
    Health and Family Welfare                                                                        
                                                                                                     
    Colombia                                                                                         
                                                                                                     
 30 Memorandum of Understanding   21.4.1995             21.4.1995                                    
    between the Government of Re-                                                                    
    public of India and the                                                                          
    Government of the Republic of                                                                    
    Colombia to hold Bilateral                                                                       
    Annual Consultations                                                                             
                                                                                                     
    Cuba                                                                                             
                                                                                                     
 31 Cultural and Educational Ex-  25.9.1995             25.9.1995                                    
    change Programme between the                                                                     
    Government of the Republic of                                                                    
    India and the Government of                                                                      
    the Republic of Cuba for the                                                                     
    year 1995-97 (Pursuant to                                                                        
    Cultural Agreement signed on                                                                     
    21.7.1976 between India and                                                                      
    Cuba)                                                                                            
                                                                                                     
    Denmark                                                                                          
                                                                                                     
 32 Protocol on Consultations     6.9.1995              6.9.1995                                     
    between Ministry of External                                                                     
    Affairs of India and the                                                                         
    Ministry of Foreign Affairs                                                                      
    of Denmark                                                                                       
                                                                                                     
 33 Bilateral Investment Protec-  6.9.1995                                                           
    tion and Promotion Agreement                                                                     
    between India and Denmark                                                                        
                                                                                                     
 34 Agreement for the Tied and    7.9.1995              7.9.1995                                     
    Credit Line for Private Wind                                                                     
    Farms made between the Presi-                                                                    
    dent of India and Danish                                                                         
    Export Finance Corporation,                                                                      
    Denmark                                                                                          
                                                                                                     
 35 Agreement between the Govern- 19.12.1995            19.12.1995                                   
    ment of India and the Govern-                                                                    
    ment of the Kingdom of                                                                           
    Denmark relating to Air                                                                          
    Services                                                                                         
 -175>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
    Egypt                                                                                            
 36 Protocol of Cooperation in    19.4.1995             19.4.1995                                    
    the field of Radio and Tele-                                                                     
    vision between the All India                                                                     
    Radio, Doordarshan India and                                                                     
    the Egyptian Radio and TV                                                                        
    Union                                                                                            
                                                                                                     
 37 Agreement for Mutual Coopera- 20.4.1995                                                          
    tion between the Government                                                                      
    of the Republic of India and                                                                     
    the Government of the Arab                                                                       
    Republic of Egypt on Coopera-                                                                    
    tion in Combating Illicit                                                                        
    Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and                                                                    
    Psychotropic Substances                                                                          
                                                                                                     
 38 Agreement between India and   16.10.1995                                                         
    Egypt for Combating                                                                              
    Terrorism, Transnational and                                                                     
    Organised Crimes                                                                                 
                                                                                                     
 39 Agreement between India and   16.10.1995                                                         
    Egypt on Cooperation in                                                                          
    Science and Technological                                                                        
    fields                                                                                           
                                                                                                     
 40 Agreement between India and   16.10.1995                                                         
    Egypt on Cooperation in the                                                                      
    Sphere of information Finland                                                                    
                                                                                                     
 41 Air Services Agreement        18.7.1995                                                          
    between India and Finland                                                                        
    Germany                                                                                          
                                                                                                     
 42 Agreement between the Govern- 10.7.1995                                                          
    ments of India and Germany                                                                       
    for the Protection and Promo-                                                                    
    tion of Investments                                                                              
                                                                                                     
 43 Agreement between the Govern- 19.6.1995                                                          
    ments of India and Germany                                                                       
    for the Avoidance of Double                                                                      
    Taxation                                                                                         
                                                                                                     
 44 Finance protocol (1995)       19.6.1995                                                          
    between the Governments of                                                                       
    India and Germany                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 45 The Technical Assistance      5.7.1995                                                           
    Agreement between India and                                                                      
    Germany                                                                                          
 -176>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
    Ghana                                                                                            
 46 Agreement between the Govern- 9.11.1995             9.11.1995                                    
    ment of the Republic of India                                                                    
    and Government of the Re-                                                                        
    public of Ghana for the                                                                          
    Establishment of the Indo-                                                                       
    Ghana Joint Commission for                                                                       
    Political, Economic, Techni-                                                                     
    cal and Cultural Cooperation                                                                     
                                                                                                     
    Greece                                                                                           
                                                                                                     
 47 Memorandum on Consultations   16.5.1995             16.5.1995                                    
    between the Ministry of Ex-                                                                      
    ternal Affairs of India and                                                                      
    the Ministry of Foreign                                                                          
    Affairs of Greece                                                                                
                                                                                                     
    Iran                                                                                             
                                                                                                     
 48 Agreement on Maritime Commer- 3.1.1995                                                           
    cial Navigation between the                                                                      
    Government of the Republic of                                                                    
    India and the Government of                                                                      
    the Islamic Republic of Iran                                                                     
                                                                                                     
 49 Memorandum of Understanding   18.4.1995             18.4.1995                                    
    between India and Iran on                                                                        
    Cooperation in the fleld of                                                                      
    Postal and Telecommunications                                                                    
    Services                                                                                         
                                                                                                     
 50 Memorandum of Understanding   18.4.1995             18.4.1995                                    
    on Cooperation in the Field                                                                      
    of Tourism between India and                                                                     
    the Islamic Republic of Iran                                                                     
                                                                                                     
 51 Memorandum of Understanding   18.4.1995             18.4.1995                                    
    on the Prevention of Illicit                                                                     
    Trafficking in Narcotic Drugs                                                                    
    and Psychotropic Substances                                                                      
    and Related matters                                                                              
                                                                                                     
    Ireland                                                                                          
                                                                                                     
 52 Mutual Inspection Agreement   3.1.1995              1.10.1995                                    
    between the National Stan-                                                                       
    dards Authority of Ireland                                                                       
    and Standardisation, Testing                                                                     
    & Quality Certification                                                                          
    Directorate, Department of                                                                       
    Electronics, Government of                                                                       
    India                                                                                            
                                                                                                     
    Israel                                                                                           
                                                                                                     
 53 Agreement between the Govern- 21.12.1994 22.8.1995  28.8.1995                                    
    ments of India and Israel on                                                                     
    Trade and Economic Coopera-                                                                      
    tion                                                                                             
 -177>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 54 Agreement between the Govern- 29.1.1996                                                          
    ment of the Republic of India                                                                    
    and the Government of the                                                                        
    State of Israel for the                                                                          
    Promotion and Protection of                                                                      
    Investments                                                                                      
                                                                                                     
    Japan                                                                                            
                                                                                                     
 55 Exchange of notes between the 30.1.1995             30.1.1995                                    
    Governments of India and                                                                         
    Japan concerning additional                                                                      
    Japanese economic Cooperation                                                                    
    already agreed under exchange                                                                    
    of notes dated 6.8.93 concer-                                                                    
    ning Japanese economic coope-                                                                    
    ration for the execution of                                                                      
    the Project for improvement                                                                      
    of Educational Media Produc-                                                                     
    tion facilities of Indira                                                                        
    Gandhi National Open                                                                             
    University                                                                                       
                                                                                                     
 56 Loan Agreement for Assam Gas  28.2.1995             28.2.1995                                    
    Turbine Power Station and                                                                        
    Transmission Line Consiruc-                                                                      
    tion Project (III) between                                                                       
    the Overseas Economic Coope-                                                                     
    ration Fund, Japan and the                                                                       
    President of India                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 57 Loan Agreement for National   28.2.1995             28.2.1995                                    
    Highway-5 Improvement Project                                                                    
    (II) between the Overseas                                                                        
    Economic Cooperation Fund,                                                                       
    Japan and the President of                                                                       
    India                                                                                            
                                                                                                     
 58 Loan Agreement for Industrial 28.2.1995             28.2.1995                                    
    Pollution Control Programme                                                                      
    between the Overseas Economic                                                                    
    Cooperation Fund, Japan and                                                                      
    the Industrial Credit and                                                                        
    Investment Corporation of                                                                        
    India Limited                                                                                    
                                                                                                     
 59 Loan Agreement for National   28.2.1995             28.2.1995                                    
    Highway-24 Improvement                                                                           
    Project between the Overseas                                                                     
    Economic Cooperation Fund,                                                                       
    Japan and the President of                                                                       
    India                                                                                            
 -178>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 60 Exchange of Notes between the 16.3.1995             16.3.1995                                    
    Government of India and the                                                                      
    Government of Japan for ex-                                                                      
    tension of the project Im-                                                                       
    provement of Medical Equip-                                                                      
    ment at Osmania General Hos-                                                                     
    pital, Andhra Pradesh under                                                                      
    Japanese grant assistance of                                                                     
    Yen 757 million to India                                                                         
                                                                                                     
 61 Exchange of Notes between the 15.6.1995             15.6.1995                                    
    Governments of India and                                                                         
    Japan for extension of the                                                                       
    Cultural Grant Aid of                                                                            
    Japanese Yen 34,000,000 to                                                                       
    India for the project of                                                                         
    National Archives of India                                                                       
                                                                                                     
 62 Exchange of Notes between     22.9.1995             22.9.1995                                    
    India and Japan for Grant                                                                        
    Assistance of Rs 87.8 crore                                                                      
    for the construction of a                                                                        
    New Nijamuddin Bridge in                                                                         
    New Delhi                                                                                        
                                                                                                     
 63 No ID-P107 Loan Agreement for 25.1.1996             25.1.1996                                    
    Dhauliganga Hydroelectric                                                                        
    Power Plant Construction                                                                         
    Project between the Overseas                                                                     
    Economic Cooperation Fund,                                                                       
    Japan and National Hydro                                                                         
    electric Power Corporation                                                                       
    Ltd                                                                                              
                                                                                                     
 64 No ID-P112 Loan Agreement for 25.1.1996             25.1.1996                                    
    Gujarat Afforestation and                                                                        
    Development Project between                                                                      
    the Overseas Economic Coope-                                                                     
    ration Fund, Japan and the                                                                       
    President of India                                                                               
                                                                                                     
    Korea                                                                                            
                                                                                                     
 65 Agreement on the Establish-   26.2.1996             26.2.1996                                    
    ment of a Joint Commission                                                                       
    between the Government of the                                                                    
    Republic of India and the                                                                        
    Government of the Republic                                                                       
    of Korea                                                                                         
                                                                                                     
    Kuwait                                                                                           
                                                                                                     
 66 The Council of Scientific &   16.6.1995             16.6.1995                                    
    Industrial Research (CSIR) of                                                                    
    the Republic of India and                                                                        
    Kuwait Institute for Scienti-                                                                    
    fic Research (KISR) of Kuwait                                                                    
    for Scientific and Technical                                                                     
    Cooperation                                                                                      
 -179>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 67 Memorandum of Understanding   16.9.1995                                                          
    between India and Kuwait to                                                                      
    form a joint venture company                                                                     
                                                                                                     
    Kryghyzstan                                                                                      
                                                                                                     
 68 Agreement between India and   22.9.1995                                                          
    Kryghyzstan in the sphere of                                                                     
    Culture, Arts, Education,                                                                        
    Mass Media and Sports                                                                            
                                                                                                     
 69 Agreement between India and   22.9.1995             22.9.1995                                    
    Kyrghyzstan on Cooperation                                                                       
    in the field of Science and                                                                      
    Technology                                                                                       
                                                                                                     
 70 Agreement between India and   22.9.1995                                                          
    Kyrghyzstan for the Promotion                                                                    
    of Bilateral Tourism                                                                             
                                                                                                     
    Malaysia                                                                                         
                                                                                                     
 71 Bilateral Investment Protec-  3.8.1995                                                           
    tion and Promotion Agreement                                                                     
    between India and Malaysia                                                                       
                                                                                                     
 72 Agreement between India and   3.8.1995                                                           
    Malaysia for development of                                                                      
    India's Satellite Broadcast                                                                      
    and Communication Services                                                                       
                                                                                                     
 73 Agreement between India and   3.8.1995                                                           
    Malaysia on Technical Train-                                                                     
    ing and Consultancy Service                                                                      
    in the development of                                                                            
    Malaysia's Space Programme                                                                       
                                                                                                     
 74 Memorandum of Understanding   3.8.1995              3.8.1995                                     
    between India and Malaysia on                                                                    
    Cooperation in the develop-                                                                      
    ment of highways                                                                                 
                                                                                                     
 75 Memorandum of Understanding   3.8.1995                                                           
    between India and Malaysia on                                                                    
    Industrial Cooperation                                                                           
                                                                                                     
    Maldives                                                                                         
 76 Agreement between the Govern- 20.9.1995                                                          
    ment of Maldives, Government                                                                     
    of India and Educational                                                                         
    Consultants India Limited for                                                                    
    providing tailor made train-                                                                     
    ing to Maldivian nominees                                                                        
    against Government of India                                                                      
    funding                                                                                          
 -180>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
    Mongolia                                                                                         
 77 Treaty of Friendly Relations  22.2.1994  21.9.1995 13.12.1995                                    
    Cooperation between the Re-                                                                      
    public of India and Mongolia                                                                     
                                                                                                     
    Myanmar                                                                                          
 78 Memorandum of Understanding   11.7.1995             11.7.1995                                    
    on Air Services between the                                                                      
    Government of the Republic                                                                       
    of India and the Government                                                                      
    of Myanmar                                                                                       
                                                                                                     
 79 Agreement between the Govern- 21.1.1994                                                          
    ment of the Republic of India                                                                    
    and the Government of the                                                                        
    Union of Myanmar on Border                                                                       
    Trade between the two Coun-                                                                      
    tries                                                                                            
                                                                                                     
    Namibia                                                                                          
                                                                                                     
 80 Memorandum of Understanding   27.11.1995            27.11.1995                                   
    on Cooperation in Potable                                                                        
    Ground Water Resources in                                                                        
    Namibia between the Govern-                                                                      
    ment of India and the Govern-                                                                    
    ment of Namibia                                                                                  
                                                                                                     
    Nepal                                                                                            
                                                                                                     
 81 Agreement between India and   10.3.1994             10.3.1994                                    
    Nepal for Assistance to the                                                                      
    Koirala Institute of Health                                                                      
    Sciences                                                                                         
                                                                                                     
    Netherland                                                                                       
                                                                                                     
 82 Memorandum of Understanding   27.6.1995             27.6.1995                                    
    between Telecommunications                                                                       
    Consultants India limited and                                                                    
    NEPOSTEL Consultancy BC,                                                                         
    Netherlands                                                                                      
                                                                                                     
 83 Memorandum of Understanding   18.9.1995             18.9.1995                                    
    between Standardisation,                                                                         
    Testing & Quality Certifica-                                                                     
    tion Directorate (STQC),                                                                         
    India and Philips Electronic                                                                     
    Manufacturing Technology,                                                                        
    Eindhoven, the Netherlands                                                                       
                                                                                                     
 84 Bilateral Investment Protec-  6.11.1995                                                          
    tion and Promotion Agreement                                                                     
    between the Government of                                                                        
    India and the Government of                                                                      
    Netherlands                                                                                      
 -181>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
    Norway                                                                                           
 85 Agreement between the Govern- 19.12.1995            19.12.1995                                   
    ment of India and the Govern-                                                                    
    ment of the Kingdom of Norway                                                                    
    relating to Air Services                                                                         
                                                                                                     
    Oman                                                                                             
                                                                                                     
 86 Memorandum of Understanding   31.5.1995             31.5.1995                                    
    between the Government of                                                                        
    India and the Government of                                                                      
    the Sultanate of Oman                                                                            
    relating to Air Services                                                                         
                                                                                                     
 87 Agreement between the Govern- 31.5.1995                                                          
    ment of India and the Govern-                                                                    
    ment of the Sultanate of Oman                                                                    
    for Air Services Between and                                                                     
    Beyond their Respective                                                                          
    Territories                                                                                      
                                                                                                     
    Philippines                                                                                      
                                                                                                     
 88 Memorandum of Understanding   26.2.1996             26.2.1996                                    
    between the Ministry of Non-                                                                     
    Conventional Energy Sources,                                                                     
    Republic of India and the                                                                        
    Department of Energy, Re-                                                                        
    public of Philppines on                                                                          
    Enhanced Cooperation in the                                                                      
    field of Renewable Energy                                                                        
                                                                                                     
    Romania                                                                                          
                                                                                                     
 89 Protocol of the XIth Session  23.6.1995                                                          
    of the Romanian-Indian Gove-                                                                     
    rnmental Joint Commission for                                                                    
    Economic Technical and                                                                           
    Scientific Cooperation                                                                           
                                                                                                     
 90 Agreement between the Govern- 2.11.1995                                                          
    ment of India and the Govern-                                                                    
    ment of Romania regarding the                                                                    
    Readmission of Persons having                                                                    
    an Illegal Status                                                                                
                                                                                                     
    Russian Federation                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 91 Agreement between the Govern- 4.4.1995              4.4.1995                                     
    ment of India and the Govern-                                                                    
    ment of Russian Federation on                                                                    
    the Cooperation across State                                                                     
    Borders                                                                                          
                                                                                                     
 92 Protocol between the Govern-  6.7.1995                                                           
    ments of India and Russian                                                                       
    Federation to finalise the                                                                       
    supplement to earlier Agree-                                                                     
    ment between India and USSR                                                                      
    on Cooperation in the cons-                                                                      
    truction of a nuclear power                                                                      
    plant at Kudankulam in Tamil                                                                     
    Nadu                                                                                             
 -182>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 93 Protocol of the Meeting of    6.7.1995                                                           
    the Indian-Russian Inter-                                                                        
    governmental Commission on                                                                       
    Trade, Economic, Scientific,                                                                     
    Technological and Cultural                                                                       
    Cooperation                                                                                      
                                                                                                     
 94 Protocol of the second        25.7.1995             25.7.1995                                    
    meeting of the-Russian-Indian                                                                    
    Working Group on coal                                                                            
                                                                                                     
 95 Protocol of the second        27.7.1995             27.7.1995                                    
    session of Indo-Russian                                                                          
    working group on Ferrous and                                                                     
    Non-Ferrous Metallurgy within                                                                    
    the Framework of the Inter                                                                       
    Governmental Commission on                                                                       
    Trade, Economic, Scientific                                                                      
    & Technological Cooperation                                                                      
                                                                                                     
 96 Memorandum of Understanding   14.8.1995                                                          
    between India and Russia                                                                         
    covering a wide range of                                                                         
    areas in the field of                                                                            
    ferrous, nonferrous and                                                                          
    precious metals                                                                                  
                                                                                                     
 97 Agreed Minutes of the first   29.9.1995             29.9.1995                                    
    meeting of the Indo-Russian                                                                      
    Working Group on Cooperation                                                                     
    in the field of Environmental                                                                    
    and Natural Resources                                                                            
                                                                                                     
 98 Agreement for Cooperation in  5.10.1995             5.10.1995                                    
    the field of Agriculture and                                                                     
    related Subjects between                                                                         
    Indian Council of Agricul-                                                                       
    tural Research, India and                                                                        
    Russian Academy of Agricul-                                                                      
    tural Sciences, Russia                                                                           
                                                                                                     
 99 Protocol on Technological     9.10.1995                                                          
    Cooperation between India                                                                        
    and Russia                                                                                       
                                                                                                     
 100 Memorandum of Understanding  4.3.1996                                                           
     for Enhanced Cooperation in                                                                     
     the field of Renewable                                                                          
     Energy between the Ministry                                                                     
     of Non-Conventional Energy                                                                      
     Sources, Government of the                                                                      
     Republic of India and the                                                                       
     Ministry of Fuel and Energy                                                                     
     of the Russian Federation                                                                       
 -183>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 101 Agreement between the Gove-  30.3.1996             30.3.1996                                    
     rnment of the Republic of                                                                       
     India and the Government of                                                                     
     the Russian Federation on                                                                       
     the installation of direct                                                                      
     telephone line with security                                                                    
     code between the residence                                                                      
     of the Prime Minister of                                                                        
     India in Delhi and the                                                                          
     Kremlin in Moscow                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 102 Programme of Cultural,       30.3.1996             30.3.1996                                    
     Scientific and Educational                                                                      
     Exchange between the Re-                                                                        
     public of India and the                                                                         
     Russian Federation for the                                                                      
     years 1996-1997                                                                                 
                                                                                                     
     Singapore                                                                                       
                                                                                                     
 103 Agreement on Cooperation in  4.1.1995                                                           
     Science & Technology between                                                                    
     the Ministry of Science and                                                                     
     Technology of the Government                                                                    
     of the Republic of India and                                                                    
     the Ministry of Trade and                                                                       
     Industry of the Government of                                                                   
     the Republic of Singapore                                                                       
     Slovak Republic                                                                                 
                                                                                                     
 104 Agreement between the Gove-  11.3.1996                                                          
     rnment of the Republic of                                                                       
     India and the Government of                                                                     
     the Slovak Republic on Co-                                                                      
     operation in the spheres of                                                                     
     culture, art, education,                                                                        
     science, tourism, sports                                                                        
     and mass media                                                                                  
                                                                                                     
     Slovenia                                                                                        
                                                                                                     
 105 Agreement between the Gove-  31.1.1995                                                          
     rnment of the Republic of                                                                       
     India and the Government of                                                                     
     the Republic of Slovenia on                                                                     
     Scientific and Technological                                                                    
     Cooperation                                                                                     
                                                                                                     
     South Africa                                                                                    
 106 Treaty on the Principles of  25.1.1995                                                          
     Inter-state Relation and Co-                                                                    
     operation between the Re-                                                                       
     public of India and the Re-                                                                     
     public of South Africa                                                                          
                                                                                                     
 107 Agreement between the Gove-  25.1.1995             25.1.1995                                    
     rnment of the Republic of                                                                       
     India and the Government of                                                                     
     the Republic of South Africa                                                                    
     on the Inter-Governmental                                                                       
     Joint Commission for the                                                                        
     Political, Trade, Economic,                                                                     
     Cultural, Scientific and                                                                        
     Technical Cooperation                                                                           
 -184>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 108 Agreement on Science & Tech- 19.7.1995                                                          
     nological Cooperation                                                                           
     between India and South                                                                         
     Africa                                                                                          
                                                                                                     
     Spain                                                                                           
 109 Convention between the Re-   8.2.1993   22.9.1994  12.1.1995                                    
     public of India and the                                                                         
     Kingdom of Spain for Avoi-                                                                      
     dance of Double Taxation on                                                                     
     Income and on Capital                                                                           
                                                                                                     
     Sudan                                                                                           
                                                                                                     
 110 Agreement between the Gove-  10.1.1995             10.1.1995                                    
     rnment of the Republic of                                                                       
     India and the Republic of                                                                       
     Sudan for the Creation of                                                                       
     the Indo-Sudanese Joint                                                                         
     Commission for Economic,                                                                        
     Technical, Commercial,                                                                          
     Information, Political,                                                                         
     Trade and Cultural Coopera-                                                                     
     tion (As amended through ex-                                                                    
     change of letters dated                                                                         
     31.5.1995)                                                                                      
                                                                                                     
     Sweden                                                                                          
                                                                                                     
 111 Cooperation between STQC     11.2.1995             11.2.1995                                    
     (Standardisation, Testing &                                                                     
     Quality Certification)                                                                          
     Directorate and Friborg                                                                         
     Instrument AB, Sweden for                                                                       
     Hospital Project in India                                                                       
                                                                                                     
 112 Agreement between Government 19.12.1995            19.12.1995                                   
     of India and the Government                                                                     
     of Kingdom of Sweden rela-                                                                      
     ting to Air Services                                                                            
                                                                                                     
     Switzerland                                                                                     
                                                                                                     
 113 Agreement between India and  2.11.1994             29.12.1994                                   
     Switzerland for the Avoi-                                                                       
     dance of Double Taxation                                                                        
     with respect to Taxes on                                                                        
     Income                                                                                          
                                                                                                     
     Tajikistan                                                                                      
                                                                                                     
 114 Agreement between the Gove-  12.12.1995            12.12.1995                                   
     rnment of the Republic of                                                                       
     India and the Government of                                                                     
     the Republic of Tajikistan                                                                      
     on Cooperation in Science                                                                       
     Technology                                                                                      
 -185>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 115 Agreement between the Gove-  12.12.1995            12.12.1995                                   
     rnment of India and the                                                                         
     Government of Tajikistan on                                                                     
     the Inter-Governmental Commi-                                                                   
     ssion on Trade, Economic,                                                                       
     Scientific and Technological                                                                    
     Cooperation                                                                                     
                                                                                                     
 116 Declaration on Further       12.12.1995            12.12.1995                                   
     Development of Friendly                                                                         
     Relations between the                                                                           
     Republic of India and the                                                                       
     Republic of Tajikistan                                                                          
                                                                                                     
     Tunisia                                                                                         
                                                                                                     
 117 Agreement between the        17.10.1995                                                         
     Government of the Republic                                                                      
     of India and the Government                                                                     
     of Tunisia on Scientific and                                                                    
     Technological Cooperation                                                                       
                                                                                                     
 118 Joint Declaration between    17.10.1995            17.10.1995                                   
     the Government of India and                                                                     
     the Government of Tunisia on                                                                    
     Cooperation in Combating                                                                        
     Terrorism, Drug Trafficking                                                                     
     and Organised Crime                                                                             
                                                                                                     
     Turkey                                                                                          
                                                                                                     
 119 Agreement between the        31.1.1995                                                          
     Government of the Republic                                                                      
     of India and the Government                                                                     
     of the Republic of Turkey                                                                       
     on Tourism Cooperation                                                                          
                                                                                                     
     Turkmenistan                                                                                    
                                                                                                     
 120 Bilateral Investment Protec- 20.9.1995                                                          
     tion and Promotion Agreement                                                                    
     between India and                                                                               
     Turkmenistan                                                                                    
                                                                                                     
 121 Protocol on Cooperation      20.9.1995             20.9.1995                                    
     between the Ministry of                                                                         
     External Affairs, Governmnet                                                                    
     of India and the Ministry of                                                                    
     Foreign Affairs, Government                                                                     
     of Turkmenistan                                                                                 
                                                                                                     
 122 Protocol between India and  20.9.1995                                                           
     Turkmenistan on Cooperation                                                                     
     in the sphere of Culture,                                                                       
     Arts, Education, Mass Media                                                                     
     and Sports                                                                                      
 -186>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 123 Setting up of Inter-Govern-  20.9.1995             20.9.1995                                    
     mental Joint Commission                                                                         
     between India and Turkmenis-                                                                    
     tan on Trade, Economic,                                                                         
     Scientific and Technical                                                                        
     Cooperation                                                                                     
                                                                                                     
 124 Credit Agreement between the 20.9.1995             20.9.1995                                    
     Government of India and the                                                                     
     Government of Turkmenistan                                                                      
                                                                                                     
     Ukraine                                                                                         
                                                                                                     
 125 Air Services Agreement       7.7.1995              7.7.1995                                     
     between the Government of                                                                       
     India and the Government of                                                                     
     Ukraine                                                                                         
                                                                                                     
     United Kingdom                                                                                  
                                                                                                     
 126 Agreement between the        14.3.1994  6.1.1995   6.1.1995                                     
     Government of the Republic                                                                      
     of India and the Government                                                                     
     of the United Kingdom of                                                                        
     Great Britain and Northern                                                                      
     Ireland on Promotion and                                                                        
     Protection of Investments                                                                       
                                                                                                     
 127 Agreement between the        8.1.1996              8.1.1996                                     
     Government of the Republic                                                                      
     of India and Government of                                                                      
     the United Kingdom of Great                                                                     
     Britain and Northern Ireland                                                                    
     on Cooperation in Science                                                                       
     and Technology                                                                                  
                                                                                                     
     United Nations Development Programme                                                            
                                                                                                     
 128 IND/95/004-Sustainable Urban 1.6.1995              1.6.1995                                     
     Development for Madras                                                                          
                                                                                                     
 129 IND/95/002-GIS-Based         16.8.1995             16.8.1995                                    
     Technologies for Local Level                                                                    
     Development Planning                                                                            
                                                                                                     
 130 IND/95/G81 Capacity Building 16.8.1995             16.8.1995                                    
     for Introduction of Environ-                                                                    
     mental Economics into Deci-                                                                     
     sion Making for Sustainable                                                                     
     Development                                                                                     
                                                                                                     
     United States                                                                                   
                                                                                                     
 131 Technical Cooperation        16.1.1995             16.1.1995                                    
     between the Department of                                                                       
     Telecom (India) and M/s                                                                         
     Hughes Network Systems                                                                          
     Incorporated, USA                                                                               
 -187>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 132 Technical Cooperation        16.1.1995             16.1.1995                                    
     between Telecom Engineering                                                                     
     Centre (of Department of                                                                        
     Telecommunications) and M/s                                                                     
     Qualcom, USA, for Trial of                                                                      
     CDMA Technology as Wireless                                                                     
     In Local Loop (WILL)                                                                            
                                                                                                     
 133 Memorandum of Understanding  13.2.1995             13.2.1995                                    
     between Electric Power                                                                          
     Research Institute, USA and                                                                     
     Ministry of Non-Conventional                                                                    
     Energy Sources, Government                                                                      
     of India                                                                                        
                                                                                                     
 134 Project Grant Agreement      10.4.1995             10.4.1995                                    
     Between the President of                                                                        
     India and the United States                                                                     
     of America for Greenhouse                                                                       
     Gas Pollution Prevention                                                                        
     Project                                                                                         
                                                                                                     
     Vietnam                                                                                         
                                                                                                     
 135 Agreement between India and  7.9.1994              2.2.1995                                     
     the Socialist Republic of                                                                       
     Vietnam for the Avoidance of                                                                    
     Double Taxation and the                                                                         
     Prevention of Fiscal Evasion                                                                    
     with respect to Taxes on                                                                        
     Income                                                                                          
                                                                                                     
     Yemen                                                                                           
                                                                                                     
 136 Agreement between the        11.7.1995                                                          
     Government of the Republic                                                                      
     of India and the Government                                                                     
     of the Repubic of Yemen on                                                                      
     Economic and Technical                                                                          
     Cooperation                                                                                     
                                                                                                     
 137 Agreement between the        11.7.1995             11.7.1995                                    
     Government of the Republic                                                                      
     of India and the Government                                                                     
     of the Republic of Yemen on                                                                     
     Cooperation in the Scienti-                                                                     
     fic and Technical Fields                                                                        
                                                                                                     
     Yugoslavia                                                                                      
                                                                                                     
 138 Protocol for Consultations   22.6.1995             22.6.1995                                    
     between the Ministry of Ex-                                                                     
     ternal Affairs of the Re-                                                                       
     public of India and the                                                                         
     Ministry for Foreign Affairs                                                                    
     of the Federal Republic of                                                                      
     Yugoslavia.                                                                                     
 -188>                                                                                               
 1995                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 APPENDIX-IV Full Powers issued during 1995-96                                                       
 70 Agreement between India and 22.9.1995                                                            
 Kyrghyzstan for the Promotion of Bilateral Tourism                                                  
                                                                                                     
 Malaysia                                                                                            
                                                                                                     
 71 Bilateral Investment Protec- 3.8.1995                                                            
 tion and Promotion Agreement                                                                        
 between India and Malaysia                                                                          
                                                                                                     
 72 Agreement between India and 3.8.1995                                                             
 Malaysia for development of                                                                         
 India's Satellite Broadcast                                                                         
 and Communication Services                                                                          
                                                                                                     
 73 Agreement between India and 3.8.1995                                                             
 Malaysia on Technical Train-                                                                        
 ing and Consultancy Service                                                                         
 in the development of                                                                               
 Malaysia's Space Programme                                                                          
                                                                                                     
 74 Memorandum of Understanding 3.8.1995 3.8.1995                                                    
 between India and Malaysia on                                                                       
 Cooperation in the develop-                                                                         
 ment of highways                                                                                    
                                                                                                     
 75 Memorandum of Understanding 3.8.1995                                                             
 between India and Malaysia on                                                                       
 Industrial Cooperation                                                                              
                                                                                                     
 Maldives                                                                                            
 76 Agreement between the Govern- 20.9.1995                                                          
 ment of Maldives, Government                                                                        
 of India and Educational                                                                            
 Consultants India Limited for                                                                       
 providing tailor made train-                                                                        
 ing to Maldivian nominees                                                                           
 against Government of India                                                                         
 funding                                                                                             
 -180>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 Mongolia                                                                                            
 77 Treaty of Friendly Relations 22.2.1994 21.9.1995 13.12.1995                                      
 Cooperation between the Re-                                                                         
 public of India and Mongolia                                                                        
                                                                                                     
 Myanmar                                                                                             
 78 Memorandum of Understanding 11.7.1995 11.7.1995                                                  
 on Air Services between the                                                                         
 Government of the Republic                                                                          
 of India and the Government                                                                         
 of Myanmar                                                                                          
                                                                                                     
 79 Agreement between the Govern- 21.1.1994                                                          
 ment of the Republic of India                                                                       
 and the Government of the                                                                           
 Union of Myanmar on Border                                                                          
 Trade between the two Coun-                                                                         
 tries                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 Namibia                                                                                             
                                                                                                     
 80 Memorandum of Understanding 27.11.1995 27.11.1995                                                
 on Cooperation in Potable                                                                           
 Ground Water Resources in                                                                           
 Namibia between the Govern-                                                                         
 ment of India and the Govern-                                                                       
 ment of Namibia                                                                                     
                                                                                                     
 Nepal                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 81 Agreement between India and 10.3.1994 10.3.1994                                                  
 Nepal for Assistance to the                                                                         
 Koirala Institute of Health                                                                         
 Sciences                                                                                            
                                                                                                     
 Netherland                                                                                          
                                                                                                     
 82 Memorandum of Understanding 27.6.1995 27.6.1995                                                  
 between Telecommunications                                                                          
 Consultants India limited and                                                                       
 NEPOSTEL Consultancy BC,                                                                            
 Netherlands                                                                                         
                                                                                                     
 83 Memorandum of Understanding 18.9.1995 18.9.1995                                                  
 between Standardisation,                                                                            
 Testing & Quality Certifica-                                                                        
 tion Directorate (STQC),                                                                            
 India and Philips Electronic                                                                        
 Manufacturing Technology,                                                                           
 Eindhoven, the Netherlands                                                                          
                                                                                                     
 84 Bilateral Investment Protec- 6.11.1995                                                           
 tion and Promotion Agreement                                                                        
 between the Government of                                                                           
 India and the Government of                                                                         
 Netherlands                                                                                         
 -181>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 Norway                                                                                              
 85 Agreement between the Govern- 19.12.1995 19.12.1995                                              
 ment of India and the Govern-                                                                       
 ment of the Kingdom of Norway                                                                       
 relating to Air Services                                                                            
                                                                                                     
 Oman                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 86 Memorandum of Understanding 31.5.1995 31.5.1995                                                  
 between the Government of                                                                           
 India and the Government of                                                                         
 the Sultanate of Oman                                                                               
 relating to Air Services                                                                            
                                                                                                     
 87 Agreement between the Govern- 31.5.1995                                                          
 ment of India and the Govern-                                                                       
 ment of the Sultanate of Oman                                                                       
 for Air Services Between and                                                                        
 Beyond their Respective                                                                             
 Territories                                                                                         
                                                                                                     
 Philippines                                                                                         
                                                                                                     
 88 Memorandum of Understanding 26.2.1996 26.2.1996                                                  
 between the Ministry of Non-                                                                        
 Conventional Energy Sources,                                                                        
 Republic of India and the                                                                           
 Department of Energy, Re-                                                                           
 public of Philppines on                                                                             
 Enhanced Cooperation in the                                                                         
 field of Renewable Energy                                                                           
                                                                                                     
 Romania                                                                                             
                                                                                                     
 89 Protocol of the XIth Session 23.6.1995                                                           
 of the Romanian-Indian Gove-                                                                        
 rnmental Joint Commission for                                                                       
 Economic Technical and                                                                              
 Scientific Cooperation                                                                              
                                                                                                     
 90 Agreement between the Govern- 2.11.1995                                                          
 ment of India and the Govern-                                                                       
 ment of Romania regarding the                                                                       
 Readmission of Persons having                                                                       
 an Illegal Status                                                                                   
                                                                                                     
 Russian Federation                                                                                  
                                                                                                     
 91 Agreement between the Govern- 4.4.1995 4.4.1995                                                  
 ment of India and the Govern-                                                                       
 ment of Russian Federation on                                                                       
 the Cooperation across State                                                                        
 Borders                                                                                             
                                                                                                     
 92 Protocol between the Govern- 6.7.1995                                                            
 ments of India and Russian                                                                          
 Federation to finalise the                                                                          
 supplement to earlier Agree-                                                                        
 ment between India and USSR                                                                         
 on Cooperation in the cons-                                                                         
 truction of a nuclear power                                                                         
 plant at Kudankulam in Tamil                                                                        
 Nadu                                                                                                
 -182>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 93 Protocol of the Meeting of 6.7.1995                                                              
 the Indian-Russian Inter-                                                                           
 governmental Commission on                                                                          
 Trade, Economic, Scientific,                                                                        
 Technological and Cultural                                                                          
 Cooperation                                                                                         
                                                                                                     
 94 Protocol of the second 25.7.1995 25.7.1995                                                       
 meeting of the-Russian-Indian                                                                       
 Working Group on coal                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 95 Protocol of the second 27.7.1995 27.7.1995                                                       
 session of Indo-Russian                                                                             
 working group on Ferrous and                                                                        
 Non-Ferrous Metallurgy within                                                                       
 the Framework of the Inter                                                                          
 Governmental Commission on                                                                          
 Trade, Economic, Scientific                                                                         
 & Technological Cooperation                                                                         
                                                                                                     
 96 Memorandum of Understanding 14.8.1995                                                            
 between India and Russia                                                                            
 covering a wide range of                                                                            
 areas in the field of                                                                               
 ferrous, nonferrous and                                                                             
 precious metals                                                                                     
                                                                                                     
 97 Agreed Minutes of the first 29.9.1995 29.9.1995                                                  
 meeting of the Indo-Russian                                                                         
 Working Group on Cooperation                                                                        
 in the field of Environmental                                                                       
 and Natural Resources                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 98 Agreement for Cooperation in 5.10.1995 5.10.1995                                                 
 the field of Agriculture and                                                                        
 related Subjects between                                                                            
 Indian Council of Agricul-                                                                          
 tural Research, India and                                                                           
 Russian Academy of Agricul-                                                                         
 tural Sciences, Russia                                                                              
                                                                                                     
 99 Protocol on Technological 9.10.1995                                                              
 Cooperation between India                                                                           
 and Russia                                                                                          
                                                                                                     
 100 Memorandum of Understanding 4.3.1996                                                            
 for Enhanced Cooperation in                                                                         
 the field of Renewable                                                                              
 Energy between the Ministry                                                                         
 of Non-Conventional Energy                                                                          
 Sources, Government of the                                                                          
 Republic of India and the                                                                           
 Ministry of Fuel and Energy                                                                         
 of the Russian Federation                                                                           
 -183>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 101 Agreement between the Gove- 30.3.1996 30.3.1996                                                 
 rnment of the Republic of                                                                           
 India and the Government of                                                                         
 the Russian Federation on                                                                           
 the installation of direct                                                                          
 telephone line with security                                                                        
 code between the residence                                                                          
 of the Prime Minister of                                                                            
 India in Delhi and the                                                                              
 Kremlin in Moscow                                                                                   
                                                                                                     
 102 Programme of Cultural, 30.3.1996 30.3.1996                                                      
 Scientific and Educational                                                                          
 Exchange between the Re-                                                                            
 public of India and the                                                                             
 Russian Federation for the                                                                          
 years 1996-1997                                                                                     
                                                                                                     
 Singapore                                                                                           
                                                                                                     
 103 Agreement on Cooperation in 4.1.1995                                                            
 Science & Technology between                                                                        
 the Ministry of Science and                                                                         
 Technology of the Government                                                                        
 of the Republic of India and                                                                        
 the Ministry of Trade and                                                                           
 Industry of the Government of                                                                       
 the Republic of Singapore                                                                           
 Slovak Republic                                                                                     
                                                                                                     
 104 Agreement between the Gove- 11.3.1996                                                           
 rnment of the Republic of                                                                           
 India and the Government of                                                                         
 the Slovak Republic on Co-                                                                          
 operation in the spheres of                                                                         
 culture, art, education,                                                                            
 science, tourism, sports                                                                            
 and mass media                                                                                      
                                                                                                     
 Slovenia                                                                                            
                                                                                                     
 105 Agreement between the Gove- 31.1.1995                                                           
 rnment of the Republic of                                                                           
 India and the Government of                                                                         
 the Republic of Slovenia on                                                                         
 Scientific and Technological                                                                        
 Cooperation                                                                                         
                                                                                                     
 South Africa                                                                                        
 106 Treaty on the Principles of 25.1.1995                                                           
 Inter-state Relation and Co-                                                                        
 operation between the Re-                                                                           
 public of India and the Re-                                                                         
 public of South Africa                                                                              
                                                                                                     
 107 Agreement between the Gove- 25.1.1995 25.1.1995                                                 
 rnment of the Republic of                                                                           
 India and the Government of                                                                         
 the Republic of South Africa                                                                        
 on the Inter-Governmental                                                                           
 Joint Commission for the                                                                            
 Political, Trade, Economic,                                                                         
 Cultural, Scientific and                                                                            
 Technical Cooperation                                                                               
 -184>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 108 Agreement on Science & Tech- 19.7.1995                                                          
 nological Cooperation                                                                               
 between India and South                                                                             
 Africa                                                                                              
                                                                                                     
 Spain                                                                                               
 109 Convention between the Re- 8.2.1993 22.9.1994 12.1.1995                                         
 public of India and the                                                                             
 Kingdom of Spain for Avoi-                                                                          
 dance of Double Taxation on                                                                         
 Income and on Capital                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 Sudan                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 110 Agreement between the Gove- 10.1.1995 10.1.1995                                                 
 rnment of the Republic of                                                                           
 India and the Republic of                                                                           
 Sudan for the Creation of                                                                           
 the Indo-Sudanese Joint                                                                             
 Commission for Economic,                                                                            
 Technical, Commercial,                                                                              
 Information, Political,                                                                             
 Trade and Cultural Coopera-                                                                         
 tion (As amended through ex-                                                                        
 change of letters dated                                                                             
 31.5.1995)                                                                                          
                                                                                                     
 Sweden                                                                                              
                                                                                                     
 111 Cooperation between STQC 11.2.1995 11.2.1995                                                    
 (Standardisation, Testing &                                                                         
 Quality Certification)                                                                              
 Directorate and Friborg                                                                             
 Instrument AB, Sweden for                                                                           
 Hospital Project in India                                                                           
                                                                                                     
 112 Agreement between Government 19.12.1995 19.12.1995                                              
 of India and the Government                                                                         
 of Kingdom of Sweden rela-                                                                          
 ting to Air Services                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 Switzerland                                                                                         
                                                                                                     
 113 Agreement between India and 2.11.1994 29.12.1994                                                
 Switzerland for the Avoi-                                                                           
 dance of Double Taxation                                                                            
 with respect to Taxes on                                                                            
 Income                                                                                              
                                                                                                     
 Tajikistan                                                                                          
                                                                                                     
 114 Agreement between the Gove- 12.12.1995 12.12.1995                                               
 rnment of the Republic of                                                                           
 India and the Government of                                                                         
 the Republic of Tajikistan                                                                          
 on Cooperation in Science                                                                           
 Technology                                                                                          
 -185>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 115 Agreement between the Gove- 12.12.1995 12.12.1995                                               
 rnment of India and the                                                                             
 Government of Tajikistan on                                                                         
 the Inter-Governmental Commi-                                                                       
 ssion on Trade, Economic,                                                                           
 Scientific and Technological                                                                        
 Cooperation                                                                                         
                                                                                                     
 116 Declaration on Further 12.12.1995 12.12.1995                                                    
 Development of Friendly                                                                             
 Relations between the                                                                               
 Republic of India and the                                                                           
 Republic of Tajikistan                                                                              
                                                                                                     
 Tunisia                                                                                             
                                                                                                     
 117 Agreement between the 17.10.1995                                                                
 Government of the Republic                                                                          
 of India and the Government                                                                         
 of Tunisia on Scientific and                                                                        
 Technological Cooperation                                                                           
                                                                                                     
 118 Joint Declaration between 17.10.1995 17.10.1995                                                 
 the Government of India and                                                                         
 the Government of Tunisia on                                                                        
 Cooperation in Combating                                                                            
 Terrorism, Drug Trafficking                                                                         
 and Organised Crime                                                                                 
                                                                                                     
 Turkey                                                                                              
                                                                                                     
 119 Agreement between the 31.1.1995                                                                 
 Government of the Republic                                                                          
 of India and the Government                                                                         
 of the Republic of Turkey                                                                           
 on Tourism Cooperation                                                                              
                                                                                                     
 Turkmenistan                                                                                        
                                                                                                     
 120 Bilateral Investment Protec- 20.9.1995                                                          
 tion and Promotion Agreement                                                                        
 between India and                                                                                   
 Turkmenistan                                                                                        
                                                                                                     
 121 Protocol on Cooperation 20.9.1995 20.9.1995                                                     
 between the Ministry of                                                                             
 External Affairs, Governmnet                                                                        
 of India and the Ministry of                                                                        
 Foreign Affairs, Government                                                                         
 of Turkmenistan                                                                                     
                                                                                                     
 122 Protocol between India and 20.9.1995                                                            
 Turkmenistan on Cooperation                                                                         
 in the sphere of Culture,                                                                           
 Arts, Education, Mass Media                                                                         
 and Sports                                                                                          
 -186>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 123 Setting up of Inter-Govern- 20.9.1995 20.9.1995                                                 
 mental Joint Commission                                                                             
 between India and Turkmenis-                                                                        
 tan on Trade, Economic,                                                                             
 Scientific and Technical                                                                            
 Cooperation                                                                                         
                                                                                                     
 124 Credit Agreement between the 20.9.1995 20.9.1995                                                
 Government of India and the                                                                         
 Government of Turkmenistan                                                                          
                                                                                                     
 Ukraine                                                                                             
                                                                                                     
 125 Air Services Agreement 7.7.1995 7.7.1995                                                        
 between the Government of                                                                           
 India and the Government of                                                                         
 Ukraine                                                                                             
                                                                                                     
 United Kingdom                                                                                      
                                                                                                     
 126 Agreement between the 14.3.1994 6.1.1995 6.1.1995                                               
 Government of the Republic                                                                          
 of India and the Government                                                                         
 of the United Kingdom of                                                                            
 Great Britain and Northern                                                                          
 Ireland on Promotion and                                                                            
 Protection of Investments                                                                           
                                                                                                     
 127 Agreement between the 8.1.1996 8.1.1996                                                         
 Government of the Republic                                                                          
 of India and Government of                                                                          
 the United Kingdom of Great                                                                         
 Britain and Northern Ireland                                                                        
 on Cooperation in Science                                                                           
 and Technology                                                                                      
                                                                                                     
 United Nations Development Programme                                                                
                                                                                                     
 128 IND/95/004-Sustainable Urban 1.6.1995 1.6.1995                                                  
 Development for Madras                                                                              
                                                                                                     
 129 IND/95/002-GIS-Based 16.8.1995 16.8.1995                                                        
 Technologies for Local Level                                                                        
 Development Planning                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 130 IND/95/G81 Capacity Building 16.8.1995 16.8.1995                                                
 for Introduction of Environ-                                                                        
 mental Economics into Deci-                                                                         
 sion Making for Sustainable                                                                         
 Development                                                                                         
                                                                                                     
 United States                                                                                       
                                                                                                     
 131 Technical Cooperation 16.1.1995 16.1.1995                                                       
 between the Department of                                                                           
 Telecom (India) and M/s                                                                             
 Hughes Network Systems                                                                              
 Incorporated, USA                                                                                   
 -187>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 132 Technical Cooperation 16.1.1995 16.1.1995                                                       
 between Telecom Engineering                                                                         
 Centre (of Department of                                                                            
 Telecommunications) and M/s                                                                         
 Qualcom, USA, for Trial of                                                                          
 CDMA Technology as Wireless                                                                         
 In Local Loop (WILL)                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 133 Memorandum of Understanding 13.2.1995 13.2.1995                                                 
 between Electric Power                                                                              
 Research Institute, USA and                                                                         
 Ministry of Non-Conventional                                                                        
 Energy Sources, Government                                                                          
 of India                                                                                            
                                                                                                     
 134 Project Grant Agreement 10.4.1995 10.4.1995                                                     
 Between the President of                                                                            
 India and the United States                                                                         
 of America for Greenhouse                                                                           
 Gas Pollution Prevention                                                                            
 Project                                                                                             
                                                                                                     
 Vietnam                                                                                             
                                                                                                     
 135 Agreement between India and 7.9.1994 2.2.1995                                                   
 the Socialist Republic of                                                                           
 Vietnam for the Avoidance of                                                                        
 Double Taxation and the                                                                             
 Prevention of Fiscal Evasion                                                                        
 with respect to Taxes on                                                                            
 Income                                                                                              
                                                                                                     
 Yemen                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 136 Agreement between the 11.7.1995                                                                 
 Government of the Republic                                                                          
 of India and the Government                                                                         
 of the Repubic of Yemen on                                                                          
 Economic and Technical                                                                              
 Cooperation                                                                                         
                                                                                                     
 137 Agreement between the 11.7.1995 11.7.1995                                                       
 Government of the Republic                                                                          
 of India and the Government                                                                         
 of the Republic of Yemen on                                                                         
 Cooperation in the Scienti-                                                                         
 fic and Technical Fields                                                                            
                                                                                                     
 Yugoslavia                                                                                          
                                                                                                     
 138 Protocol for Consultations 22.6.1995 22.6.1995                                                  
 between the Ministry of Ex-                                                                         
 ternal Affairs of the Re-                                                                           
 public of India and the                                                                             
 Ministry for Foreign Affairs                                                                        
 of the Federal Republic of                                                                          
 Yugoslavia.                                                                                         
 -188>                                                                                               
 Full Powers issued during 1995-96.                                                                  
                                                                                                     
 S NO CONVENTIONS/TREATIES                                 DATE OF FULL POWERS                       
                                                                                                     
 1   Full Powers in favour of Shri T P Srinivasan,      21.1.1995                                    
     acting Permanent Representative to the Permanent                                                
     Mission of India, New York to sign the-                                                         
                                                                                                     
     (i)   Protocol on the Establishment of Diplomatic                                               
           Relations between the Republic of India and                                               
           Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia                                                     
           (FYROM);                                                                                  
     (ii)  Protocol on the Establishment of Consular                                                 
           Relations between the Republic of India and                                               
           FYROM.                                                                                    
                                                                                                     
 2   Full Powers in favour of Shri Kuldip Sehdev,       15.3.1995                                    
     Ambassador of India in Japan to sign the                                                        
     (i)   Protocol on the Establishment of Diplomatic                                               
           Relations between the Republic of India and                                               
           the Federated States of Micronesia;                                                       
     (ii)  Protocol on the Establishment of Consular                                                 
           Relations between the Republic of India and                                               
           the Federated States of Micronesia.                                                       
                                                                                                     
 3   Full Powers in favour of Shri Ravinder Gupta,      5.10.1995                                    
     Representative of India on the Council of                                                       
     International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO)                                                
     to sign Protocol on the Authentic Quinquelingual                                                
     (Arabic) Text of the Convention of International                                                
     Civil Aviation, 1944                                                                            
                                                                                                     
 4   Full Powers in favour of Shri P Chidambaram,       1.11.1995                                    
     Minister of State for Commerce to sign the                                                      
     Bilateral Investment Protection and Promotion                                                   
     Agreement between India and Netherlands                                                         
                                                                                                     
 5   Full Powers in favour of Shri Manmohan Singh,      25.1.1996                                    
     Finance Minister to sign the Convention between                                                 
     the Republic of India and the State of Israel for                                               
     the Avoidance of Double Taxation and for the                                                    
     prevention of Fiscal Evasion with Respect of                                                    
     Taxes on Income and on Capital                                                                  
                                                                                                     
 6   Full Powers in favour of Shri Manmohan Singh,      25.1.1996                                    
     Finance Minister to sign the Agreement between                                                  
     the Government of the Republic of India and the                                                 
     State of Israel for the Promotion and Protection                                                
     of Investments                                                                                  
 -189>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 7   Full Powers in favour of Shri Bhuvnesh Chaturvedi, 2.2.1996                                     
     Minister of State for Science and Technology to                                                 
     sign the Agreement between the Government of the                                                
     Republic of India and Government of the United                                                  
     Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland on                                                
     Cooperation in Science and Technology                                                           
                                                                                                     
 8   Full Powers in favour of Shri V S Ramamurthy,      23.2.1996                                    
     Secretary, Department of Science & Technology to                                                
     sign the Agreement on Scientific and Tech-                                                      
     nological Cooperation between the Government of                                                 
     the Republic of India and the Government of the                                                 
     Socialist Republic of Vietnam                                                                   
                                                                                                     
 9   Full Powers in favour of Shri Anil Baijal, Joint   27.3.1996                                    
     Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation & Tourism                                                 
     to sign the Air Services Agreement between the                                                  
     Government of Hong Kong and the Government of the                                               
     Republic of India.                                                                              
 -190>                                                                                               
 1995                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 APPENDIX-V Instruments of Ratification issued during 1995-96.                                       
 Instruments of Ratification issued during 1995-96.                                                  
                                                                                                     
 S NO CONVENTION/TREATY                                         DATE OF INSTRUMENT                   
                                                                                                     
 1 Air-Services Agreement between the Government of            2.1.1995                              
   of India and the Government of Zambia                                                             
 2 Cultural Agreement between the Government of the           23.2.1995                              
   Government of India and the Government of the Lao                                                 
   People's Democratic Republic                                                                      
                                                                                                     
 3 Agreement between the Government of India and the          25.5.1995                              
   Government of Tunisia on Trade and Economic                                                       
   Cooperation                                                                                       
                                                                                                     
 4 Treaty on the Principles of Inter-State Relation and       25.5.1995                              
   Cooperation between the Republic of India and the                                                 
   Republic of South Africa                                                                          
                                                                                                     
 5 Agreement for Mutual Cooperation between the Government    15.6.1995                              
   of the Republic of India and the Government of the                                                
   Arab Republic of Egypt on Cooperation in Combating                                                
   Illicit Traffic in Narcotic  Drugs and Psychotropic                                               
   Substances                                                                                        
                                                                                                     
 6 Agreement between the Government of the Republic of        21.6.1995                              
   India and the Russian Federation for the Promotion                                                
    and Mutual Protection of Investments                                                             
                                                                                                     
 7 Agreement between India and Federal Republic of            30.8.1995                              
   Germany for Promotion and Protection of Investments                                               
                                                                                                     
 8 Amendment of Article XVII(f) of the INTELSAT              12.10.1995                              
   Agreement approved by the Nineteenth Assembly on                                                  
   26.10.1994                                                                                        
 9 Convention on the Prohibition of the Development,         18.10.1995                              
   Production, Stockpiling and use of Chemical Weapons                                               
   and their Destruction, signed at Paris on 13.1.1993                                               
                                                                                                     
 10 Revised Constitution and Convention of the               19.10.1995                              
    International Telecommunication Union (ITU) adopted                                              
    at Geneva on 22.12.1992                                                                          
                                                                                                     
 11 Convention between the Government of the Republic        10.11.1995                              
    of India and the Government of the Republic of                                                   
    Italy for the Avoidance of Double Taxation and                                                   
    the Prevention of Fiscal Evasion with Respect to                                                 
    Taxes on Income                                                                                  
 -191>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 12 Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic     20.3.1996                              
    Treaty, 1959 signed by India on 2.7.92                                                           
                                                                                                     
 13 Agreement between the Government of the Republic          12.1.1996                              
    of India and the Government of the Italian Republic                                              
    for the Promotion and Protection of Investment                                                   
                                                                                                     
 14 Agreement between the Government of the Republic of       12.1.1996                              
    India and the Government of the Kingdom of Denmark                                               
    concerning the Promotion and Reciprocal Protection                                               
    of Investments,                                                                                  
                                                                                                     
 Note : This list is not exhaustive.                                                                 
 -192>                                                                                               
 1995                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 APPENDIX-VI Statement showing the number of applications                                            
 received for fresh passports                                                                        
 Statement showing the number of applications received for fresh                                     
 passports and miscellaneous services and the number of passports issued                             
 and services rendered during the        year 1995.                                                  
                                                                                                     
 S NO   RPOs/POs*    FRESH APPLICATIONS          MISCELLANEOUS SERVICES                              
                                                                                                     
                     NO OF         NO OF             NO OF        NO OF                              
              APPLICATIONS     PASSPORTS      APPLICATIONS     SERVICES                              
                  RECEIVED       GRANTED          RECEIVED     RENDERED                              
                                                                                                     
 1 AHMEDABAD        105955         99089             45723        45512                              
 2 BANGALORE         97741         95672             39525        39846                              
 3 BAREILLY          36863         35880             10850        10559                              
 4 BHOPAL            20297         20148              9130         8776                              
 5 BHUBANESHWAR       6995          5309              2313         2262                              
 6 BOMBAY           223397        218043            113677       111847                              
 7 CALCUTTA          50045         47601             28385        25738                              
 8 CHANDIGARH        84608        103257             31700        34270                              
 9 COCHIN            80686         80009             41720        40078                              
 10 DELHI           121389        106607             53677        53810                              
 11 GOA              15329         14220             12366        14472                              
 12 GUWAHATI          7486          6739              2474         2347                              
 13 HYDERABAD       149422        142770             53618        51701                              
 14 JAIPUR           52942         51893             18378        30713                              
 15 JALANDHAR        69384        100743             33233        34164                              
 16 JAMMU            11457          8713              1493         1443                              
 17 KOZHIKODE       133067        135892             57608        55848                              
 18 LUCKNOW          91266         99127             18085        20087                              
 19 MADRAS          117333        112475             41501        40885                              
 20 NAGPUR            9541          9037              3220         3233                              
 21 PATNA            41156         38498              8548         8522                              
 22 TRICHY          164577        139332             56964        56789                              
 23 TRIVANDRUM       90432         83461             37203        37061                              
                                                                                                     
    TOTAL          1781368       1754515            721391       729963                              
                                                                                                     
 * Regional Passport Offices/Passport Offices.                                                       
 -193>                                                                                               
 1995                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 APPENDIX-VII Statement showing the Revenue and                                                      
 Expenditure Figures of Passport Offices                                                             
 Statement showing the Revenue and Expenditure Figures of Passport                                   
 Offices/Reg                                                                                         
 ional                                                                                               
 Passport Offices during the year 1995.                                                              
                                                                                                     
 S NO  OFFICE                           REVENUE             EXPENDITURE                              
                                         EARNED                INCURRED                              
                                                                                                     
 1 AHMEDABAD                           42270925                  682346                              
 2 BANGALORE                           33347220                 8439913                              
 3 BAREILLY                            13474105                 3860083                              
 4 BHOPAL                               8015490                 1839859                              
 5 BHUBANESHWAR                         2405082                  907357                              
 6 BOMBAY                              90073079                15906627                              
 7 CALCUTTA                            27134358                 2488175                              
 8 CHANDIGARH                          31274300                 7499653                              
 9 COCHIN                              32140073                 7977107                              
 10 DELHI                              47917466               357629857                              
 11 GUWAHATI                            3221337                 1036112                              
 12 HYDERABAD                          54458731                10332349                              
 13 JAIPUR                             19807792                 5666477                              
 14 JALANDHAR                          32607895                 6017935                              
 15 JAMMU                               3355640                 1224487                              
 16 KOZHIKODE                          51119811                 7838618                              
 17 LUCKNOW                            31372089                 8637358                              
 18 MADRAS                             77223650                 7425880                              
 19 NAGPUR                              3475566                  968264                              
 20 PANAJI (GOA)                        7003779                 1520655                              
 21 PATNA                              13959002                 3052507                              
 22 TRICHY                             59028610                 7610279                              
 23 TRIVANDRUM                         32808344                 6061290                              
                                                                                                     
    TOTAL                             717494344               474623188                              
 -194>                                                                                               
 1995                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 APPENDIX-VIII Consular Data for 1995                                                                
 Consular Data for 1995.                                                                             
                                                                                                     
 1 Number of Attestations                                        184396                              
                                                                                                     
 2 Number of Indians repatriated at Government cost                 106                              
                                                                                                     
 3 Number of Indians arrested abroad*                             12102                              
                                                                                                     
 4 Number of deaths of Indians reported to the Ministry*           3591                              
                                                                                                     
 5 Number of foreigners in Jails in India"                         2085                              
                                                                                                     
 6 Number of foreigners died in India***                            322                              
                                                                                                     
 7 (i) Number of requests for extradition received by Government      1                              
       of India from abroad#                                                                         
   (ii) Number of requests from Government of India to Foreign        3                              
        Governments for extradition                                                                  
                                                                                                     
 8 Number of lost/damaged passports cases received*               17682                              
                                                                                                     
 * Figures are for Cases reported.                                                                   
 ** Figures made available by Ministry of Home Affairs.                                              
 *** Figures made available by State Governments.                                                    
  # Includes requests made to countries with which India does not                                    
 have Extraditi on  Treaties.                                                                        
                                                                                                     
 -195>                                                                                               
 1995                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 APPENDIX-IX Names of Ambassadors/High Commissioners of                                              
 India                                                                                               
 Names of Ambassadors/High Commissioners of India abroad who have                                    
 taken charge from April  1995 to March 1996.                                                        
                                                                                                     
 S NO  COUNTRY        CAPITAL           AMBASSADOR/             DATE OF                              
                                        HIGH COMMISSIONER   APPOINTMENT                              
                                                                                                     
 1 Australia        Canberra            G Parthasarathy       29.5.1995                              
 2 Bhutan           Thimpu              Dalip Mehta           21.4.1995                              
 3 Botswana         Gaborone            Cherry George         10.7.1995                              
 4 Czech            Prague              Girish Dhume          23.6.1995                              
 5 Denmark          Copenhagen          Shrimati Neelam Deo   22.3.1996                              
 6 Egypt            Cairo               K Sibal               20.9.1995                              
 7 Germany          Bonn                S K Lambah            11.8.1995                              
 8 Hungary          Budapest            S J Singh              3.9.1995                              
 9 Israel           Tel Aviv            Shivshankar Menon      9.5.1995                              
 10 Ivory Coast     Abidjan             H H S Vishwanathan    18.9.1995                              
 11 Jordan          Amman               Gajanan Wakankar      4.10.1995                              
 12 Kenya           Nairobi             T P Sreenivasan        4.8.1995                              
 13 Kuwait          Kuwait              B M C Nayar           31.7.1995                              
 14 Lebanon         Beirut              Ajai Chaudhary         1.3.1996                              
 15 Myanmar         Yangon              L T Pudaite           22.9.1995                              
 16 Nigeria         Lagos               S K Uppal             22.3.1996                              
 17 Pakistan        Islamabad           Satish Chandra        30.8.1995                              
 18 Peru            Lima                Shrimati Nirupama Rao  9.1.1996                              
 19 Philippines     Manila              C P Ravindranathan    18.9.1995                              
 20 Seychelles      Mahe                P Mukhopadhyay         2.6.1995                              
 21 Singapore       Singapore           Prem Singh             2.8.1995                              
 22 Sudan           Khartoum            G P Isaar             27.4.1995                              
 23 Uzbekistan      Tashkent            M K Bhadrakumar       27.8.1995                              
 24 Zambia          Lusaka              R Wangdi              20.4.1995                              
                                                                                                     
 -196>                                                                                               
 1995                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 APPENDIX-X Cadre Strength at Headquarters and                                                       
 Missions/Posts abroad during 1995-96                                                                
  Cadre Strength at Headquarters and Missions/Posts abroad during                                    
  1995-96 (incl                                                                                      
 uding posts                                                                                         
 budgeted by Ministry of Commerce and held in abeyance/ex-cadred).                                   
                                                                                                     
 S NO       CADRE/POST                 POSTS AT      POSTS AT     TOTAL                              
                                   HEADQUARTERS      MISSIONS                                        
                                                                                                     
 IFS (A)*                                                                                            
                                                                                                     
 1 Grade-I**                                  5            21        26                              
 2 Grade-II                                   4            30        34                              
 3 Grade-III                                 24           118       142                              
 4 Grade-IV                                  26           107       133                              
 5 Junior Administrative Grade/Senior Scale  48           132       180                              
 6 (i) Junior Scale                           3            30        33                              
   (ii) Probationers reserve                 27             -        27                              
   (iii) Leave reserve                       15             -        15                              
   (iv) Deputation reserve                   19             -        19                              
   (v) Training reserve                       7             -         7                              
                                                                                                     
 IFS (B)                                                                                             
                                                                                                     
 7 (i) Grade-I                               59            81       140                              
   (ii) Deputation reserve                    6             -         6                              
 8 (i) Grade-II/III                         100           172       272                              
   (ii) Leave reserve                        30             -        30                              
   (iii) Deputation reserve                  16             -        16                              
   (iv) Training reserve                     25             -        25                              
 9 (i) Grade-IV                             252           409       661                              
   (ii) Leave reserve                        60             -       600                              
   (iii) Deputation reserve                  55             -        55                              
 10 (i) Grade-V/VI                          385           196       581                              
   (ii) Leave reserve                        60             -        60                              
   (iii) Deputation reserve                  14             -        14                              
 11 (i) Grade-II of Cypher Cadre             58           139       197                              
        (Cypher Assistant)                                                                           
    (ii) Leave reserve                       23             -        23                              
 12 Principal Private Secretary               4            17        21                              
 13 (i) Private Secretary                    32           180       212                              
    (ii) Leave reserve                       14             -        14                              
 -197>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 14 (i) Personal Assistant                  157           194       351                              
    (ii) Leave reserve                       33             -        33                              
    (iii) Training reserve (Hindi)           10             -        10                              
    (iv) Deputation reserve                  12             -        12                              
 15 Stenographer (Grade-III)                 42            77       119                              
 16 Interpreters' Cadre                      10            25        35                              
 17 L&T Cadre                                16             1        17                              
                                                                                                     
         TOTAL                             1651          1929      3580                              
                                                                                                     
 *Abolition of 22 posts as part of IVth Cadre Review proposals has                                   
 not been reflected.                                                                                 
 **Including temporary upgradation of one post from Grade II to Grade I.                             
 -198>                                                                                               
 1995                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 APPENDIX-XI List of Officers qualified in various foreign languages                                 
 List of Officers qualified in various foreign languages                                             
                                                                                                     
 S NO   COMPULSORY FOREIGN LANGUAGE                  NUMBER OF OFFICERS                              
                                                                                                     
 1 Arabic                                                            97                              
 2 Bhasa Indonesia                                                   13                              
 3 Burmese                                                            1                              
 4 Chinese                                                           55                              
 5 Dutch                                                              1                              
 6 French                                                            93                              
 7 German                                                            42                              
 8 Gorkhali/Nepali                                                    1                              
 9 Hebrew                                                             1                              
 10 Hungarian                                                         1                              
 11 Italian                                                           5                              
 12 Japanese                                                         26                              
 13 Kazakh                                                            1                              
 14 Kishwahili                                                       10                              
 15 Malay                                                             1                              
 16 Persian                                                          18                              
 17 Portuguese                                                       17                              
 18 Russian                                                          83                              
 19 Serbo-Croatian                                                    3                              
 20 Sinhalese                                                         2                              
 21 Spanish                                                          68                              
 22 Swedish                                                           1                              
 23 Thai                                                              2                              
 24 Tibetan                                                           2                              
 25 Turkish                                                           6                              
 26 Ukrainian                                                         1                              
 27 Vietnamese                                                        2                              
 -199>                                                                                               
 1995                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 APPENDIX-XII Statement showing the number of appointments                                           
 Statement showing the number of appointments (both by direct recruitment and                        
 promotion) made in various groups in the Ministry of External Affairs and                           
 reserved vacanci es filled by Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes/OBCs during the                     
 year 1995 (Provisional).                                                                            
 GROUP      TOTAL NO OF VACANCIES FILLED     NUMBER OF VACANCIES                                     
                                          RESERVED         UN-RESERVED                               
                                      SC      ST       OBCs                                          
                                                                                                     
 Group 'A' (Indent)     14             2       1         4            7                              
                                                                                                     
 Group 'B'             129            16       7                    106                              
                                                                                                     
 Group 'C'              86            17       2         -           67                              
                                                                                                     
 Group 'D'              22             3       2         -           17                              
 -200>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
  USA                                                                                                
 1995                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 APPENDIX-XIII Revenue Expenditure of the Ministry of External Affairs during the                    
 Financial Year 1995-96.                                                                             
 Revenue Expenditure of the Ministry of                                                              
  External Affairs during the Financial                                                              
 Year 1995-96.                                                                                       
                                                                                                     
                                              REVISED ESTIMATES 1995-96                              
                                                  (IN CRORES OF RUPEES)                              
                                                                                                     
 Headquarter                                                      63.53                              
 Missions and Posts                                              475.00                              
 Central Passport and Emigration Organisation                     57.42                              
 Foreign Service Training Institute                                0.30                              
 Special Diplomatic Expenditure                                  252.00                              
 international Conferences/Meetings                                2.50                              
 Entertainment Charges                                            13.00                              
 Contribution to International Organisations (including UN)       25.94                              
 Grant-in-Aid to ICCR                                             25.00                              
 Evacuation of Indians due to War/Civil Disturbance                0.31                              
 Other Miscellaneous items                                        18.91                              
 Miscellaneous General Service (Loss by Exchange)                  5.00                              
 Payment to Shipping Corporation of India for Charter Operations   0.52                              
 between Madras-Port Blair sector                                                                    
 Payment to Indian Airlines for Charter Operations between         0.26                              
 Madras-Port Blair sector                                                                            
 Aid to other Countries                                                                              
 Aid to Bangladesh                                                 0.80                              
 Aid to Bhutan                                                   140.00                              
 Aid to Nepal                                                     25.00                              
 Aid to Sri Lanka                                                 11.20                              
 Aid to Maldives                                                  12.00                              
 Aid to Cambodia                                                   1.56                              
 Aid to Myanmar                                                   11.36                              
 Aid to other developing countries                                35.34                              
 Aid to African countries                                         16.37                              
                                                                                                     
 TOTAL REVENUE EXPENDITURE                                      1193.32                              
 -201>                                                                                               
 1995                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 APPENDIX-XIV Expenditure on Indian Missions/Posts abroad and Headquarters of the                    
 MEA                                                                                                 
 Expenditure on Indian Missions/Posts abroad and Headquarters of the Ministry of                     
 External Affairs in 1995-96.                                                                        
                                                                                                     
 The estimated expenditure on the Headquarters Organisation of the Ministry duri                     
 ng the current financial year (1995-96) is expected to be Rs 63.53 crores which                     
 is 5.3 2% of the total estimated revenue expenditure of the Ministry. Out of this                   
 Rs 13.13 crore s will be on Salaries and Wages, Rs 12.84 crores on Travel                           
 Expenses, Rs 19.88 crores on O ffice Expenses, Rs 11.00 crores on Advertising and                   
 Publicity and Rs 6.03 crores on Re nt, Rates, Taxes.                                                
                                                                                                     
 The total estimated expenditure on Indian Missions/Posts is expected to be Rs 4                     
 75.00 crores during the current financial year which works out to 39.81% of the                     
 total revenue expenditure of this Ministry. Out of this, an amount of Rs 191.89                     
 crores is for Salaries (including Foreign Allowances), OTA and Wages, Rs 46.89                      
 crores for Travel Expen ses (Transfer Passages/Home Leave Passages and Local                        
 tours), Rs 82.75 crores for Of fice Expenses, Rs 8.07 crores for Advertising and                    
 Publicity and Rs 145.40 crores for Rent, Rates, Taxes as well as for Repairs and                    
 Maintenance of Government owned/rented accommodation in Missions abroad. Average                    
 expenditure per Mission abroad (inclu ding Publicity) works out to Rs 3.06                          
 crores.                                                                                             
                                                                                                     
 The remaining 54.87% of the estimated revenue expenditure of the Ministry is be                     
 ing incurred on various aid programmes for neighbouring and other developing                        
 countr ies including ITEC Programmes, Aid to African Countries, SAARC and SCAAP                     
 Programmes , contribution to United Nations Organisations and other International                   
 bodies, Pa ssport Organisations, Entertainment Charges, Grants-in-Aid to Indian                     
 Council for Cultu ral Relations and other 'Miscellaneous items.                                     
                                                                                                     
 In the Capital Section there is a total provision of Rs 52.04 crores in RE 1995                     
 -96, out of which Rs 47.00 crores are for construction and purchase of                              
 properties. Rest of the amount represents loans component to countries like                         
 Bangladesh.                                                                                         
 -202>                                                                                               
 1995                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 APPENDIX-XV VVIP Visits to India during 1995-96.                                                    
 VVIP Visits to India during 1995-96.                                                                
                                                                                                     
 S NO     NAME OF VISITOR                                          DATE                              
                                                                                                     
 Heads of State, Vice President, Heads of Government and Members of Royal                            
  Families                                                                                           
                                                                                                     
 1 Prime Minister of Nepal Manmohan Adhikari                   10 to 14                              
                                                             April 1995                              
 2 President of Iran Akbar Hashmi Rafsanjani                   17 to 19                              
                                                             April 1995                              
 3 President of Mali Alfa O Konare                             28 to 31                              
                                                            August 1995                              
 4 Prime Minister of Denmark Paul N Rasmussen                   5 to 15                              
                                                         September 1995                              
 5 Prime Minister of Mauritius Anerood Jugnauth           27 October to                              
                                                        1 November 1995                              
 6 Prime Minister of Namibia Hage G Geingob              25 November to                              
                                                        1 December 1995                              
 7 President of Tajikistan E S Rakhmanov                       12 to 16                              
                                                          December 1995                              
 8 President of Armenia Levl Petrossin                         13 to 17                              
                                                          December 1995                              
 9 Prime Minister of Canada Jean Chretien                       9 to 14                              
                                                           January 1996                              
 10 President of the Federative Republic of Brazil             24 to 27                              
    Fernando Henrique Cardoso-Chief Guest for              January 1996                              
    Republic Day                                                                                     
 11 Prime Minister of Nepal Sher Bahadur Deuba                 11 to 17                              
                                                          February 1996                              
 12 President of the Republic of Korea Kim Young Sam           24 to 27                              
                                                          February 1996                              
                                                                                                     
 Other Visits at Head of State/Government and Vice-presidential Level                                
                                                                                                     
 1 SAARC Summit                                         2 to 4 May 1995                              
   Prime Minister of Bangladesh                                                                      
   King of Bhutan                                                                                    
   President of Maldives                                                                             
   Prime Minister of Nepal                                                                           
   President of Pakistan                                                                             
   President of Sri Lanka                                                                            
 -203>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 2 Crown Prince Henry of Luxembourg                   14 to 21 May 1995                              
 3 Prime Minister of Lithuania Adolfas Slezevicius            28 and 29                              
                                                         September 1995                              
 4 Senior Minister of Singapore Lee Kuan Yew                     3 to 5                              
                                                           January 1996                              
 5 Vice-President of the Republic of Uganda Specioza          10 to. 12                              
   Wandira Kazibwe (Bombay only)                           January 1996                              
 6 First Prime Minister of Cambodia Prince Norodom        29 January to                              
   Ranariddh                                            1 February 1996                              
 7 King of Bhutan Jigme Singye Wangehuk               4 to 7 March 1996                              
                                                                                                     
 Transit/private Visits at Head of State/Government Level                                            
                                                                                                     
 1 Vice-President of Iraq (Transit)                         I July 1995                              
 2 President of Kyrghyzstan (Transit, Calcutta)               17 and 26                              
                                                              July 1995                              
 3 President of European Community (Private)                 31 July to                              
                                                          8 August 1995                              
 4 President of Kenya (Transit)                               14 and 15                              
                                                            August 1995                              
 5 Lady Margaret Thatcher (Private)                            18 to 22                              
                                                            August 1995                              
 6 President of Sierra Leone (Bombay & Indore)                   1 to 6                              
                                                        Septemeber 1995                              
 7 First Lady of Nigeria (Transit)                             1 and 17                              
                                                         September 1995                              
 8 President of Guinea (Transit, Bombay)                        3 and 8                              
                                                         September 1995                              
 9 First Lady of Uganda (Transit)                              4 and 12                              
                                                         September 1995                              
 10 President of Sudan (Transit, Calcutta)            24 September 1995                              
 11 Prime Minister of Bangladesh (Transit)                   21 and 25,                              
                                                           October 1995                              
 12 Vice-President of Uganda (Transit)                  5 November 1995                              
 13 Prime Minister of Sri Lanka for treatment in       20 November 1995                              
    Kerala                                                                                           
 14 Former President of USA, George Bush (Private)             28 to 30                              
                                                          November 1995                              
 -204>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 15 President of Ghana (Calcutta)                      12 December 1995                              
 16 Queen of Nepal (Private, Jaipur)                           11 to 16                              
                                                          February 1996                              
 17 Chancellor, Federal Republic of Germany (Transit)      2 March 1996                              
 18 President of Mauritius'(Transit, Bombay)                  20 and 27                              
                                                             March 1996                              
                                                                                                     
 Visits of Foreign Ministers and Equivalent                                                          
                                                                                                     
 1 Foreign Minister of Qatar Sheikh Hamad Bin Jassin             2 to 4                              
   Bin Jabber Al-Thani                                       April 1995                              
 2 Deputy Prime Minister & Foreign Minister of                 18 to 20                              
   Turkmenistan Boris O Shikhmuradov                         April 1995                              
 3 Foreign Minister of Nicaragua Ernesto Leal Sanchez          18 to 22                              
                                                             April 1995                              
 4 Foreign Minister of Colombia Dr Rodrigo Pardo               20 to 23                              
   Garcia-Pena                                               April 1995                              
 5 Foreign Minister of Croatia Dr Mate Granic                  27 to 29                              
                                                             April 1995                              
 6 Foreign Minister of Australia G Evans                       19 to 20                              
                                                               May 1995                              
 7 1st Deputy Prime Minister of Kazakhstan V L Mette           22 to 25                              
                                                               May 1995                              
 8 Foreign Minister of Sudan                                  30 May to                              
                                                            3 June 1995                              
 9 Deputy Prime Minister of Russia Yuri F Yarov                  5 to 7                              
                                                              July 1995                              
 10 Special Envoy of Iraq                                        6 to 9                              
                                                              July 1995                              
 11 Deputy Prime Minister of Russia Yuri F Yarov                8 to 12                              
                                                           October 1995                              
 12 Deputy Prime Minister of Russia Yuri F Yarov                1 and 2                              
                                                          December 1995                              
 13 Vice President of European Commission           22 December 1994 to                              
    Sir Leon Brittan                                     4 January 1996                              
 14 Foreign Minister of the Islamic Republic of Iran          12 and 13                              
                                                           January 1996                              
 -205>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 15 Secretary General, OECD, Jean Claude Paye                  19 to 24                              
                                                           January 1996                              
 16 Secretary General, ASEAN Dato Ajit Singh                     3 to 7                              
                                                          February 1996                              
 17 Deputy Prime Minister & Foreign Minister of                14 to 19                              
    Mauritius Paul Raymond Berenger                       February 1996                              
 18 Foreign Minister of Hungary                                16 to 18                              
                                                          February 1996                              
 19 Foreign Minister of the Socialist Republic of              23 to 27                              
    Vietnam                                               February 1996                              
 20 Foreign Minister of the Russian Federation                30 and 31                              
                                                             March 1996                              
                                                                                                     
 Transit/private Visits of Foreign Ministers and Equivalent                                          
                                                                                                     
 1 Religious Head of Bhutan The Je Khempo                     15 and 16                              
                                                               May 1995                              
 2 Foreign Minister of Uzbekistan (Transit)                   10 and 11                              
                                                            August 1995                              
 3 Foreign Minister of Bhutan (Transit)                          4 to 6                              
                                                          November 1995                              
 4 Foreign Minister of Nigeria (Transit, Madras)                7 to 13                              
                                                          November 1995                              
 5 Foreign Minister of Ukraine (Transit)                      25 and 26                              
                                                          February 1996                              
 -206>                                                                                               
 1995                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 APPENDIX-XVI Visits abroad of the President- Vice President and                                     
 Prime Minister of India                                                                             
 Visits abroad of the President- Vice President and Prime Minister of                                
 India                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 1 Prime Minister to Maldives                                 15 and 16                              
                                                             April 1995                              
 2 Vice President to Italy                                     22 to 28                              
                                                               May 1995                              
 3 President to Portugal, Trinidad & Tobago,                  27 May to                              
   Chile and Zimbabwe                                      10 June 1995                              
 4 Prime Minister to France                                    11 to 15                              
                                                              June 1995                              
 5 Vice President to USA (Medical)                           14 June to                              
                                                            1 July 1995                              
 6 Prime Minister to Malaysia                                    2 to 5                              
                                                            August 1995                              
 7 Prime Minister to Turkmenistan                              19 to 23                              
   and Kyrghyzstan                                       September 1995                              
 8 Prime Minister to Egypt, Colombia and USA                   15 to 26                              
   (New York)                                              October 1995                              
 9 Prime Minister to Burkina Faso, Argentina                    2 to 10                              
   and Ghana                                              November 1995                              
 10 Vice President to Japan                                      2 to 8                              
                                                          December 1995                              
 -207>                                                                                               
 1995                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 APPENDIX-XVII The Conference Cell of Protocol Division                                              
 organised the following conferences                                                                 
 The Conference Cell of Protocol Division organised the following                                    
 conferences during1995- 96.                                                                         
                                                                                                     
 S NO      NAME OF THE CONFERENCE, ETC                           DATE                                
                                                                                                     
 1 Conference on Indian Foreign Policy, National              15 and 16                              
   Interest and Economic Globalisation, New Delhi            April 1995                              
 2 SAARC Summit                                         2 to 4 May 1995                              
 3 50th Anniversary of UN, Release of Commemorative        26 June 1995                              
   Coin, New Delhi                                                                                   
 4 Trilateral Agreement India, Iran and Turkmenistan           27 to 29                              
   on Transport and Transit, New Delhi                        June 1995                              
 5 2nd Special Session of the SAARC Standing Committee        25 and 26                              
   of SAARC Foreign Secretaries, New Delhi                  August 1995                              
 6 Meetings of the Finance/Planning Secretaries and              6 to 8                              
   Group of Secretaries for Rural Development and        September 1995                              
   Poverty Eradication, New Delhi                                                                    
 7 6th Meeting of the SAARC Committee on Economic             16 and 17                              
   Cooperation, New Delhi                                 November 1995                              
 8 16th Session of the Programming Committee of               18 and 19                              
   SAARC countries                                        December 1995                              
 9 21st Session of the Standing Committee of the               15 to 17                              
   Foreign Secretaries of SAARC countries                 December 1995                              
 10 16th Session of the Council of Ministers of the SAARC     18 and 19                              
    countries                                             December 1995                              
 11 2nd Meeting of the SAARC Finance/Planning Ministers         3 and 4                              
                                                           January 1996                              
 12 9th Round of Indo-EU Troika Talks, New Delhi                                                     
                                                                                                     
 In addition, the Conference Cell also provided assistance to                                        
 other Ministries/Departments                                                                        
 of Government of India in organising international conferences.                                     
 The Conference Cell                                                                                 
 particularly provided assistance for the following Conferences-                                     
                                                                                                     
 (i) Regional Seminar on UN Peace Keeping Operations, New Delhi.                                     
 (ii) Introduction to India for Resident Diplomats by Foreign Service                                
  Institute, New Delhi                                                                               
 (iii) Fifth Indira Gandhi International Conference (making of an Indian                             
  Ocean Community),                                                                                  
 New Delhi                                                                                           
 (iv) Conferment of honorary doctorate on the visiting Prime Minister of                             
  Namibia                                                                                            
                                                                                                     
 (v) Conferences handled by Lok Sabha/Rajya Sabha Secretariats for                                   
 Parliamentarians/Speakers.                                                                          
 -208>                                                                                               
 1995                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 APPENDIX-XVIII Major International Conferences/Meetings/                                            
 Seminars etc                                                                                        
  Major International Conferences/Meetings/Seminars etc organised by                                 
  Inter-Governmental                                                                                 
 Organisations at which the Government of India was represented in                                   
  1995-96.                                                                                           
                                                                                                     
 S NO    TITLE OF CONFERENCE                  VENUE             DATE                                 
 1 V Extended Training Programme on           Ghaziabad        16 to 20                              
   Business Management                                     January 1995                              
 2 Regional Workshop for Core Members of      Bangkok          13 to 17                              
   National Working Group on Gender Issues                February 1995                              
 3 Second Expert Meeting on Public Weather    Geneva             3 to 6                              
   Service Programme                                         April 1995                              
 4 Seminar on Express Product                 Jakarta          17 to 19                              
                                                             April 1995                              
 5 International Meeting on Metropolitan      Quito,           17 to 20                              
   Governance                                 Ecuador        April 1995                              
 6 23rd Session of Committee on Projects of   Dhaka            19 to 22                              
   International Jute Organisation                           April 1995                              
 7 23rd Session of International Jute Council Dhaka            22 to 25                              
   of IJO                                                    April 1995                              
 8 2nd Preparatory Committee Meeting for      Nairobi       24 April to                              
   Habitat 11                                                5 May 1995                              
 9 15th Session of UNCHS                      Nairobi       25 April to                              
                                                             1 May 1995                              
 10 World Philatelic Exhibition 1995          Helsinki,         9 to 16                              
                                              Finland          May 1995                              
 11 Meeting of the State Parties to United    New York         14 to 24                              
    Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea                   May 1995                              
 12 Meeting of Aviation Security Panel to     Montreal,        21 to 31                              
    review security arrangements of Air       Canada           May 1995                              
    India at Toronto and London Airports                                                             
 13 WMO Conference on Meteorological and      Geneva           22 to 26                              
    Hydrological Technology and its                            May 1995                              
    Management                                                                                       
 -209>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 14 12th WMO Congress                         Geneva          30 May to                              
                                                           21 June 1995                              
 15 Inter-Governmental Oceanographic          Paris             6 to 13                              
    Commission on Global Ocean Observing                      June 1995                              
    System (GOOS)                                                                                    
 16 UN Expert Group Meeting on Social         Geneva       13 June 1995                              
    Statistics                                                                                       
 17 WMO Expert Meeting on Drought             Geneva           28 to 30                              
    Monitoring                                                June 1995                              
 18 Seminar on Managing the Seoul Postal      Singapore       13 and 14                              
    Strategy (SPS)                                            July 1995                              
 19 Meeting of Heads of Regional              Toulouse,        24 to 28                              
    Meteorological Centres (RMTCs) and WMO                    July 1995                              
    Symposium on France Education & Training                                                         
    in Meteorology & Operational Hydrology                                                           
 20 Third Part of the First Session of the    Jamaica           7 to 18                              
    International Seabed Authority                          August 1995                              
 21 Workshop on Management of Urban Water     Kuala            21 to 25                              
    Supply & Sanitation                       Lumpur        August 1995                              
 22 50th Session of International             Beijing          21 to 29                              
    Statistical Institute                                   August 1995                              
 23 Regional Consultations on "Access to      Jakarta          28 to 30                              
    Shelter and Secure Tenure"                              August 1995                              
 24 Meeting of International Commission on    Germany            4 to 8                              
    Radiological Protection (ICRP)                       September 1995                              
 25 Annual Meeting of the Governing Board of  Singapore         4 to 12                              
    Asian Pacific Postal Training Centre                 September 1995                              
    (GB/APPTC); 7th Congress of Asian                                                                
    Pacific Postal Union                                                                             
 26 Habitat Finance Conference of UNCHS       Washington       10 to 13                              
                                                         September 1995                              
 27 Expert Group Meeting on Construction      New York         11 to 13                              
    Statistics                                           September 1995                              
 28 Meeting on the Implementation of          Bangkok          13 to 15                              
    Agenda 21 for Integrated Water Management            September 1995                              
    in Asia and Pacific                                                                              
 -210>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 29 Inception Workshop 'Inter-national        Manila           18 to 21                              
    Strengthening and Collection of                      September 1995                              
    Environment Statistics in Selected                                                               
    Developing Member Countries'                                                                     
 30 8th International Pyrheliometer           Davos,    25 September to                              
    Comparison and Regional Pyrheliometer   Switzerland 14 October 1995                              
    Comparison                                                                                       
 31 2nd Meeting of the Internal Drafting      Paris             8 to 14                              
    Group of the Preparatory Committee for                 October 1995                              
    the Habitat II Conference of UNCHS                                                               
 32 Fellowship/Training Seminar on Waste      Cuba              8 to 14                              
    Treatment of Alcohol                                   October 1995                              
 33 HALON Technical Options Committee         China             9 to 11                              
    Meeting (HTOC)                                         October 1995                              
 34 Review of 1993 International Comparison   Bangkok          16 to 20                              
    Programme Data                                         October 1995                              
 35 Annual Session of Council of              Berne,           16 to 26                              
    Administration of Universal Postal      Switzerland    October 1995                              
    Union                                                                                            
 36 54th Plenary Meeting of the               Manila           22 to 27                              
    International Cotton Advisory Committee                October 1995                              
 37 Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC) test    Muster,          22 to 27                              
    and training inspection of old            Germany      October 1995                              
    Chemical Weapons Storage, emptying and                                                           
    destruction facilities                                                                           
 38 14th Meeting of the Commission of the     Hobart,     22 October to                              
    Scientific Committee for the             Australia  4 November 1995                              
    Conservation of Antarctic Marine                                                                 
     Living Resources (CCAMLR)                                                                       
 39 WMO International Workshop on Limited     Beijing          23 to 27                              
    Area and Variable Resolution Models                    October 1995                              
 40 Global Programme of Action for            Washington  23 October to                              
    Prevention of Degradation of Marine                 3 November 1995                              
    Environment arising from Land based                                                              
    Activities                                                                                       
 41 UN Expert Committee on Economics          New York         24 to 25                              
                                                           October 1995                              
 42 Task Force on Medical Treatment in        The Hague,       24 to 27                              
    relation to Chemical Agent Casualty       Netherlands  October 1995                              
 43 Regional Seminar on Mega Cities           Manila           24 to 30                              
    Management in Asia and Pacific                         October 1995                              
 -211>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 44 3rd Global Forum of the Water Supply &    Bridgetown, 30 October to                              
    Sanitation Collaborative Council          Barbados  3 November 1995                              
 45 Publishers-UPU Contact Committee Meeting  London    2 November 1995                              
 46 Meeting of the International Forum on     Washington         3 to 8                              
    Forecasting El Nino                                   November 1995                              
 47 30th Session of FAO, Inter-Governmental   Rome               6 to 8                              
    Group on Jute, Kenaf & Allief Fibres                  November 1995                              
 48 First Session of WMO CIMO Working Group   Geneva            6 to 10                              
    on Upper-Air Measurements                             November 1995                              
 49 Policy Seminar on Migration               Bangkok           6 to 10                              
                                                          November 1995                              
 50 Capacity Assessment at the Factory        Alabama,          7 to 10                              
    Works of M/s EEC for supply of            USA         November 1995                              
    Doppler Weather Radar                                                                            
 51 Implementation Coordination Meeting on    New Delhi        13 to 18                              
    GTS in Region II and 2nd Session of the               November 1995                              
    RA-II W/G on Planning and Implementation                                                         
     of the WWW                                                                                      
 52 5th International Study Seminar for       Tokyo            13 to 22                              
    Official Life Institution                             November 1995                              
 53 Workshop on Pilot Project on              Japan            18 to 21                              
    Barrier-free Access to Disabled and                   November 1995                              
    Elderly Persons                                                                                  
 54 24th Session of Committee on Projects     Dhaka    27 November 1995                              
    of IJO                                                                                           
 55 Commonwealth Workshop on Human Rights     Cyprus     27 November to                              
                                                        1 December 1995                              
 56 Meeting of the State Parties to UN        New York   27 November to                              
    Convention on the Law of the Sea                    1 December 1995                              
 57 Third Session of Ad hoc Group of State    Geneva     27 November to                              
    Parties Meeting on Biological Weapons               8 December 1995                              
    Convention                                                                                       
 58 Regional Workshop on Marine Pollution     Singapore          4 to 7                              
    Arising from Land and Sea based Activities            December 1995                              
 59 WMO Workshop on Numberical Wave Geneva                      4 to 13                              
    Analysis and Forecasting and the Workshop             December 1995                              
    on Computer assisted learning techniques                                                         
 -212>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 60 Conference on UN Peace Keeping Force-     Singapore        11 to 13                              
    Role & Functions of the Civilian Police in            December 1995                              
    PKOs: Briefing and Lessons                                                                       
 61 Meeting of the Independent World          Tokyo            11 to 15                              
    Commission on Oceans                                  December 1995                              
 62 WMO Executive Council Working Group on    Geneva           15 to 17                              
    Long Term Plan                                         January 1996                              
 -213>                                                                                               
 1995                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 APPENDIX-XIX Major International Conferences/Meetings                                               
 /Seminars organised by Non-Government                                                               
                                                                                                     
 Major International Conferences/Meetings/Seminars organised by                                      
  Non-Governmental Organisations in which Indian experts participated in                             
  their personal capacity with Government assistance in 1995-96.                                     
                                                                                                     
 S NO   TITLE OF CONFERENCE                 VENUE               DATE                                 
 1 2nd Indo-US Legal Forum                  Washington         13 to 26                              
                                                               May 1995                              
                                                                                                     
 2 Worldwide Common Law Jurists Conference  Williamsburg,     28 May to                              
                                            Virginia,       2 June 1995                              
                                            USA                                                      
                                                                                                     
 3 8th Biennial Conference of the           Edinburgh,         10 to 13                              
   International Bar Association            Scotland          June 1995                              
                                                                                                     
 4 Law Asia Conference of Chief Justices    Beijing            16 to 20                              
                                                            August 1995                              
                                                                                                     
 5 Commonwealth Chief Justices Conference   Ottawa             24 to 29                              
                                                         September 1995                              
                                                                                                     
 6 Opening of the Legal year                London       1 October 1995                              
                                                                                                     
 7 Annual Meeting of US National            Atlanta,             5 to 8                              
   Association of Women Judges              USA            October 1995                              
 -214>                                                                                               
 1995                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 APPENDIX-XX Miscellaneous major International Conferences etc                                       
 in 1995-96                                                                                          
 Miscellaneous major International Conferences etc in 1995-96 at which the                           
  Government of  India was represented or in which Indian experts                                    
 participated in their personal                                                                      
  capacities                                                                                         
 with Government of India's assistance.                                                              
                                                                                                     
 S NO  TITLE OF CONFERENCE ETC              VENUE                DATE                                
 1 SAARC LAW Conference of the Chief        Kathmandu       31 March to                              
   Justices of SAARC countires                             2 April 1995                              
 2 Meeting of Experimental Biologists       USA              20 days in                              
   (Atlanta); Deliver lectures/seminars                      April 1995                              
   (Universities of Philadelphia and                                                                 
   Galveston)                                                                                        
 3 MRS-1995 Symposium 'B'- Defect and        San Fransisco     17 to 21                              
   Impurity Engineered Semiconductors &     USA              April 1995                              
   Devices during MPS 1995 Spring Meeting                                                            
 4 27th Session of Coodex Committee on      The Hague,      24 April to                              
   Pesticide Residue Netherlands                             1 May 1995                              
 5 CIB Wolrd Building Congress & General    Amsterdam,          8 to 10                              
   Assembly of CIB                          Netherlands        May 1995                              
 6 IEEE International Radar Conference 95   Alexandria,         8 to 11                              
   Virginia,                                USA                May 1995                              
 7 13th Aerodynamic Decelerator Systems     Florida,           15 to 18                              
   Technical Conference and Seminar; Post-  USA                May 1995                              
   Conference tour to M/s Conax Florida                                                              
   Corporation                                                                                       
 8 Expert Group Meeting; Workshop on        Netherlands        15 to 19                              
   Module-I Training by PTS of Preparatory                     May 1995                              
   Commission of OPCW                                                                                
 9 15th International Symposium on          Israel             21 to 24                              
   Ballistics                                                  May 1995                              
 10 6th Asian Congress of Fluid Mechanics   Singapore          22 to 26                              
    (ACFM)                                                     May 1995                              
 11 3rd European Air Defence Symposium      UK                30 May to                              
                                                            1 June 1995                              
 12 Council Session of International Sugar  Sao Paulo,        30 May to                              
    Organisation                            Brazil          2 June 1995                              
 -215>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 13 108th Session of FAO                    Rome                 3 to 7                              
                                                              June 1995                              
 14 6th International Symposium on          Stockholm,         11 to 16                              
    Protection against CBW Agents           Sweden            June 1995                              
 15 Rockefeller Foundation Meeting          New York           17 to 27                              
    (New York); Indo-UK Defence                               June 1995                              
    Consultative Group Meeting                                                                       
 16 123rd IWC World Grain Conference        Helsinki,         20 and 21                              
                                            Finland           June 1995                              
 17 International Workshop TW 95 on         Tomsk              26 to 29                              
    Chemical Gas-dynamics and Combustion    Russia            June 1995                              
    of Energetic Materials                                                                           
 18 International Conference on "Society,   Russia           26 June to                              
    Stress and Health: Strategies in the                    2 July 1995                              
    countries of Europe"                                                                             
 19 14th EURO Conference                    Jerusalem,           3 to 6                              
                                            Israel            July 1995                              
 20 7th Session of Regional Commission on   Bangkok              3 to 8                              
    Food Security for Asia and Pacific                        July 1995                              
 21 31st AIAA/ASME/SAE/ASEE Joint           Sheraton           10 to 12                              
    Propulsion Conference and Exhibition    Harbor lsland,    July 1995                              
                                            San Diego,                                               
                                            USA                                                      
 22 Coordination Meeting and Preparation of Israel           12 July to                              
    Test Plan for Evaluation of EW System                10 August 1995                              
 23 Gordon Research Conference on High      New                16 to 21                              
    Temperature Corrosio                    Hampshire,        July 1995                              
                                            USA                                                      
 24 International Conference on Research    Seattle            24 to 28                              
    'PIERS-95' (Progress in                 Washington        July 1995                              
    Electromagnetic Research Symposium)                                                              
 25 Workshop on Harmonisation of Category B Netherlands         3 and 4                              
   (Chemical Warfare and Defence) and                       August 1995                              
    Category D (Inspection Procedure) of                                                             
    Module-I Training Syllabus                                                                       
 26 International Field Mission Symposium   Madison,            7 to 11                              
    (IFES-95) at University of Wisconsin    USA             August 1995                              
 -216>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 27 International Conference                Beijing            14 to 16                              
                                                            August 1995                              
 28 Renewal of Protocol on Inland Water     Dhaka              17 to 23                              
    Transit and Trade with Bangladesh                       August 1995                              
 29 International Symposium on              Zhukovsky,         22 to 27                              
    Experimental Facilities & Aircraft      Moscow          August 1995                              
    Certification                                                                                    
 30 10th International Congress of          Wurzberg,      27 August to                              
    Radiation Research (10th ICRR)          Germany    1 September 1995                              
 31 10th ICRR, Chair Symposium on           Germany,       27 August to                              
    Photodynamic Therapy and 6th Congress   UK         1 September 1995                              
    of European Society for Photobiology                         3 to 8                              
                                                         September 1995                              
 32 Opening Plenary Session between ASEAN   Bangkok            28 to 30                              
    and Indian Science and Technology                       August 1995                              
    Officials; 4th ASEAN Science &                                                                   
    Technology Week                                                                                  
 33 2nd World Women's Conference            Beijing        31 August to                              
                                                       3 September 1995                              
 34 ISSCT Congress                          Colombia            7 to 15                              
                                                         September 1995                              
 35 12th International Symposium on Air-    Australia          10 to 15                              
    breathing Engines (12th ISABE)                       September 1995                              
 36 ISSCT Congress of International Sugar   Colombia          11 and 12                              
    Technologists                                        September 1995                              
 37 2nd European Guns, Mortars and          Srivenham          11 to 13                              
    Ammunition Symposium                                 September 1995                              
 38 3rd International Workshop on Advanced  Capri,Naples,     19 and 20                              
    Infra-red Technology and Applications   Italy        September 1995                              
 39 Administrative Committee of ISO        London and 29 September 1995                              
                                            Havana,Cuba          4 to 6                              
                                                           October 1995                              
 40 International Trade Fair                Iran                 2 to 5                              
                                                           October 1995                              
 41 Ministerial Meeting on World Food       Canada             14 to 23                              
    Security                                               October 1995                              
 42 International Conference on Grain       Bangkok            17 to 25                              
    Drying in Asia                                         October 1995                              
 -217>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 43 8th World Conference on Titanium        Birmingham,        22 to 26                              
                                            UK             October 1995                              
 44 International Conference on Image       Washington         23 to 26                              
    Processing (ICIP 95)                                   October 1995                              
 45 Sixth International Conference on       Boston,            24 to 26                              
    Signal Processing Application and       USA            October 1995                              
    Technology (ICSPAT)                                                                              
 46 SPIE's Microelectronics Manufacturing   Austin, Texas,     25 to 27                              
    95 Symposium                            USA            October 1995                              
 47 National Conference of Bankruptcy       New Orleans,  29 October to                              
    Judges                                  USA         1 November 1995                              
 48 SAARC Experts' Panel Meeting on         Karachi            21 to 23                              
    (i) Agro-meteorology,                                 November 1995                              
    (ii) Climatology & Data Exchange and                                                             
    (iii) Meteorological Instrumentation                                                             
 49 1995 IEEE International Conference on   Perth,       26 November to                              
    Neural networks (ICNN 95)               Australia   I December 1995                              
 50 1995 Materials Research Society fall    Boston,      27 November to                              
    Meeting                                 USA         I December 1995                              
 51 Informal Consultations between World    London       27 November to                              
    Association of Beet and Cane-Growers                1 December 1995                              
    Association and Meeting of ISO                                                                   
 52 IEEE Asia Pacific Workshop on Mobile    South Korea  30 November to                              
    Telecommunication                                   2 December 1995                              
 53 2nd Neem Awareness Workshop             Moita,              3 to 10                              
                                            Kenya         December 1995                              
 54 SAARC Seminar-cum-Workshop on Topical   Calcutta             5 to 8                              
    Cyclones and Forecasting                              December 1995                              
 55 12th Australasia Fluid Mechanics        Sydney             10 to 15                              
    Conference (12th AFMC)                                December 1995                              
 56 12th Australian Fluid Mechanics         Sydney             10 to 15                              
    Conference (12th AFMC)                                December 1995                              
 57 Third Asia-Pacific International        Hong Kong          11 to 15                              
    Symposium on Combustion and Energy                    December 1995                              
    Utilisation                                                                                      
 58 The 1995 Asia Money Laundering          Tokyo              12 to 14                              
    Symposium                                             December 1995                              
                                                                                                     
 -218>                                                                                               
 1995                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 APPENDIX-XXI Meetings/Conferences held under the aegis of                                           
 NAM                                                                                                 
 Meetings/Conferences held under the aegis of the Non-aligned Movement                               
  (NAM) d                                                                                            
 uring 1995-                                                                                         
 96.                                                                                                 
                                                                                                     
 S NO   TITLE OF THE CONFERENCE                VENUE             DATE                                
 1 NAM Foreign Ministers Meetings in Bandung   Bandung         21 to 28                              
                                                             April 1995                              
                                                                                                     
 2 11th NAM Summit at Cartagena, Colombia      Cartagena       15 to 20                              
                                                           October 1995                              
 -219>                                                                                               
 1995                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 APPENDIX-XXII International Organisations of which India became a member or                         
 ceased to be a member                                                                               
 International Organisations of which India became a member or ceased to be a                        
 member during                                                                                       
 1995-96.                                                                                            
                                                                                                     
 S NO NAME OF THE INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATION OF WHICH INDIA BECAME A MEMBER DUR                      
 ING 1995-96                                                                                         
                                                                                                     
 1 Government Board of Statistical Institute for Asia and Pacific                                    
                                                                                                     
 2 Radio Technical Commission for Aeronautics (RTCA), Washington (For one year)                      
                                                                                                     
 3 Society Computer Simulation (SCS), San Diego, USA (For five years)                                
                                                                                                     
 4 Special Library Association (SLA), USA (For one year)                                             
                                                                                                     
 5 ISA-1992 (Upto 31 December 1995 unless the Agreement extended or terminated e                     
 arlier by organisation)                                                                             
 -220>                                                                                               
 1995                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 APPENDIX-XXIII Outgoing Performing Arts Delegations (ICCR)                                          
  Outgoing Performing Arts Delegations (ICCR) (April to December 1995).                              
                                                                                                     
 S NO  COUNTRY       TYPE OF GROUP                   PERIOD                                          
                                                                                                     
 1    North Korea   Natya Ballet Centre             8 to 18 April 1995                               
      and           Folk Dance Group                                                                 
      Mongolia      from New Delhi                  19 to 27 April 1995                              
                                                                                                     
 2    Canada        Nandita Basu                    12 to 20 April                                   
                    Odissi Dancer                   1995                                             
                                                                                                     
 3    USA           Shri T H Subhash                14 to 23 April                                   
                    Chandran (Ghattam)              1995                                             
                    Dr N Ramani (Carnatic flute)                                                     
                                                                                                     
 4    United Arab   Rabindra Sangeet Artistes       21 to 28 May                                     
      Emirates      from Calcutta                   1995                                             
                    Shri Abhirup G Thakurta                                                          
                    Shrimati Bulbul Sengupta                                                         
                    Shrimati Srabani Chatterjee                                                      
                    Shrimati Keshab Mukherjee                                                        
                    (Accompanist)                                                                    
                    Shri Anjan Bose (Accompanist)                                                    
                                                                                                     
 5    USA and       Chitra Viswesvaran Bharatnatyam 7 to 27 May                                      
      Canada        Dancer and her troupe           1995                                             
                                                                                                     
 6    France        13-Member Group from Stop Gaps  24 to 28 May                                     
                    Cultural Academy (Bombay)       1995                                             
                                                                                                     
 REMARKS                                                                                             
                                                                                                     
 1    Performed at the 13th April Spring                                                             
      Friendship Art Festival, at Pyong Yang                                                         
      and performed in Mongolia                                                                      
                                                                                                     
 2    To give performances, lecture &                                                                
      demonstration at the invitation of                                                             
      Manobor Arts                                                                                   
                                                                                                     
 3    To perform at the St Thyagaraja Music                                                          
      Festival in Cleveland, USA oganised by                                                         
      Bhairavi Non-Profit Association Inc                                                            
                                                                                                     
 4    Tagore week organised by Abu Dhabi                                                             
      Cultural Foundation                                                                            
                                                                                                     
 5    To give performance at the invitation                                                          
      of Palavan Cultural Organisation,                                                              
      New Jersey                                                                                     
                                                                                                     
 6    To participate in the Festival of Inter-                                                       
      national De Chant Choral De Nancy                                                              
 -221>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 7    Jamaica        Pandit Ram Mohan Kathak         9 to 16 May                                     
                     Dancer and Dance Teacher at     1995                                            
                     Paramaribo (Suriname)                                                           
                                                                                                     
 8     USA           Pandit Bhimsen Joshi            21 to 28 May                                    
                     (Hindustani Vocal)              1995                                            
                                                                                                     
 9     France        Dr Balamurali Krishna and       10 to 14 June                                   
                     Ustad Amjad Ali Khan            1995                                            
                                                                                                     
 10    USA           Shri Sudhir Moghe               7 to 14 July                                    
                     Shri Debu Deodhar               1995                                            
                     from Pune                                                                       
                                                                                                     
 11    Russia        12-Member Folk Dance            28 June to                                      
       Hungary       and Music Group from            22 July 1995                                    
       Belurussia    Rajasthan                                                                       
       Germany       Kohinoor Langa & party                                                          
       Estonia                                                                                       
                                                                                                     
 12    Mauritius     10-Member Tera Tali and         19 June to                                      
       Madagascar    Manganiyar Group from           3 July 1995                                     
                     Rajasthan                                                                       
                                                                                                     
 13    USA           12 Handicapped artistes from    29 June to                                      
                     Andhra Pradesh led by           13 July 1995                                    
                     Shri V Murlidhar                                                                
                                                                                                     
 REMARKS                                                                                             
                                                                                                     
 7     To give performances on the occasion of                                                       
       150th Anniversary celebration of                                                              
       landing of Indians in Jamaica                                                                 
                                                                                                     
 8     To give performances                                                                          
                                                                                                     
 9     To perform at UNESCO in Paris in                                                              
       connection with the First Gandhi                                                              
       Memorial Lecture delivered by Prime                                                           
       Minister of India on 12 June                                                                  
                                                                                                     
 10    To participate in the 7th convention of                                                       
       Brihan Maharashtra Mandal" Houston                                                            
                                                                                                     
 11    To participate in Krasnoyarsk Festival                                                        
       Folk Dance and Music Festival in Minsk                                                        
       and to perform in Finland, Germany                                                            
       and Estonia                                                                                   
                                                                                                     
 12    To coincide with "Made in India"                                                              
       Exhibition Mauritius and to perform in                                                        
       Madagascar on the occasion of 35th                                                            
       Anniversary Celebrations of independence                                                      
       of Madagascar                                                                                 
                                                                                                     
 13    To perform at the Telegu Mah'a Sabha                                                          
       in Chicago                                                                                    
 -222>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 14    France        Dance and Theatre Groups and    7 to 30 July                                    
                     Troupe:                         1995                                            
                     Kathak-Birju Maharaj                                                            
                     Kuchipudi-Vempati                                                               
                     Chinna Satyam and troupe                                                        
                     Repertory Theatre                                                               
                     Thaiyyam and his Theatre Group                                                  
                     Ashok Vajpai and 5-Member                                                       
                     Group                                                                           
                                                                                                     
 15    Kyrghyzstan   Sonu Nigam                      25 to 31 August                                 
                     Play-back Singer (Bombay)       1995                                            
                                                                                                     
 16    USA           Malani Rajurkar                 27 August to                                    
                     and Three Vocalist from Bombay  4 October 1995                                  
                                                                                                     
 17    Bhutan        14-Member Bihu Group of         12 to 18 August                                 
                     Alonkar Ghosti Guwahati, Assam  1995                                            
                                                                                                     
 18    Sri Lanka     INT Folk Dance Group from       12 to 18 August                                 
                     Rajkot, Gujarat                 1995                                            
                                                                                                     
 19    Greece        28-Member Habib Tanvir Group    23 August to                                    
       Germany                                       3 September 1995                                
                                                                                                     
 20    South Africa  Raja & Radha Reddy              25 August to                                    
       Mozambique    and Troupe                      21 September 1995                               
       Botswana                                                                                      
       Zambia                                                                                        
                                                                                                     
 14    To participate in the Avignon Festival                                                        
                                                                                                     
 15    1000th Anniversary of Epic Manas                                                              
                                                                                                     
 16    To perform at various Universities in                                                         
       USA at the invitation of Dr B N Dixit                                                         
       of Centre for the Performing Arts of                                                          
       India, University of Pittsburg                                                                
                                                                                                     
 17    For Independence Day Celebrations                                                             
                                                                                                     
 18    For Independence Day Celebrations                                                             
                                                                                                     
 19    To give performances                                                                          
                                                                                                     
 20    To give performances af the invitation                                                        
       of the Indian Dance Academy of                                                                
       South Africa                                                                                  
 -223>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 21    Germany       Bhaswati Mishra, and Krishan    29 August to                                    
       Sweden        Mohan Mishra. Kathak            29 September 1995                               
       Denmark       Group from New Delhi                                                            
       Ireland                                                                                       
       Belgium                                                                                       
       Netherlands                                                                                   
       Switzerland                                                                                   
       Poland                                                                                        
       Hungary                                                                                       
                                                                                                     
 22    Syria         14-Member Folk Dance Group      5 to 29 September                               
       Iraq          led by Shri Bhagwan Sahu        1995                                            
                     from Orissa                                                                     
                                                                                                     
 23    South Korea   12-Member Himachal              16 September to                                 
                     Folk Dance Group                5 October 1995                                  
                                                                                                     
 24    Israel        Kiran Segal Group               16 September to                                 
       Egypt         (Odissi Dance)                  22 October 1995                                 
       Morocco                                                                                       
       Tunisia                                                                                       
       Nigeria                                                                                       
       Malta                                                                                         
       Libya                                                                                         
                                                                                                     
 25    Japan         Ms Tanaka                       14 September to                                 
                     (Bharatnatyam Dancer)           11 October 1995                                 
                     with three Accompanists                                                         
                                                                                                     
 26    Nepal         Ramlila Group of Sri Ram        24 October to                                   
                     Bharatiya Kala Kendra           1 November 1995                                 
                                                                                                     
 27    Oman          10-Member Amala Shankar         28 October to                                   
                     Ballet Troupe                   3 November 1995                                 
                                                                                                     
 21    To participate in the Festival held at                                                        
       Bremen and to perform in other                                                                
       countries                                                                                     
                                                                                                     
 22    Al Basra International Festival in Syria                                                      
       and International Babylon Festival in                                                         
       Iraq                                                                                          
                                                                                                     
 23    To perform at the International Folk                                                          
       Festival and Kwanju Biennial                                                                  
                                                                                                     
 24    To perform at the opening of the                                                              
       Exhibition on the Hindu Temple and                                                            
       Architecture and visit to other countries                                                     
       for performances organised by the                                                             
       Missions                                                                                      
                                                                                                     
 25    To give performances                                                                          
                                                                                                     
 26    To Participate in Dussehra Celebrations                                                       
       in Kathmandu                                                                                  
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                     
 27    To perform at the Anniversary                                                                 
       celebrations of the Sultanate of Oman                                                         
 -224>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 28    Colombia      Folk Group                      3 September to                                  
       Cuba          of Maulik Shah and              4 November 1995                                 
       Peru          Ishira Parikh                                                                   
       Mexico        (Kathak Dance)                                                                  
       Venezuela                                                                                     
       Panama                                                                                        
                                                                                                     
 29    Belgium       Rajasthani folk Dance           21 to 26 November                               
                     Kumar Bose (Tabla Exponent)     1995                                            
                                                                                                     
 30    Indonesia     Dance Group of                  17 to 28 November                               
                     Usha Venkateshwaran             1995                                            
                                                                                                     
 31    Mauritius     5-Member Kuchipudi              21 to 28 November                               
                     Dance Troupe of                 1995                                            
                     Snehlatha Bhaskaran                                                             
                                                                                                     
 32    Thailand  (i) Anand Lal (Shehnai)             11 to 22 December                               
                (ii) Kathak from Kadamb              1995                                            
               (iii) Manipuri Group of Jagoi Marup                                                   
                (iv) Pungcholam Group from Manipur                                                   
                 (v) Aaviskar Folk Dance Group                                                       
                     from Gujarat                                                                    
                (vi) Purulia Chhau Group from                                                        
                     West Bengal                                                                     
               (vii) Snow & Lion Dance Group from                                                    
                     Sikkim                                                                          
              (viii) Wedding Dance from Leh (J & K)                                                  
                (ix) Giddah Group (Gurmeet Bawa)                                                     
                                                                                                     
 33    Cambodia      17-Member Group of              26 December to                                  
                     International Centre for        2 January 1996                                  
                     Kathakali, New Delhi                                                            
                                                                                                     
 28    To perform at the NAM Summit and                                                              
       to visit other countries in the region                                                        
                                                                                                     
 29    To perform at a concert 'Sitar to Gitar'                                                      
       Invitation received from Yehudi                                                               
       Menuhin                                                                                       
                                                                                                     
 30    For participation in the 50th Year of                                                         
       Independence of Indonesia                                                                     
                                                                                                     
 31    To perform at Telegu Maha Sabha                                                               
       1st Telegu Teacher Conference at                                                              
       Port Louis                                                                                    
                                                                                                     
 32    To perform at the Festival of                                                                 
       India in Thailand                                                                             
                                                                                                     
 33    To participate in the International                                                           
       Ramayana Festival at Ankor Vat"                                                               
                                                                                                     
       Cambodia.                                                                                     
 -225>                                                                                               
 1995                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 APPENDIX-XXIV Incoming Performing Delegation (ICCR) (April to December 1995).                       
 Incoming Performing Delegation (ICCR) (April to December 1995).                                     
                                                                                                     
 1 The Council" in collaboration with the Department of Culture, Embassy of Por                      
 tugal and the Gulbenkin Foundation,. Portugal" organised the "Festival of                           
 Portugal in India" in April 1995.                                                                   
                                                                                                     
 2 The Council" in collaboration with the Department of Culture and the Embassy of                   
 Turkmenistan, organised "Days of Turkmen Culture in India" from 7 to 14 June                        
 1995.                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 3 The Rajhans Orchestra from Belgium performed on 14 August 1995.                                   
                                                                                                     
 4 A Music and Dance Group from Indonesia performed on 24 August 1995.                               
                                                                                                     
 5 The Council" in collaboration with the Department of Culture and the Embassy of                   
 the Socialist Republic of Vietnam, organised "Days of Vietnam Culture in India"                     
 on 3 September 1995. The Group also performed in Bombay and Calcutta.                               
                                                                                                     
 6 On the occasion of the visit of the Prime Minister of Denmark, the Council, in                    
 Collaboration with the Royal Danish Embassy and India International Centre (IIC),                   
 organised a puppet show on 3 September 1995 at IIC, New Delhi.                                      
                                                                                                     
 7 Renowned Israeli East West Musical Ensemble performed in Delhi on 9 Septembe r                    
 1995.                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 8 The Council, in collaboration with the India International Centre (IIC), org                      
 anised a Bharatnatyam recital by Mavin Khoo from Malaysia on 24 September 1995.                     
                                                                                                     
 9 The Council" in collaboration with the Embassy of Indonesia, presented 'Ramay                     
 ana' by the visiting Indonesian Ramayana Ballet group at Azad Bhavan, New Delhi.                    
                                                                                                     
 10 The Council, in collaboration with Indira Gandhi National Centre for Arts (I                     
 GNCA) and the Italian Embassy, organised a Programme of Contemporary Dances by                      
 Enzo Cosim i Dance Company from Italy on 2 November 1995.                                           
                                                                                                     
 11 A traditional Dance Group from South Korea performed on 12 September 1995.                       
                                                                                                     
 12 The New Leipzig String Quartet from Germany performed in Delhi on 18 Novembe r                   
 1995. They also performed in Hyderabad, Calcutta, Bombay and Bangalore.                             
                                                                                                     
 13 Musical concerts by Trio Passagio from Netherlands performed on 27 November                      
 1995. The Group also presented their performances in Hyderabad, Calcutta, Bombay,                   
 Bangalore and Madras.                                                                               
 -226>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 14 The Council" in collaboration with the Department of Culture and the Embassy                     
 of the Russian Federation organised "Days of Russian Culture in India" from 1 to                    
 15 December 1995.                                                                                   
                                                                                                     
 The following Cultural Performing Groups of Russia had participated in the E                        
 vent:-                                                                                              
                                                                                                     
 (a) 42-Member Kremlin Ballet;                                                                       
                                                                                                     
 (b) 32-Member Pyatnitsky State Academic Folk Dance Group;                                           
                                                                                                     
 (c) 14-Member Circus Group;                                                                         
                                                                                                     
 (d) 8-Member Gypsy Dance Group; and                                                                 
                                                                                                     
 (e) 6-Member Baroque Chamber Orchestra.                                                             
                                                                                                     
 15 The Council" in collaboration with the Alliance Francaise, hosted the visit of                   
 a French Dance Company "Le Ballet Preljocaj in December 1995. Apart from Group's                    
 Perform ance in Delhi on 11 December at Shriram Centre" the Group also performed                    
 in Hyderabad" Madras" Bombay and Calcutta.                                                          
                                                                                                     
 16 A Seminar on "India and Central Asia" was organised by the Council from 15 t o                   
 20 December 1995. Four Cultural Groups from Mongolia, Russia, Turkmenistan and                      
 Kyrghyzstan performed in Delhi on 17 and 18 December 1995.                                          
 -227>                                                                                               
 1995                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 APPENDIX-XXV Special Programme in honour of VVIP                                                    
 UCCR)visitors/delegates/conferences                                                                 
 Special Programme in honour of VVIP UCCR) visitors/delegates/conferences.                           
                                                                                                     
 1 The Council organised a performance by Asha Singh Mastana and Group on 29 Ju ne                   
 1995 in connection with the Mango Festival in honour of the Heads of various                        
 Foreign Missions.                                                                                   
                                                                                                     
 2 On the request of Kala Vikash Kendra, Cuttack, the Council organised a Dance                      
 Ballet "Gautam Buddha" by the performing artistes of Kala Vikash Kendra on 8 July                   
 1995.                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 3 On the request of All India Minorities Front, the Council organised a cultur al                   
 programme on 20 August 1995 on the occasion of the Birth Anniversary of Shri                        
 Rajiv Gandhi, former Prime Minister of India, at India International Centre, New                    
 Delhi.                                                                                              
                                                                                                     
 4 On the occasion of the inauguration of renovated auditorium by the Finance M                      
 inister Dr Manmohan Singh on 26 August 1995, the Council also organised a                           
 cultural evening highlighting a Ballet "Chandalika" by Geetanjali Troupe from                       
 Calcutta and Flute recital by Pandit Hariprasad Chaurasia in Council's                              
 Auditorium.                                                                                         
                                                                                                     
 5 In honour of the President of Mali" the Council organised a cultural program me                   
 `Taal Vadya Kutcheri" by Pandit Birju Maharaj at Rashtrapati Bhavan, New Delhi.                     
                                                                                                     
 6 The Council organised a Lecture Demonstration by Shri Jiwan Pani followed by                      
                                                                                                     
 Bharatanatyam by Maithili Kasar and Kathak by Parul Singh on 7 September 1995 a t                   
 Tagore Hall, Azad Bhavan, New Delhi.                                                                
                                                                                                     
 7 The Council organised Bharatanatyam recital by Nandini V Rangan on 15 Septem                      
 ber 1995 at Tagore Hall, Azad Bhavan, New Delhi.                                                    
                                                                                                     
 8 In honour of the visiting cricket team from West Indies the Council organise d                    
 a performance by the Kinnaur Folk Dance Group from Himachal on 27 September 1995                    
 at Ashok Convention Hall, New Delhi.                                                                
                                                                                                     
 9 The Council organised a dance performance by Kumari Folk Dance group on 29 S                      
 eptember 1995, a Choreographic Composition War Nari' (Man-woman) in Kathak style                    
 by Maulik Shah and Ishira Parikh at Tagore Hall" Azad Bhavan, New Delhi.                            
                                                                                                     
 10 In honour of the delegation participating in the XIII National Conference of                     
 IMACGP organised by the Indian Medical Association, the Council organised a                         
 Kathak recital by Neera Batra on 8 October 1995 at Tagore Hall" Azad Bhavan" New                    
 Delhi.                                                                                              
                                                                                                     
 11 The Council" in collaboration with the Ministry of Information" organised a                      
 musical evening on 12 October 1995 to pay tribute to the Father of the Nation                       
 Mahatma Gandhi" featuring famous patriotic songs of poet Pradeep that inspired                      
 three generation s, presented by Mahendra Kapoor and Anuradha Paudwal at Siri                       
 Fort Auditorium, New Delhi.                                                                         
 -228>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 12 In honour of the delegates participating in the Conference "AIDS" Law and Hu                     
 manity" organised by the Indian Law Institute" the Council presented a                              
 Bharatanatyam Recital by Ms Leela Samson on 6 December 1995 at Tagore Hall, Azad                    
 Bhavan, New Delhi.                                                                                  
                                                                                                     
 13 For the participants of the meeting between the Indian Ocean Rim Community B                     
 usiness and Academic Groups" the Council presented an Odissi Recital by Ms Madhvi                   
 Mudgal on13 December 1995 at FICCI Auditorium" New Delhi.                                           
 -229>                                                                                               
 1995                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 APPENDIX-XXVI Exhibition (Outgoing and Incoming) for 1995-96 (ICCR Exhibition                       
 (Outgoing and Incoming) for 1995-96 (ICCR).                                                         
 S NO TITLE OF EXHIBITION  COUNTRY       PERIOD   NAME OF COMMISSIONER/                              
                                                  ARTIST SPONSORED                                   
                                                                                                     
 OUTGOING EXHIBITIONS                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 1  Paintings, Drawings     United Arab   21 to 26 May                                               
    and Manuscripts of      Emirates      1995                                                       
    Gurudev Rabindra                                                                                 
    Nath Tagore                                                                                      
                                                                                                     
 2  Photograph entitled     UK            June 1995                                                  
    'Rocks of Ladakh'                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 3  Exhibition of Tagore    UK          October 1995   Jaya Thyaparajan                              
    Paintings                                                                                        
                                                                                                     
 4  'Dialogues of Culture'  Germany       October 1995   N N Rizmon                                  
                                                                                                     
 5  Photographs of          Guyana        1995                                                       
    Maulana Azad                                                                                     
                                                                                                     
 6  International Cultural  Indonesia     1995                                                       
    Event 'Istiqlal Mosque                                                                           
    Festival'                                                                                        
                                                                                                     
 REMARKS                                                                                             
                                                                                                     
 1   ICCR sponsored an exhibition for                                                                
     participation in 'Tagore Week'                                                                  
     held between 21-26 May 1995 at                                                                  
     Abu Dhabi in collaboration with                                                                 
     Embassy of India" Abu Dhabi                                                                     
     Cultural Foundation                                                                             
                                                                                                     
 2   ICCR helped to organise an                                                                      
     exhibition of Sharat Kumar at                                                                   
     The Nehru Centre, London                                                                        
                                                                                                     
 3   Exhibition was held at ICC,                                                                     
     London and the artist was                                                                       
     sponsored by Air India to hold the                                                              
     exhibition                                                                                      
                                                                                                     
 4   N N Rizmon was provided travel                                                                  
     grant for participation in the                                                                  
     exhibition                                                                                      
                                                                                                     
 5   To organise a series of exhibition                                                              
     on Maulana Saheb by ICC,                                                                        
     Georgetown                                                                                      
                                                                                                     
 6   On the occasioh of 50th anniversary                                                             
     of Independence Day of Indonesia"                                                               
     Council sent publications on Sufism                                                             
     and Muslims in India along with                                                                 
     enlarged photographs of historical                                                              
     Mughal Monuments in India                                                                       
 -230>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 7  Bronze Bust of          Norway        August 1995                                                
    Mahatma Gandhi                                                                                   
                                                                                                     
 8  Bronze Bust of          Panama        September 1995                                             
    Mahatma Gandhi                                                                                   
                                                                                                     
 9  Bronze Bust of          USA           April 1995                                                 
    Mahatma Gandhi                                                                                   
                                                                                                     
 INCOMING EXHIBITIONS                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 1  `Buddhism-Focus on      ICCR's        July 1995                                                  
     Asia' Film Festival    Auditorium                                                               
                                                                                                     
 2  Handicrafts &           Lalit Kala    October 1995                                               
    Photographs             Academy                                                                  
                                                                                                     
 3  Photography on          Bangalore and June/July 1995                                             
    Maulana Azad            Thiruvananth-                                                            
                            puram                                                                    
                                                                                                     
 REMARKS                                                                                             
                                                                                                     
 7   A bronze bust of Mahatma Gandhi                                                                 
     was transported to Norway to be                                                                 
     installed in the Indo-Scandinavik                                                               
     Literary & Cultural Forum during                                                                
     August 1995                                                                                     
                                                                                                     
 8   Two bronze bust of Mahatma                                                                      
     Gandhi were sent to Panama for                                                                  
     installation at the Republic De La                                                              
     School" Panama and in District                                                                  
     David in Panama                                                                                 
                                                                                                     
 9   A bronze bust of Mahatma                                                                        
     Gandhi was sent for installation at                                                             
     St Louis" State of Missouri" USA                                                                
                                                                                                     
 1   In collaboration with Cinemaya,                                                                 
     ICC organised film festival in                                                                  
     ICCR's Auditorium. Films were                                                                   
     later sent to Calcutta for screening                                                            
                                                                                                     
 2   Exhibition was presented by ICCR                                                                
     under Indo-Vietnam CEP                                                                          
                                                                                                     
 3   A photographic exhibition was                                                                   
     organised in ICCR's regional offices                                                            
     at Bangalore and Thiruvananth-                                                                  
     puram on Maulana Azad.                                                                          
 -231>                                                                                               
 1995                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 APPENDIX-XXVII Outgoing Visitors (ICCR) Outgoing Visitors (ICCR).                                   
 S NO  NAME OF PERSON         COUNTRY        PURPOSE                                                 
                                                                                                     
 1 Shri Giriraj Kishore       South      To collect material for a                                   
   Head, Centre for Creative  Africa     novel on Mahatma Gandhi                                     
   Writing & Publication                                                                             
   IIT, Kanpur                                                                                       
                                                                                                     
 2 Shri K L Nandan            UK         To deliver a lecture at the                                 
   Editor-in-Chief                       Faculty of Oriental                                         
   Sunday Mail (Hindi) Delhi             Studies, Cambridge                                          
                                                                                                     
 3 Shri M Shamim              USA        To attend the 38th                                          
   Freelance Journalist                  San Francisco International                                 
   Delhi                                 Film Festival                                               
                                                                                                     
 4 Shri Shujaat Hussain       USA        To perform at the                                           
   Sitarist                              University of Texas and                                     
   Delhi                                 give lecture demonstration                                  
                                         workshop for students                                       
                                                                                                     
 5 Professor Suhas            UK         For completing his project                                  
   Chakravarty Delhi                     on V K Krishna Menon                                        
                                                                                                     
 6 Shri A K Kunte and         Mauritius  To participate in a                                         
   Shri Anish Pradhan                    programme aganged at the                                    
   Bombay                                Mahatma Gandhi Institute"                                   
                                         Mauritius                                                   
                                                                                                     
 7 Mrs Shobita Punja          Syria      At the invitation of Lt                                     
   Delhi                                 Mustafa Tlass,Syrian                                        
                                         Minister of Defence                                         
      PERIOD                                                                                         
                                                                                                     
 1 2 April to                                                                                        
   1 May 1995                                                                                        
                                                                                                     
 2 1 April to                                                                                        
   1 May 1995                                                                                        
                                                                                                     
 3 20 April to                                                                                       
   4 May 1995                                                                                        
                                                                                                     
 4 26 April to                                                                                       
   14 June 1995                                                                                      
                                                                                                     
 5 14 May to                                                                                         
   14 June 1995                                                                                      
                                                                                                     
 6 28 April to                                                                                       
   7 May 1995                                                                                        
                                                                                                     
 7 8 May to                                                                                          
   14 May 1995                                                                                       
 -232>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                     
 8 Shri Bharat Gupt Associate Greece     To deliver lecture on Indian                                
   Professor of English,                 Theatre musicology and inte-                                
   College of Vocational                 raction with the counterparts                               
   Studies University of                 in the Greek University                                     
   Delhi, Delhi                                                                                      
                                                                                                     
 9 Professor Daya Krishna     UK         On the occasion of the                                      
   the Editor" Journal of                inauguration of a new part-                                 
   Indian Philosophical                  time post in Indian philosophy                              
   Research"                             at King"s College" London                                   
   Jaipur                                                                                            
                                                                                                     
 10 Shri Kailash Pandya       Canada     To participate in the Interna-                              
    Darpana Academy of                   tional Conference on Stage                                  
    Performing Arts                      organised by the University of                              
    Ahmedabad                            Quebec in Montreal                                          
                                                                                                     
 11 Shri L L Mehrotra         Bangladesh Goodwill visit                                              
    Former Secretary          Bhutan                                                                 
    Ministry of External                                                                             
    Affairs                                                                                          
                                                                                                     
 12 Professor P K Bhanja      UK         To Participate in a programme                               
    Former Principal of                  of music recitals & lecture                                 
    Sangeet Bhavan Visva                 and demonstration-cum-                                      
    Bharati and his                      exhibition at Holesworth                                    
    wife Shrimati Tulu Bhanja            Gallery Suffolk                                             
                                                                                                     
 13 Professor Qamar Rais      Uzbekistan To deliver talks/lectures on                                
    Department of Urdu"                  Modern Indian Literature of                                 
    University of Delhi,                 Oriental Studies, Tashkent                                  
    Delhi.                                                                                           
                                                                                                     
 14 Shri H S Prasad           Germany    To participate in an academic                               
    Department of Philosophy             Project on Creative Peace                                   
    University of Delhi,                 through encounter of world                                  
    Delhi                                cultures                                                    
                                                                                                     
 8  15 May to                                                                                        
    15 July 1995                                                                                     
                                                                                                     
 9  19 May to 22                                                                                     
    May 1995                                                                                         
                                                                                                     
 10 21 May to                                                                                        
    27 May 1995                                                                                      
                                                                                                     
 11 29 May to                                                                                        
    2 June                                                                                           
    8 to 15 June 1995                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 12 26 May to                                                                                        
    15 June 1995                                                                                     
                                                                                                     
 14 14 May to                                                                                        
    13 July 1995                                                                                     
 -233>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                     
 15 Professor Naseer Ahmed    USA        To present a paper at the                                   
    Khan Associate Professor             Round Table of the 17th South                               
    of Urdu Jawaharlal Nehru             Asian Languages and Analysis"                               
    Uiniversity Delhi                    University of Texas" Austin,                                
                                         USA                                                         
                                                                                                     
 16 Shri Waman Partikar       Israel     To attend Home Institution                                  
    Marathi Writer                       Programme for Preschool                                     
    Bombay                               Youngsters (HIPPY)                                          
                                         International Workshop                                      
                                                                                                     
 17 Shri Ashok Vajpayi        Colombia   To participate in the Vth                                   
    Joint Secretary                      International Festival of                                   
    Department of Culture                poems held at Medellin"                                     
    Delhi                                Colombia                                                    
                                                                                                     
 18 Shri Ajay Sharma of       USA        To participate in a series of                               
    Rikhiram & Sons                      Work-shops on Musical                                       
    Delhi                                Instruments                                                 
                                                                                                     
 19 Shri Satish Gujral    Czechoslovakia To exchange ideas with artists                              
    Painter, Muralist &       Israel     & architects of that country                                
    Architect, Delhi                                                                                 
                                                                                                     
 20 Professor Satish Kumar   Switzerland To deliver the Annual Nehru                                 
    School of International              Memorial lecture                                            
    Studies, Jawaharlal                                                                              
    Nehru Uiniversity, Delhi                                                                         
                                                                                                     
 21 Dr S Harindra Srivastava Netherlands To participate in a cultural                                
    ARSD College,                        discussion on "Inherent Spirit                              
    Delhi University                     & consciousness of patriotism                               
                                         in Indian culture"'                                         
 22 Shri Rati Saran Sharma    Venezuela  To attend the XXVI                                          
    General Secretary                    International Theatre Institu-                              
    Bharatiya Natya Sangh                te UNESCO World Congress                                    
    Delhi                                                                                            
                                                                                                     
 15 2 to 4 June                                                                                      
    1995                                                                                             
                                                                                                     
 16 5 to 15 June                                                                                     
    1995                                                                                             
                                                                                                     
 17 7 to 14 June                                                                                     
    1995                                                                                             
                                                                                                     
 18 10 June to                                                                                       
    9 September                                                                                      
    1995                                                                                             
                                                                                                     
 19 10 to 30 June                                                                                    
    1995                                                                                             
                                                                                                     
 20 12 to 17 June                                                                                    
    1995                                                                                             
                                                                                                     
 21 16 June to                                                                                       
    2 July 1995                                                                                      
                                                                                                     
 22 23 to 30 June                                                                                    
    1995                                                                                             
 -234>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 23 Dr Anima Bose, Director   South      To participate in the IV                                    
    Centre for Peace          Africa     International Symposium "On                                 
    Education Delhi                      the Contributions of                                        
                                         Psychology to Peace"                                        
                                                                                                     
 24 Shri Amit Singh           Australia  To participate in 21st                                      
    lInd year English Honours            Australian Intervarsity                                     
    and Shri Anupam Martins"             Debating Competition at                                     
    Ist year Economics Honours           Monash University Claytown                                  
    St Stephen's College"                Campus in Melbourne                                         
    Delhi                                                                                            
 25 Dr Lolita Nehru           UK         To participate & present a                                  
    Head" Department of                  paper in the European                                       
    History of Art" National             Association of South                                        
    Museum                               Asian Archaeologists                                        
    Delhi                                Conference held in Cambridge                                
                                                                                                     
 26 Ms Anuradha Kunte         France     To attend International                                     
    Centre for French                    Association of Conference                                   
    Studies, Jawaharlal Nehru            Interpreters (AIIC)                                         
     University" Delhi                   held in Paris                                               
                                                                                                     
 27 Shri Suresh Awasthi       Australia  To attend the International                                 
    former Chairman                      Conference of Music & Dance                                 
    National School of Drama             held in Melborne                                            
                                                                                                     
 28 Dr Partha Chattopadhyaya  USA        To participate in 125th birth                               
    Writer-Journalist                    anniversary of Mahatma Gandhi                               
    Anand Bazar Patrika                  and to talk on "The                                         
    Calcutta                             Relevance of Mahatma                                        
                                         Gandhi's message in the                                     
                                         present day world" at Gandhi                                
                                         Centre" St Louis                                            
 29 Dr H K Ranganath          USA        To attend an interface on                                   
    Gandhi Centre of Science             lnter Cultural Communication                                
    and Human Values"                    at Rochester                                                
    Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan,                                                                          
    Bangalore                                                                                        
                                                                                                     
 23 24 to 30 June                                                                                    
    1995                                                                                             
                                                                                                     
 24 2 to 9 July 1995                                                                                 
                                                                                                     
 25 3 to 7 July 1995                                                                                 
                                                                                                     
 26 4 to 22 July 1995                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 27 10 to 15 July                                                                                    
    1995                                                                                             
                                                                                                     
 28 18 July to                                                                                       
    8 August 1995                                                                                    
                                                                                                     
 29 11 to 15 July                                                                                    
    1995                                                                                             
 -235>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 30 Shri Sunil Mukherjee      Kenya      To participate as Adjudicator                               
    Sarod Player,                        in the Annual Kenya Music                                   
    Delhi                                Festival held in Nairobi                                    
                                                                                                     
 31 Shri Abu Abraham          South      To give lectures on                                         
    Saranarn                  Africa     cartooning on journalism in                                 
    Golf Links Road,                     India                                                       
    Tiruvananthapuram                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 32 Dr Vinaybala Mehta        Japan      To attend the 25th Triennial                                
    Vice-President India                 International Conference on                                 
    Federation of Universities           women in Japan                                              
                                                                                                     
 33 Professor Indranath      Kyrghyzstan To participate in the seminar                               
    Choudhuri Secretary,                 on '"Epic Manas" at Bishkek                                 
    Sahitya Akademi,                                                                                 
    New Delhi                                                                                        
                                                                                                     
 34 Professor K N Pandita     Tajikistan Goodwill visit                                              
    Potedar House                                                                                    
    Jawahar Nagar                                                                                    
                                                                                                     
 35 Professor Lallan Parasad  Mexico     To deliver series of lectures                               
    Vyas Secretary General               on Balmiki Ramayan at the                                   
    Vishwa Bahitya Sanskriti             University in Mexico                                        
    Sanstan, Delhi                                                                                   
                                                                                                     
 36 Professor Olivinho J F    Portugal   To work on the pre-Portuguese                               
    Gomes Professor & Head               Ramayana & Mahabharata                                      
    Department of Konkani"               Manuscript in Konkani                                       
    Goa University"                                                                                  
    Goa                                                                                              
                                                                                                     
 30 1 to 9 August                                                                                    
    1995                                                                                             
                                                                                                     
 31 16 August to                                                                                     
    2 September                                                                                      
    1995                                                                                             
                                                                                                     
 32 18 to 25 August                                                                                  
    1995                                                                                             
                                                                                                     
 33 27 and 28                                                                                        
    August 1995                                                                                      
                                                                                                     
 34 24 September to                                                                                  
    22 October 1995                                                                                  
                                                                                                     
 35 15 to 23                                                                                         
    September 1995                                                                                   
                                                                                                     
 36 1 September to                                                                                   
    10 October 1995                                                                                  
 -236>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 37 Shri Jagdish R Hiremath,  Trinidad & To attend a conference on                                   
    Retired Ambassador,       Tobago     "Challenge & change; the                                    
    Delhi                                Indian diaspora in its                                      
                                         historical & contemporary                                   
                                         contexts"                                                   
                                                                                                     
 38 Professor Gopi Chand       UK        To deliver two lectures, "The                               
    Narang Professor of Urdu,            Changing Panorama of Urdu                                   
    Delhi                                Literature" and "Challenges of                              
                                         Post Modernism New Trends in                                
                                         Urdu Fiction" the Return of                                 
                                         the Story"                                                  
                                                                                                     
 39 Shri Brij Bhasin          UK         To participate in South Asian                               
    President"                           Crafts Conference                                           
    Vrindavan, Delhi                                                                                 
                                                                                                     
 40 Ms Sunanda Roy,           Germany    To attend the Youth Festival                                
    Musician                             European Classical Music                                    
    Delhi                                                                                            
                                                                                                     
 41 Professor Varyam Singh    Kazakhstan To attend the 150th Birth                                   
    Jawaharlal Nehru                     Anniversary of the poet Abai                                
    Uuniversity" Delhi                   Kunanbaev                                                   
    Dr Abdus Samad                                                                                   
    Patna, Bihar                                                                                     
                                                                                                     
 42 Professor R P Kaushik     Trinidad & To participate in                                           
    Jawaharlal Nehru          Tobago     International Conference on                                 
    University, Delhi                    Indian Diaspora                                             
    Dr Bindeshwar Ram,                                                                               
    Deputy Director"                                                                                 
    Indian Council of Historical                                                                     
    Research" Delhi                                                                                  
                                                                                                     
 43 Mrs Anees Jung,           France     Goodwill visit                                              
    Delhi                                                                                            
                                                                                                     
 37 7 to 22 August                                                                                   
    1995                                                                                             
                                                                                                     
 38 6 to 22 August                                                                                   
    1995                                                                                             
                                                                                                     
 39 17 to 21                                                                                         
    September 1995                                                                                   
                                                                                                     
 40 6 to 29 August                                                                                   
    1995                                                                                             
                                                                                                     
 41 8 to 11 August                                                                                   
    1995                                                                                             
                                                                                                     
 42 11 to 18 August                                                                                  
    1995                                                                                             
                                                                                                     
 43 1 to 7 September                                                                                 
 1995                                                                                                
 -237>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 44 Shri Sudhir Dhar          Germany    To attend Kito Festival                                     
    Shri T K Unnithan                    in Breman                                                   
    Shri B B Mehar                                                                                   
    Shri S Ansari                                                                                    
                                                                                                     
 45 Dr Parimal Kumar Das      Indonesia  Goodwill visit                                              
    Professor,                                                                                       
    Department of South Asian                                                                        
    Studies"                                                                                         
    Jawaharlal Nehru                                                                                 
    University" Delhi                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 46 Ms Radha Sharma"          France     To participate in a symposium                               
    Delhi                                held at University of Rennes                                
                                                                                                     
 47 Professor Abdul Kalam     Mauritius  To participate in the 25th                                  
    Qasmi Department of Urdu"            Anniversary of the 1995                                     
    Aligarh Muslim University"           National Urdu Institute"                                    
    Aligarh                              Mauritius                                                   
                                                                                                     
 48 Dr R R Subramanian        South      To participate in a seminar                                 
    Senior Research Associate Africa     at the University of                                        
    Defence Studies & Analyses,          Witwatersrand Johannesburg                                  
    Delhi                                                                                            
                                                                                                     
 49 Dr Rashmi Sudha Puri,    Kyrghyzstan To participate in a seminar                                 
    Director, Department of              on Mahatma Gandhi's philosophy                              
    Gandhian Studies" Punjab                                                                         
    University" Chandigarh                                                                           
                                                                                                     
 50 Shri Bashier Ahmed Mayukh UK         To participate in the Kavi                                  
    Hindi Poet"                          Sammelans in London and                                     
    Kota"                                Manchester                                                  
    Rajasthan                                                                                        
                                                                                                     
 44 30 September to                                                                                  
    10 October 1995                                                                                  
                                                                                                     
 45 4 to 15                                                                                          
    September 1995                                                                                   
                                                                                                     
 46 8 and 9                                                                                          
    September 1995                                                                                   
                                                                                                     
 47 14 to 20                                                                                         
    September 1995                                                                                   
                                                                                                     
 48 4 September to                                                                                   
    5 October 1995                                                                                   
                                                                                                     
 49 29 September to                                                                                  
    6 October 1995                                                                                   
                                                                                                     
 50 14 and 15                                                                                        
    October 1995                                                                                     
 -238>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 51 Shri Bekal Utsahi         UK         To attend Kavi Sammelans in                                 
    Ex-M P (Rajya Sabha)                 London and Manchester                                       
    New Delhi                                                                                        
                                                                                                     
 52 Dr Gieve Patel"           Israel     To participate in a seminar on                              
    Bombay                               Creativity in Indian Culture                                
                                                                                                     
 53 Professor N C Sengupta    Bangladesh To participate in 7th Asian                                 
    Principal                            Art Bienniel 1995                                           
    College of Art" New Delhi                                                                        
 54 Professor Rasheeduddi     Indonesia  To participate in the seminar                               
    Khan New Delhi                       on Islam and Global Community                               
 55 Shri Narendra Kumar       Kazakhstan To publish biographies of the                               
    Haranand Publications                Presidents of Central Asian                                 
    New Delhi                            Republics                                                   
 51 13 to 21 October 1995                                                                            
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                     
 52 5 to 13  November 1995                                                                           
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                     
 53 2 to 9 November 1995                                                                             
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                     
 54 14 to 18 November 1995                                                                           
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                     
 55 13 to 19 February 1995                                                                           
                                                                                                     
 -239>                                                                                               
 1995                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 APPENDIX-XXVIII Incoming Visitors (ICCR)                                                            
 Incoming Visitors (ICCR).                                                                           
                                                                                                     
 S NO  NAME OF THE PERSON     COUNTRY    PURPOSE                                                     
                                                                                                     
 1 Dr Rupert Snell            UK         To meet his counterparts                                    
   Reader in Hindi, Department                                                                       
   of Indology and of the                                                                            
   Languages & Culture, South                                                                        
    Asia University of London                                                                        
 2 3-Member Theatre Group     Sri Lanka  To meet their counterparts                                  
                                                                                                     
 3 4-Member delegation of     Ghana      Goodwill visit                                              
   Students accompanied by a                                                                         
   teacher (winner of                                                                                
   Shankar's International                                                                           
   Children's Competition)                                                                           
                                                                                                     
 4 Gen Arnold Quinoo and his  Ghana      To meet their counterparts                                  
   wife                                                                                              
                                                                                                     
 5 Dr Patick Seyon            Liberia    To meet their counterparts                                  
   President of the University                                                                       
   of Liberia and his wife                                                                           
                                                                                                     
 6 Mr Mourtazo Ostanaev       Tajikistan To meet his counterparts                                    
   President of Tajikistan                                                                           
   Hotel/Intourist and                                                                               
   Vice-President of the CIS                                                                         
   Federation of Intourist                                                                           
                                                                                                     
 7 Dr Irina Clushkova         Russia     To meet her counterparts                                    
   Indologist, Linguist and                                                                          
   Professor, Centre for                                                                             
   Indian Studies, Institute                                                                         
   of Orientology, Moscow                                                                            
                                                                                                     
    PERIOD                                                                                           
                                                                                                     
 1  1 to 23 April 1995                                                                               
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                     
 2  14 to 26 April 1995                                                                              
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                     
 3  16 to 30 May 1995                                                                                
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                     
 4  25 May to 8 June 1995                                                                            
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                     
 5  25 June to 7 July 1995                                                                           
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                     
 6  23 June to 2 July 1995                                                                           
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                     
 7  15 July to 4 August 1995                                                                         
                                                                                                     
 -240>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 8 Ms Ibu  Gedong Bagoes Oka  Indonesia  To attend the first meeting of                              
   Founder/Chairperson Gandhi            the Board of Trustees at the                                
   Peace Ashram, Denpasar,               Sabarmati Ashram                                            
   Bali                                                                                              
                                                                                                     
 9 Mr Stephen Murphy          Australia  To attend the first meeting of                              
   Coordinator International             the Board of Trustees at                                    
   Gandhian Movement                     Sabarmati Ashram                                            
   of Australia                                                                                      
                                                                                                     
 10 54-Member Youth Cultural  Japan      Goodwill visit                                              
    delegation of the Soka                                                                           
    Gakkai International                                                                             
                                                                                                     
 11 Ms Indira Konelbaeva      Kazakhstan Goodwill visit                                              
    (she bears the name                                                                              
    Indira in Honour of                                                                              
    Indian former PM)                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 12 Shri Vishwa Mehra         UK         To attend a workshop at the                                 
    Indian Conservator, London           Asiatic Society, Calcutta                                   
                                                                                                     
 13 Mrs Maria Del Carman      Cuba       To meet her counterparts                                    
    Solana Valdes" Deputy                                                                            
    Director of the Cuban                                                                            
    Centre for the Studies                                                                           
    on Asia & Oceania                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 14 Mr Tony Wedgewood Benn    UK         To deliver the Krishna Menon                                
    Member of Commons" London            Memorial Lecture                                            
                                                                                                     
 15 Ms Grazina Miniotaite     Russia     To participate in the                                       
    Centre for Nonviolent                International  Seminar on                                   
    Action, Lithuania                    'Gandhi: Future of Humanity'                                
                                         on the occasion of 125th                                    
                                         Birth Anniversary of Mahatma                                
                                         Gandhi                                                      
                                                                                                     
 8  14 to 28 July  1995                                                                              
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                     
 9  14 to 28 July  1995                                                                              
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                     
 10 2 to 12 August 1995                                                                              
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                     
 11 11 to 25 August 1995                                                                             
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                     
 12 29 March to 5 April 1995                                                                         
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                     
 13 3 to 6 July 1995                                                                                 
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                     
 14 6 to 9 September 1995                                                                            
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                     
 15 23 to 25  September 1995                                                                         
                                                                                                     
 -241>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 16 Professor Marietta,       Russia     To participate in the                                       
    Stepaniants, Director,               International Seminar on                                    
    Centre Philosophies                  'Gandhi : for Oriental Future                               
    Studies, Institute of                of Humanity' on the occasion                                
    Philosophy, Russian                  of 125th Birth Anniversary of                               
    Academy of                           Mahatma Gandhi                                              
    Sciences, Moscow                                                                                 
                                                                                                     
 17 Dr Lilla Szabo            Hungary    To study painting and the                                   
    Art Historian                        document of Elizabeth Sass                                  
                                         Brunner                                                     
                                                                                                     
 18 Mrs Dhairyabala Dhupelia  South      To participate in the                                       
    Grand Daughter of         Africa     concluding celebrations of                                  
    Mahatma Gandhi                       125th Birth Anniversary of                                  
                                         Gandhiji                                                    
                                                                                                     
 19 Mr Satish Dhupelia        South                 -do-                                             
                              Africa                                                                 
                                                                                                     
 20 9-Member delegation (The  USA        To discuss issues of bilateral                              
    American Council of                  and global importance                                       
    Young Political Leaders"                                                                         
    America)                                                                                         
                                                                                                     
 21 Mr Kamaluddin Nilu        Bangladesh Research Study on "Probable                                 
    Associate Professor of               Application of Western Drama                                
    Dramatic Arts, University            in Indian Traditional Theatre"                              
    of Chittagong                                                                                    
                                                                                                     
 22 Dr Chirsitina Nygren      Sweden               -do-                                              
    University of Stockholm,                                                                         
    Department of Theatre and                                                                        
    Film Arts                                                                                        
                                                                  14                                 
 23 Professor Boris Jakharyin Russia     To make his research study in                               
    Head of Indian Philology             Linguistics                                                 
    Moscow State University                                                                          
                                                                                                     
 24 Mr Sayeed Ahmad,          Bangladesh For conducting a study in                                   
    Theatre Critic and Art               India on contemporary rural                                 
    Connoisseur                          & folk theatre                                              
                                                                                                     
 16 23 to 25 September 1995                                                                          
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                     
 17 1 September to 30 November 1995                                                                  
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                     
 18 28 September to 11 November 1995                                                                 
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                     
 19 28 September to 11 November 1995                                                                 
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                     
 20 15 to 21 September 1995                                                                          
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                     
 21 1 October to 31 December 1995                                                                    
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                     
 22 1 October to  31 December 1995                                                                   
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                     
 23 12 October to 12 December 1995                                                                   
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                     
 24 16 October 1995 to 16 January 1996                                                               
                                                                                                     
 -242>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 25 Dr Phan Lac Tuyen,        Vietnam    Goodwill visit                                              
    Vice-Dean of the                     To meet counterparts                                        
    Department of Ethnology,                                                                         
    Institute of Social                                                                              
    Sciences, Ho Chi Minh City                                                                       
                                                                                                     
 26 Ms Lynn Maree, Dance      South      To meet her counterparts                                    
    Director" Playhouse       Africa                                                                 
    Company                                                                                          
                                                                                                     
 27 4-Member Delegation       Bhutan     To meet their counterparts                                  
    led by Deputy Minister                                                                           
    Dasho Khandu Wangchuk                                                                            
                                                                                                     
 28 Mr and Mrs Seyfi Tashan   Turkey     To meet eminent personalities                               
    Head of the Turkey's                                                                             
    Foreign Policy Institute                                                                         
                                                                                                     
 29 Mr Moonelall Ramphul      Mauritius  To meet Indian members of                                   
    President" Mauritius                 Association and to visit the                                
    India Friendship Society             Institute for the Blind                                     
                                         and Physically Handicapped,                                 
                                         Delhi.                                                      
 25 18 October to 7 November 1995                                                                    
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                     
 26 18 to 21 October  1995                                                                           
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                     
 27 23 to 26 October 1995                                                                            
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                     
 28 13 to 25 December  1995                                                                          
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                     
 29 30 October to 13 November 1995                                                                   
                                                                                                     
 -243>                                                                                               
 1995                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 APPENDIX-XXIX Visiting Professors - Chairs of Indian Studies Abroad (ICCR                           
 Visiting Professors - Chairs of Indian Studies Abroad (ICCR).                                       
 Under various schemes, the ICCR sends abroad Visiting Professions for teaching                      
 Indology, Indian Language and allied subjects. During the period under report the                   
 following academics were in position abroad:                                                        
                                                                                                     
 1 Dr Devendra Shukla Visiting Associate Professor of Hindi at the University of                     
 Sofia, Bulgaria.                                                                                    
                                                                                                     
 2 Dr Jai Singh Yadav Visiting Associate Professor of Hindi at the Gadjah Mada                       
 University, Yogyakarta, Java" Indonesia.                                                            
                                                                                                     
 3 Dr Abdul Bismillah Visiting Associate Professor of Hindi at the University of                     
 Warsaw, Poland.                                                                                     
                                                                                                     
 4 Dr Triloki Nath Singh Visiting Associate Professor of Hindi at the, Indian                        
 Cultural Centre, Paramaribo, Suriname.                                                              
                                                                                                     
 5 Dr N Jayaram Visiting Professor of Social & Cultural Anthropology at the                          
 University of West Indies, St Augustine Campus" Trinidad and Tobago.                                
                                                                                                     
 6 Dr V R Jagannathan Visiting Professor of Hindi at the University of West                          
 Indies, St Augustine Campus, Port of Spain, Trinidad and Tobago.                                    
                                                                                                     
 7 Dr (Mrs) Kamlesh Singh Visiting Associate Professor of Hindi Language and                         
 Literature at the Catholic University of Louvain in Belgium.                                        
                                                                                                     
 8 Dr 0 P Singhal Visiting Professor of Hindi Language and Literature at the                         
 Beijing University, China.                                                                          
                                                                                                     
 9 Dr (Mrs) Usha Satyavrat Shastri Visiting Associate Professor of Sanskrit at the                   
 Silpakorn University, Bangkok, Thailand.                                                            
                                                                                                     
 10 Dr Ramesh Chand Sharma Visiting Associate Professor of Hindi at the Hankuk                       
 University of Foreign Language, Seoul" Republic of Korea.                                           
 -244>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 11 Dr (Mrs) Anita Ganguly Visiting Associate Professor of Hindi at the Helsinki                     
 University, Finland.                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 12 Dr (Mrs) Noorjahan Begum Visiting Associate Professor of Hindi at the Ankara                     
 University, Turkey.                                                                                 
                                                                                                     
 13 Dr (Mrs) Geeta Sharma Visiting Associate Professor of Hindi at the Jawaharlal                    
 Nehru Cultural Centre, Moscow, Russia.                                                              
                                                                                                     
 14 Dr Syed Asghar Wajahat Visiting Associate Professor of Hindi at the Eotvos                       
 Lorand University, Budapest, Hungary.                                                               
                                                                                                     
 15 Dr S K Lal Visiting Professor of Sanskrit at the University of Sorbone                           
 Nouvelle, Paris-III, France.                                                                        
                                                                                                     
 16 Dr Rewati Raman Pandey Visiting Professor of Philosophy at Mahatama Gandhi                       
 Institute, Port Louis, Mauritius.                                                                   
                                                                                                     
 17 Dr K Nachimuthu Visiting Professor of Tamil at University of Warsaw, Poland.                     
 -245>                                                                                               
 1995                                                                                                
                                                                                                     
 APPENDIX-XXX Presentation of Books and Art Objects/Musical Instruments (ICCR                        
 Presentation of Books and Art Objects/Musical Instruments (ICCR) (April to De                       
 cember 1995).                                                                                       
 Presentation of Books                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 1 United Arab      Coffee Table Books for Cultural    35 books                                      
   Emirates         Foundation                                                                       
 2 Madagascar       To the Mission Library             147 French &                                  
                                                       Gujarati books                                
 3 Ghana            History and Culture books for      20 books                                      
                    presentation to various schools                                                  
 4 Belgium          To Buddhist institutions           18 books                                      
                    To University of Ghent             26 books                                      
                    To Schools of Music                12 books                                      
 5 Brazil           Presentation purposes              10 books                                      
 6 Kyrghyzstan      Presentation purposes              13 books                                      
                    To Kyrghyzstan-India Friendship    20 books                                      
                    Society                                                                          
 7 Germany          To Tagore Institute                29 books                                      
                    To University of Gottingen         20 books                                      
 8 Romania          To Sanskrit Scholars               6 books                                       
 9 Germany          To Martin Luther University        Collected works                               
                    of Gandhi                                                                        
 10 Thailand        To Thailand Festival               25 books                                      
 11 Iraq            To University of Baghdad           20 books                                      
 12 Venezuela       Various academic institutions Books 16 books                                     
                    on Gandhi to various institutions                                                
 13 Australia       A Guru Granth Sahib to a           2 sets                                        
                    Gurudwara in Sydney                                                              
 14 Canada          Writings and Speeches of                                                         
                    Dr B R Ambedkar to the G R D                                                     
                    Youth Association                                                                
 15 Ireland         For presentation purposes          18 books                                      
                    To John Scott School               68 books                                      
 16 Syria           To Assad Library                   30 books                                      
 -246>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 17 Bangladesh      For presentation purposes          30 books                                      
 18 Botswana        For presentation purposes          10 books                                      
 19 Switzerland     For presentation purposes          26 books                                      
 20 Vietnam         For presentation purposes          15 books                                      
 21 Netherlands     To Organisatie Voor Hindu Media    23 books                                      
                    (OHM) (Media)                                                                    
 22 Pakistan        For presentation purposes          20 books                                      
 23 Indonesia       For presentation purposes          16 books                                      
                                                       5 video                                       
                                                       cassettes                                     
                                                       15 audio                                      
                                                       cassettes                                     
 24 Uganda          For presentation purposes          17 books                                      
 25 Ukraine         To local cultural clubs            6 books                                       
 26 Sudan           For presentation purposes          17 books                                      
 27 Nepal           Books on Gandhi to various         27 books                                      
                    academic institutions                                                            
 28 Angola          For a childrens book exhibition    58 books                                      
 29 UK              The Supreme Court Report to the                                                  
                    House of Lords                                                                   
 30 Belarus         For presentation purposes          8 books                                       
 31 Philippines     Lalit Kala folders for             10 folders                                    
                    presentation purposes                                                            
 32 Russia          For University of Moscow, Centre   31 books                                      
                    of Comparative Studies                                                           
 33 Oman            For presentation purposes          8 books                                       
                    5 folders                                                                        
 34 France          For presentation purposes          27 books                                      
 35 Poland          For presentation purposes          23 books                                      
                                                       20 folders                                    
 36 Panama          To provincial library              12 books                                      
                    For presentation purposes          10 books                                      
 37 Sweden          To National Library                23 books                                      
                                                       29 compact discs                              
                                                       5 video                                       
                                                       cassettes                                     
 -247>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
                    For presentation purposes          10 books                                      
                    For presentation purposes          22 books                                      
 38 South Africa    For presentation purposes          8 books                                       
 39 South Korea     For presentation purposes          29 books                                      
 40 Seychelles      For presentation purposes          17 books                                      
                                                       10 folders                                    
 41 Israel          For presentation purposes          31 books                                      
                                                       15 audio                                      
                                                       cassettes                                     
 42 Iran            For presentation purposes on       4 books                                       
                    Contemporary poetry                                                              
 43 Trinidad        University of West Indies          24 books                                      
    & Tobago        Charkha & books on Gandhiji for    50 books                                      
                    the Mission                                                                      
 44 Libya           For presentation purposes          10 ICCR                                       
                                                       Publications                                  
 45 Taiwan          For presentation purposes          10 books                                      
 46 Iran            For the celebration of 125th       20 books on                                   
                                                       Gandhiji                                      
                    Birth Anniversary of Gandhiji      5 Indian                                      
                                                       Horizons                                      
                                                       1 Album on                                    
                                                       Gandhiji                                      
 47 Iran            For academic institutions          16 books                                      
 48 United States   For presentation by Mission        20 books                                      
    of America                                         40 folders                                    
                                                       10 copies of                                  
                                                       Best of                                       
                                                       Laxman (Volume                                
                                                       1-4)                                          
 49 Myanmar         For the Embassy's School           NCERT & CBT                                   
                                                       Books                                         
                                                       85 copies of                                  
                                                       Bhagvad                                       
                                                       Gita                                          
 50 Greece          For presentation purposes          32 books                                      
                                                       10 Lalit Kala                                 
                                                       folders                                       
                                                       5 Scarves                                     
 51 China           For presentation purposes          13 audio                                      
                                                       cassettes                                     
 52 Thailand        For Indian Music Centre            19 audio                                      
                                                       cassettes                                     
                                                       10 compact                                    
                                                       discs                                         
 53 Canada          'The Metro International Caravan', Statue of                                     
                    Festival of Toronto                Nataraja                                      
 -248>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
 Presentation of Art Objects/Musical Instruments                                                     
                                                                                                     
 1 Thailand         To a Music Centre            9 Musical Instruments                               
                    To Indian Women's Club       5 Musical Instruments                               
 2 Canada           To Peel Arya Samaj           4 Musical Instruments                               
 3 Myanmar          To the All Myanmar Hindu     6 Musical Instruments                               
                    Central Board                                                                    
 4 Guyana           To a Hindu temple            3 Musical Instruments                               
 5 Germany          To the Tagore Institute at   5 Musical Instruments                               
                    Bonn                                                                             
 6 Libya            To the Indian Community      8 Musical Instruments                               
                    School                                                                           
 7 Belgium          To the Sangeet School of     5 Musical Instruments                               
                    Music                                                                            
 8 Ireland          To the University of         12 Musical Instruments                              
                    Limmerick                                                                        
 9 United Arab      To a local association       3 Musical Instruments                               
   Emirates                                                                                          
 10 Sri Lanka       To Colombo Broadcasting      24 Musical Instruments                              
                    Corporation                                                                      
 11 Belgium         To Centre De la Marionette   6 puppets                                           
                    Tourmai                                                                          
 12 Ghana           For a painting competition   9 trophies                                          
                    conducted by the Indian                                                          
                    Embassy                                                                          
 13 South Korea     For a National Costume       4 sets of national                                  
                    Exhibition costumes                                                              
 14 Colombia        For decoration of the        5 folders                                           
                    Mission's premises           5 paintings                                         
                                                 3 Tanjavore Plates                                  
 -249>                                                                                               
                                                                                                     
External website     External website    External website    External website    External website    
that opens in a new  that opens in a new that opens in a new that opens in a new that opens in a new 
window               window              window              window              window              

    Address : Patiala House, Annexe - BNew Delhi                              
   -110001                                           Page last updated on: 09 
    Telephone: 23389073, 23382694, 23073685;                  December, 2013  
   Fax: 23386340, 23387700;Feedback :            Site designed and maintained 
   dirlibmea.gov.in                                  by: National Informatics 
    Officer In-charge:-                                         Centre (NIC), 
    (c)Content Owned by MEA Library Ministry of   DeitY, MoCIT, Government of 
   External Affairs, Government of India                               India. 
   Terms & Conditions | Privacy Policy |         Visitors:                    
   Copyright Policy | Hyperlinking Policy |      
   Accessibility Statement | Help                

   java script is required for this page
   MEAs App twitter Facebook Google plus YouTube flickr
   loading
