1953-54

Contents
Jan 01, 1953
REPORT
1953-54
THE MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS
CONTENTS
PART I
PAGES
A. United Nations and Other international Organizations

1-5

PART II-EXTERNAL RELATIONS
B.

India's Immediate Neighbours

5-12

C.

Foreign Possessions in India

12

D.

South-East Asia

13

E.

Middle East

14-16

F.

Far East

17-18

G.

Africa

18-21

H.

South Pacific Region

I.

Europe

The Americas

21
22-23
23-24

K.

Distinguished

Visitors from Abroad

25

PART III-ADMINISTRATION
L.

Organisation of the Ministry

26-33

M. Tribal Areas

33-34

N.

Chandernagore

34

O.

Consular Affairs

34-36

P.

Emigration

36-37

Q.

Information Services

38-39

R.

Cultural Relations

39-42

S.

Recovery of Abducted

T.

Diplomatic and Consular Missions

Women and

Children.

42

in India

42

APPENDIX
I. Extracts from the Prime Minister's Policy statements in the Parliament

43-50

II. President Eisenhower's Statement and letter to the Prime Minister
on U. S.-Pakistan Military Aid and the Prime Minister's Statement in Parliament

51-58

III. Indian Missions Abroad

59-61

IV. Foreign Missions in India .

62-65

V. Treaties, Conventions and Agreements
1953-54
VI.

International Organizations

113 M of E.A.
INDIA
PAKISTAN

concluded by

of which

India

India is a Member

during

66-67
68-70

Jan 01, 1953

A. United Nations & Other International Organizations
<pg1>
REPORT OF THE MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS
1953-54
PART I
A. UNITED NATIONS
&
OTHER INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS
(i) International Conferences
The Eighth Session of the General Assembly of the United Nations
commenced its work on the Sep 15, 1953. The leader of the
Indian Delegation, Shrimati Vijayalakshmi Pandit, was elected as
President. The dignity and impartiality with which she conducted
the Proceedings of the Assembly were acknowledged by the Representatives of the various Member States in the Assembly on the last
day of the first part of the Session.
2. The Korean question, which was the principal subject on the
Assembly's agenda during the preceding Session, remained in the
background during the 8th Session. Other developments were taking
place in Korea and the majority view was that a concurrent debate
in the Assembly should be avoided. Korea was, however, very much
in the minds of the various Delegations and India herself was directly involved in some of these developments. Details are given in
Section F of Part II of this Report but it should be mentioned here
that the conduct of our own Custodian Force in the performance of
a-task unprecedented in history in connection with the repatriation
of the Prisoners of War was warmly commended in the United
Nations and elsewhere.
3. The African Continent and its problems formed the subject of
many discussions under a variety of items on the agenda.
The question of the treatment of people of Indian origin in the
Union of South Africa engaged, once more, the attention of the Ad
Hoc Political Committee. The resolution adopted by that Committee
provided for the continuance of the Committee of Good Offices
which was set up at an earlier session, and for that body to make
suggestions for consideration by the Assembly at its next session.

113 M of E. A.
<pg2>
On the question of South West Africa, the General Assembly
adopted two resolutions. The first provided for the establishment of
a Seven-Member Committee for examining reports and petitionswhich might be submitted to it or to the Secretary-General, and for
reporting to the General Assembly conditions in the territory of'
South West Africa. The second resolution asked the Union Government to place South West Africa under the International TrusteeshipSystem in compliance with the previous resolution of the Assemblyand the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice.
On the question of apartheid, the Assembly had before it the
illuminating report of the United Nations Commission the Racial
situation in the Union of South Africa, a body which was presided
over by Dr. Santa Cruz of Chile. The Commission held that it was
within the competence of the United Nations to deal with this question, and concluded its report by expressing its conviction that "if
the South African Government merely indicated its wish to reviewits racial policy and to accept spontaneously, in complete sovereignty
and independence, the fraternal. collaboration of the community of
nations in solving that problem, a simple gesture of that kind might
even now clear the air and open a new path of justice and peace to
the development of the Union of South Africa within the United
Nations". The Delegation of India with the co-operation of many
others was able to secure the adoption by the General Assembly of
a resolution whereby the Commission is enabled to continue its study
and to suggest for consideration, at the next Session of the Assembly,
measures which would help to alleviate the situation and provide
a peaceful settlement.
Although the requisite support was not forthcoming for the,
adoption by the Assembly of resolutions calculated to ease the
tensions in Morocco and Tunisia, the Representatives of the AsianAfrican Group made spirited appeals for the recognition of the right
of those peoples to self-determination.
With regard to the Trust Territories of Togoland, our Delegation
laid emphasis on the need for ascertaining the freely expressed
wishes of the inhabitants before embarking upon any radical changes
in their status.
4. On the question of Disarmament and the prohibition of the use,
of the atom bomb, it became evident that the Commission which,
was set up by the United Nations to deal with this problem had little
progress to record. Since the co-operation of the permanent members
of the Security Council was essential in this direction, the Indian
Delegation suggested that a Sub-Committee of the Commission
should be set up, that it should consist of the Powers principally

<pg3>
involved and that this body should be able to accomplish much if it
held its meetings in private. These suggestions were embodied in
the resolution as finally adopted by the General Assembly.
5. In the economic sphere though much progress was not registered, the Indian Delegation lent its whole-hearted support to resolutions which were designed to carry forward proposals for the economic development of under developed areas and-for the setting up
of an International Finance Corporation.
6. The question of forced labour formed the subject of heated discussion in the Social Committee and the Indian Delegation made it
clear that India was opposed to forced labour in any form, whether
for economic, social or political purposes, and whether sanctioned by
law, or merely tolerated by administrative action, or lack of action.
7. The question of the revision of the Charter of the United
Nations was debated both in the Plenary meetings of the Assembly
and in the Legal Committee: considerable reluctance was expressed
by many delegations to anticipate the stand their respective Governments would take at the General Conference envisaged in the
Charter as it was considered undesirable even to ask Member-States
in advance what amendments. they would suggest for the consideration of the Conference. In the circumstances, the General Assembly
did nothing beyond authorizing the Secretary-General to compile and
publish the documents of the San Francisco Conference (1945) together with the relevant index etc.
8.India continued to serve on the Economic and Social Council
during the year under review and has also been elected by the
General Assembly to serve on the Trusteeship Council for a period
of three years.
9. One of the resolutions adopted by the UNESCO at its last
general conference stemmed from the report of the Seminar on the
Contribution of Gandhian Outlook and Techniques, which was held
in Delhi in January 1953. By this resolution the Executive Board
and the Director-General of UNESCO were asked to study the possibilities of giving effect to the measures proposed by the Government
of India in the Draft Programme for 1955-56.
10. At the instance of the Indian Delegation to. the main session
of the FAO, a proposal for setting up an emergency famine, relief
under the auspices of the FAO for providing quick and timely relief
in case of famine was considered during 1952-58. While the scheme,
as envisaged was not finally accepted in view of the unwillingness
of the surplus countries to provide necessary finances, the principle
<pg4>
has been accepted that the FAO will, through its existing machinery,

watch famine trends in member nations with a view to convening a
meeting of its Council to decide on international co-operation for
timely assistance in case of an emergency.
11. The Government of India continued its interests in the
activities of the other specialized Agencies of the United Nations,
namely, WHO, ILO, ICAO, ITU, UPU, UMO, IMF and IBR & D.
India was re-elected to the Council of ICAO and FAO in 1953. She
was also represented on the UNICEF, Human Rights Commission,
Social Commission, Statistical Commission, Narcotic Drugs Commission, Transport and Communications Commission and the Fiscal
Commission. India also became a party to the Protocol for Limiting
and Regulating the cultivation of the Poppy Plant, and the Production, etc. of Opium.
12. The Economic Commission for Asia and the Far East with its
headquarters at Bangkok continued to render useful work, and the
Government of India have extended their co-operation to this regional
body in many matters relating to economic development, in particular, by taking an active part on the various Committees set up for
the promotion of Industry and Trade, Inland Transport, Highways,
Electric Power, Railways, Small Scale Industries and Handicraft
Marketing.
13. India was also represented in other International Conferences
such as on Public Education, Travel Organizations, Vital and Health
Statistics, Theoretical Physics, Protection of Literary and Artistic
Work, and Administrative Science. A few important International
Conferences were also held in India such as the International Legal
Conference, and the Seminar on Low-Cost Housing.
(ii) Colombo Plan
India is a member of the Colombo Plan along with other nations
of this region. While the Ministry of Finance, are the coordinating
Ministry for the Plan, the Ministry of External Affairs has to receive
and transmit requests under the Plan to and from other member
nations. This is done through Indian Missions abroad.
India played a dual role under the Colombo Plan. She received
economic and technical aid from the more advanced countries of the
Plan, notably Canada, the U.K., Australia and New Zealand, and
also extended aid to other member countries who were in need of it,
mainly countries of South Asia. Such technical aid includes the
grant of scholarships in India for Technical Training.
The Colombo Plan Conference for September-October, 1953, was
held in New Delhi.
<pg5>
(iii) Foreign Aid

India continued to receive economic and technical assistance from
the United States of America under the T.C.A. Agreement. India
also received some economic and technical assistance from Norway
under the tripartite agreement between the United Nations and the
Governments of India and Norway concerning the economic development of India.
INDIA
USA KOREA SOUTH AFRICA CHILE MOROCCO TUNISIA CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC SRI
LANKA AUSTRALIA CANADA NEW ZEALAND UNITED KINGDOM NORWAY
Sep 15, 1953

External Relations
PART II.-EXTERNAL RELATIONS
B.-INDIA'S IMMEDIATE NEIGHBOURS
(i) Bhutan
His Highness the Maharaja of Bhutan, accompanied by the
Maharani and an entourage of about 40 persons, paid a State visit
to India in January 1954. He was accorded a warm reception with
all the ceremonial and courtesy due to his status and position, and his
three weeks' sojourn in India, as a State guest, contributed substantially towards fostering a better understanding and a closer relationship between India and Bhutan.
(ii) Burma
In December, 1953, an Indian Delegation went to Rangoon to
discuss the New Burma Land Nationalization Bill, particularly the
clause dealing with the rate and mode of payment of compensation
to the land owners. The Delegation was well received. The discussions were cordial and friendly. The Burmese authorities haw
promised to consider the Government of India's views very carefully,
2. An event of special significance to both countries was the joint
tour of the Prime Ministers of India and Burma for about a week
in March/April, 1953, in the tribal areas on either side of the IndoBurma frontier in order to convince the tribal people of the great
interest both the Governments were taking in their welfare.
3. At the invitation of the Government of Burma, the Health
Minister, Rajkumari Amrit Kaur, visited Rangoon in October, 1953,

in order to participate in the Festival of Lights. The enthusiastic
reception given to her by the Government and the people of Burma
showed the close bonds of friendship and goodwill that exist between
the two countries.
<pg6>
4. Burmese Expert Missions dealing with a variety of subjects,
such as the Trade Union Movements and Organisations, Methods of
Water Sewage, Transport and Communications in big cities, TubeWell Water Supply for rural areas, and Hydro-electric and other
Engineering Projects, etc. visited India on study tours. They were
afforded necessary facilities. The Government of India are also
assisting the Government of Burma in the recruitment of engineers
for employment in Burma.
5. The Government of India gave their strong support to Burma's
complaint to the United Nations in connection with the aggression
of K.M.T. troops on Burmese territory.
6. The Government of Burma agreed to the opening of an Indian
Consulate at Mandalay.
7. A number of cases relating to the settlement of ex-Burma Government Employees claims for pension, gratuity, arrears of pay,
leave salary etc. were taken up with the Government of Burma
through the Indian Embassy, Rangoon and a few of them have been
settled.
8. About 100 Indian nationals who were rendered destitute in
Burma, were repatriated at Government expense during 1953.
(iii) Ceylon
Shri C. C. Desai on his appointment as High Commissioner for
India in Colombo in March 1953 proceeded to prepare the ground
or a discussion of the Indo-Ceylon citizenship issue by the Prime
Ministers of the two countries when they met in London for the
Coronation of the Queen.
2. The London talks between the Prime Ministers were inconclusive for while there were no great differences regarding the group
which would qualify for citizenship and that which would be enabled
to stay on in Ceylon on long-term residence permits, no agreement
could be reached regarding the third group. While India was anxious
for the settlement of an issue which had for some time affected her
relations with a neighbouring country, with which she had close ties,
no agreement which envisaged compulsory repatriation was acceptable to her.
3. Little progress was made during the summer. On the other
hand the question of illicit immigration from South India to Ceylon
assumed a form which caused further friction between the two

countries. India was as anxious as Ceylon to stop this traffic and
<pg7>
she took a series of measures towards this end which had resulted in
a visible decrease in it. On the Ceylon side, however, this continued
to be treated as a danger to national existence and therefore warranting drastic measures.
4. In October, Mr. Dudley Sennanyake resigned and was succeeded by Sir John Kotelawala. One of Sir John's earliest acts was to
investigate the question of illicit immigration himself. He visited
the Mannar Peninsula accompanied by the Indian High Commissioner. The Inspector General of Police, Madras, and the Superintendents of Police of Ramanadhapuram and Tirunelveli Districts also
met the Ceylon Prime Minister and his party at Mannar.
Subsequently, it was agreed that the Prime Ministers of India and
Ceylon should meet again some time in the New Year to continue
the discussions initiated at the London talks.
The Prime Ministers met in New Delhi from the 15th to the 18th
January and reached an Agreement which has since been ratified.
The main features of the Agreement are:(i) the two Governments reiterate their determination to
suppress illicit immigration from India to Ceylon.
Further to this end, the Ceylon Government will prepare
a register of adults not already on the electoral register.
After this register is completed; any unregistered person
whose mother tongue is an Indian language will be presumed to be an illicit immigrant from India and so liable
to deportation. Before such a person is prosecuted under
the Immigrants and Emigrants Act, the Indian High
Commissioner will be given the opportunity to satisfy
himself that a prima facie case exists, the final decision
being, the Ceylon Government's;
(ii) no change will be made in the Indian and Pakistani
(Citizenship) Act which will be administered so as to
dispose of all pending applications within two years;
(iii) registered persons will for a period of 10 years only be
placed on a separate electoral register and will send
representatives to Parliament. Their representation will
be effected in the present Parliament;
(iv) persons not registered as citizens of Ceylon will be given
inducements by the Ceylon Government to register as
Indian citizens and if they voluntarily accept these
inducements, the Government of India will give the
necessary facilities for their registration as Indian
citizens;

<pg8>
(v) the Prime Ministers will continue the practice of closeconsultation in matters affecting the mutual interests,
of their Governments.
(iv) Nepal
Relations with Nepal continued to be close and cordial. Under
various aid schemes, India extended to Nepal financial and technical
assistance as well as scholarships for students and training facilities
for technical and other personnel. The completion of the road linking Nepal and India, repair and maintenance of the Gauchar air
field at Kathmandu, survey of roads in the interior, partial completion
of an aerial survey of parts of Nepal, help in irrigation works, installation of a 200-line telephone exchange at Kathmandu were amongst
the important items under financial and technical assistance.
A senior Indian official, Shri K. B. Bhatia, was appointed as
Director of Technical Mission in Nepal.
Shri M. P. Koirala, Prime Minister of Nepal visited Delhi in July
and had consultations with the Government of India on matters of
mutual interest.
The depots maintained by the British in India for recruiting
Gurkhas were closed down during the year.
A Treaty of Extradition was signed with Nepal in October, 1953.
(v) Pakistan
The year under review marks an important period in the history
of Indo-Pakistan relations, as strenuous efforts were made, at all
levels, to settle all outstanding disputes between the two neighbouring countries, as well as to promote their co-operation in matters
of common interest. The atmosphere of peaceful co-operation so
laboriously built up in the earlier part of the year was vitiated by
the U.S.-Pakistan Military Aid Agreement, and this intervention of'
a third party has not only defeated the efforts made earlier in the
year to solve Indo-Pakistan problems in a peaceful co-operative
atmosphere but also produced serious repercussions in several South
Asian countries.
2. Prime Ministers' Talks.-The Prime Ministers of India and
Pakistan took the opportunity of their visit to London, in connection with the Commonwealth Prime Ministers' Conference and the
Coronation, to discuss. these issues in an informal and friendly
manner. Then followed two more conferences between the Prime
Ministers one in Karachi (25th-27th July) and the other in New
<pg9>

Delhi (17th-20th August), when concrete decisions were taken in
the direction of settling the outstanding problems between the two
countries, including Kashmir, canal waters, Evacuee and Trust
properties and Shrines, avoidance of propaganda and attacks in the
Press, Radio, speeches, etc. and even zonal issues like the exchange
of Cooch Behar and East Bengal enclaves and travel and border
trade.
3. In addition to these discussions, the two Prime Ministers also
remained in correspondence with each other on these and other issues
of common interest with a view to resolving them and watching the
progress in matters agreed upon between them.
4. This diplomacy of direct contact ushered in a new attempt.
at all levels to strive at the settlement directly and in peaceful
and co-operative manner of the problems, which had plagued the two,
neighbours since the Partition.
INDO-PAKISTAN CONFERENCES
5. Evacuee Property.-One of the important results of this new
approach was the discussions held in Karachi on the evacuee property and allied issues between the Advisers of the Ministries of
Rehabilitation of the two countries, assisted by the officers of the
Ministries concerned from the Jul 27, 1953 to the 13th August,
1953 thus breaking a stalemate which had presisted since June 1950,
when the last conference was held.
6. These discussions ranged over the whole field of evacuee property and evacuee claims; and the agreements reached at the conference on various issues, particularly those relating to movable property, have been ratified by the two Governments, and instructions
for their implementation have been issued in January 1954. It was
also agreed that a further conference should be held in September
1953 to discuss matters on which no agreement was reached, mainly:
those relating to agricultural property and the urban immovable
property. Unfortunately, however, this conference has not yet been
held.
7. Steering Committee.-A new approach was also made during
the period under review to settle all outstanding issues between the
two countries. The two Governments issued a directive to all their
Ministries to take up immediately with their opposite numbers those
issues with which they were concerned. In order that the two
Prime Ministers be kept fully informed of the progress made in these
discussions, the two Governments appointed an official Steering,
Committee.
<pg10>
8. The Steering Committee met in Karachi on the 14th and 15th
July, 1953 and laid down the procedure for the settlement of the
outstanding issues. The specific agenda itself included over a

hundred items,
9. Progress has, admittedly, been slow, particularly, as the problems, many of which are financial in character, have been pending
for a long time. The important contribution of the Committee,
however, has been in the devising of a machinery for the settlement
of these issues as well as in the efforts that are being made (e.g.
in the verification of claims) towards their settlement.
10. Eastern Zone Conference.-An Indo-Pakistan Conference, at
official level, was held in Calcutta from the 30th September to the
2nd October, 1953, to discuss various Eastern Zone problems. This
Conference was held in pursuance of the agreement reached by the
two Prime Ministers during their talks in New Delhi.
11. The subjects discussed at the Conference included the Exchange of Enclaves in Cooch Behar and East Bengal, the Demarcation of Boundary and the settlement of boundary disputes in the
Eastern Zone, Freedom of Movement, Border Trade, and certain important issues arising out of the Prime Ministers' Agreement of
April 1950 regarding minorities, etc. Satisfactory progress was
achieved in the solution of some of these problems, particularly in
regard to the boundary disputes and as a result, the plenipotentiaries of the two Governments accepted and signed the relevant maps
in this connection at a meeting held in Karachi on the 22nd January, 1954.
12. Experts Committees on Kashmir.-The joint communique
issued by the Prime Ministers of India and Pakistan at the conclusion of their talks in New Delhi in August 1953 stated inter alia,
that it was their firm opinion that the Kashmir dispute should be
settled in accordance with the wishes of the people of the State.
They also agreed to appoint official committees to advise them on
the preliminary issues relative to the Kashmir dispute.
13. The Indian and Pakistani official committees, accordingly,
met in New Delhi from the 21st to the 29th December, 1953 and held
informal discussions on these issues. In accordance with the agreement reached between the two Prime Ministers, the reports submitted by those committees will be considered by them directly in
order to arrive at agreements in regard to these issues.
14. Canal Waters.-The discussions which were held last year as
a result of the initiative of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development regarding canal waters between the Working
<pg11>
Parties of India and Pakistan entered their final phase during the
period under review. These discussions were held in Washington
since September 1953 for the purpose of studying, together with the,
Bank's Engineers, possible technical measures to increase the supplies of water available to the two countries from the Indus system

of rivers.
15. Other Matters.-Reference was made in the last report toPakistan's decision to replace the permit system between India
and West Pakistan by a passport-cum-visa system and also to apply
that system to the travel between East Pakistan and India which,
had hitherto been free. The decisions of the Indo-Pakistan Passport Conference, which was subsequently held in New Delhi in order
to review the working of this system and to liberalise travel restrictions as far as possible, were ratified by the two Governments during
the period under review.
16. One of the decisions of the above Conference was the agree-ment of the two Governments to open additional visa offices in
Hyderabad (Sind), Rajshahi (East Bengal), Bombay and Shillong.
17. U.S.-Pakistan Military Aid.-While the new approach mentioned earlier in this report was being pursued vigorously for the
settlement of all outstanding issues between the two countries, other
developments vitally affecting India and Pakistan were taking place
in the international field since the August talks of the two Prime
Ministers. Negotiations for military aid to Pakistan from the
U.S.A. created a new situation, which affected the Kashmir and'
other issues between the two countries and raises wider issues
relating to the peace area in this region and to the cold war antagonisms in the world. The negotiations resulted in a U.S.-Pakistan
military aid agreement. On the 25th February, 1954 the President
of the United States made a statement on this subject and also wrote
to the Prime Minister. The complications this intervention introduced in Indo-Pakistan relations and the serious consequences of
this projection of the cold war area in South Asia are reviewed in a
statement made by the Prime Minister in the House of the People
which also contains the Prime Minister's reply to President
Eisenhower's letter. (See Appendix II).
(vi) Sikkim
A State Council consisting of a majority of elected representatives came into being, and an Executive Council consisting of re-presentatives of the major parties was also formed.
The Government of India have lent the State an official to serveas Planning Officer and have from time to time deputed other officers<pg12>
to advise on specific matters. Some Sikkimese students are to be
awarded scholarships for study in India.
The Maharajkumar of Sikkim was made a Honorary Lt.-Colonel
in the Indian Army. He and the Maharajkumarani visited India as
State guests.

C. FOREIGN POSSESSIONS IN INDIA
The problem of the French and the Portuguese possessions in
India continued to present difficulties.
The French Government did not agree to India's proposal that
negotiations be started for the direct transfer of Pondicherry,
Karikal, Mahe and Yanam to India without a referendum. They
pleaded that the French Constitution did not allow such a transfer
without consultation with the people of the settlements. Acts of
terrorism and violence, directed mainly against the pro-Indian
elements, were on the increase in these territories. The veteran promerger leader. Shri Sellane Naicker, was shot at in Pondicherry and
he was forced to seek refuge in Indian territory. There are many
others like him who have migrated to India fearing violence from
lawless elements. Measures have been taken to prevent untoward
incidents on the Indian side of the border following repressive
measures in French territory.
Since smuggling has continued unabated across the border,
stringent measures have been taken to check it. Barbed-wire fencing has been erected around parts of Pondicherry and Karikal, and
other measures are under examination. In Mahe, consequent on
restrictions being placed en Indian motor vehicles, it has been
decided to divert the main roads which now pass through French
territory.
The refusal of the Portuguese Government to discuss, much less
to accept, the proposals of the Government of India regarding the
future of the Portuguese possession in India, resulted in the closing
of our Legation in Lisbon on the 11th June, 1953. All possible
measures to check smuggling, which continues on a large scale, are
being taken. Goan nationalist opinion is greatly agitated over the
repressive measures taken by the Portuguese authorities in Goa and
over the protracted delay in the settlement of the future of these
territories. A notable development during the period under review
was the new delimitation of the archdiocese of Goa. No area in
any State in India is now tinder the ecclesiastical jurisdiction of the
Archbishop of Goa.
<pg13>
D-SOUTH-EAST ASIA
(i) Indonesia
The Instruments of Ratification of the Treaty of Friendship
between the President of India and the President of the Republic
of Indonesia were exchanged in New Delhi on the 1st of May, 1953.
The Treat was registered with the United Nations Secretariat on
the 17th June, 1953.
(ii) Malaya

It has been decided that the assets of the Indian National Army
and the Indian Independence League now lying with the Custodian
of Enemy Property in Malaya are to be divided between India and
Pakistan in the ratio of 2:1. The Government of India's Representative has already approached the authorities concerned for an early
settlement, The exact value of the Government of India's share is
not yet known but when the money is realised, it will be added to
the proposed Scholarship Fund. A Trust Deed is being drafted in
consultation with the Ministry of Law for the purpose. As mentioned in last year's report, the Government of India's Representative
will be the trustee and he will be assisted by a committee in the selection of candidates for the award of scholarships.
The Government of India have decided to open two posts at Ipoh
and Penang for passport work. These will be subordinate to the
Government of India's Mission in Singapore. The formal concurrence
of the U.K. Government is awaited.
The Government of the Federation of Malaya have prepared two
pilot schemes to settle Indian labourers in Malaya on land. The
settlers will enjoy full rights over the lands allotted to them but
they will not have the right to sell.
(iii) Thailand
The Government of Thailand indicated their desire to terminate
the Formal Agreement which was signed in Singapore on the 1st
January, 1946, between them on the one hand and the Governments
of the United Kingdom and India on the other. This Agreement
had ended the state of war between Siam and U.K. and India. The
U.K, Government have already terminated the Agreement by exchange of suitable notes and we have informed the Thailand Government of our willingness to do the same.
<pg14>
E.-MIDDLE EAST
Relations with countries of the Middle East
During the year friendly relations with India's neighbours in the
Middle East were further strengthened by the conclusion of treaties
and agreements (vide Appendix V) and by the visits of delegations.
from these countries to India and from India to them. Units of the
Indian Navy paid visits to ports in Egypt, Libya, Lebanon, Syria and
Turkey.
(i) Afghanistan
At the request of the Afghan Government, a batch of 10 teachers
was sent to Afghanistan during 1953.

2. The Government of India undertook to train 79 Afghan Air
Force Personnel in various Air Force Courses in India. 64 trainees
are already receiving training and more are expected to arrive,
shortly.
3. The Government of India agreed to 'grant exemption to Tribal
Pathans from registration under the Foreigners' Act 1939 and from
taking out residential per its under the Foreigners' Order 1948.
4. At the invitation of the Afghan Government, two Indian
Hockey and Football teams and a Goodwill Mission organised bythe Delhi Schools Parliament visited Kabul during August, 1953
to participate in the Afghan Jashan Celebrations.
5. The Government of India invited a Hockey team from
Afghanistan to play friendly matches with various University teams,
in India in November-December 1953.
6. A weekly scheduled air service between India and Afghanistan,
on the route Delhi-Amritsar-Lahore-Kabul-Kandahar was introduced on the 7th November, 1953. As this service is seriously
handicapped for want of communication and meteorological facilities.
in Afghanistan, the Government of India have agreed to provide,
suitable equipment to the Afghan Government and also to post Indian
personnel in Afghanistan to operate the communication and meteorological stations at Kabul, and Kandahar for two years on the understanding that the Afghan personnel will be trained to assume
responsibility thereafter.
<pg15>
(ii) Egypt
The Prime Minister of India while returning to India after attending the coronation of Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II, stayed in
Cairo for 3 days. He was received there with great enthusiasm and
he met the leaders of the Revolutionary Council and other Egyptian
personalities.
2. At the invitation of the Government of India, an Egyptian
Military Mission arrived in India on the 23rd January 1954. The
mission visited important military installations, training establishments and development projects.
3. A Press Delegation from Egypt also arrived on the 23rd
January and was taken on a tour of the country. It left India on
the 8th February, 1954.
4. On 18th June 1953 Egypt announced a change of its Constitution
from Monarchy to Republic. The Government of India readily
accorded recognition to this change and their Ambassador in Egypt
presented his credentials to the President of the new Republic.

(iii) Iran
Dr. Syed Mahmud M.P. and Shri Anil K. Chanda Deputy Minister
of External Affairs, went on a Goodwill Mission to Tehran after their
visit to Baghdad.
2. In response to the representations of the Indian Embassy in
Tehran, the Iranian Government modified the Iranian Foreigners
Act whereby restrictions on foreign traders, including Indians
engaged in the import trade of Iran, have been removed.
3. A small party was sent in April, 1953 in order to help the
Iranian Government to combat the locust menace in the South East
Coastal area of Iran. A gift donation of Rs.15,000 was made to the
Iranian Red Lion and Sun Society through the Indian Red Cross in
aid of the victims of earthquake at Torud in February, 1953.
4. The Indian Consul-General, Shanghai, assumed responsibility
for looking after Iranian interests in that area following the withdrawal of the Iranian Consul-General from the city.
(iv) Iraq
A special mission consisting of Dr. Syed Mahmud, M.P. and Shri
Anil K. Chanda, visited Baghdad in connection with the coronation of
King Feisal.
113 M. of E.A.
<pg16>
(v) Haj
Arrangements were made for over 8,000 pilgrims to visit Hejaz on
a pilgrimage during the year. The pilgrims were provided facilities
to carry Indian currency, food rations, cloth and other articles to
Hejaz. As a special case to avoid inconvenience to the pilgrims.
during this year, they were exempted from obtaining income-tax
clearance or exemption certificates.
2. Permission was also granted to some air lines to carry pilgrims
from India to Hejaz and back on pilgrims passes.
3. Medical facilities were provided as usual to pilgrims in Jeddah,
Mecca and Medina. An ambulance car has been supplied to the
Indian Consulate-General, at Jeddah, for use by the Medical Officerduring the haj season.
(vi) Turkey
A Turkish Parliamentary Delegation visited India during theperiod 8th/31st March 1953.
2. The Turkish Parliament has reciprocated by inviting a Parlia-

mentary Delegation from India. This invitation has been accepted
by the Speaker of the House of the People and the visit of the Indian
Parliamentary Delegation will take place some time later in 1954.
(vii) Sudan
The Anglo-Egyptian Agreement of Self-Government and selfdetermination for the Sudan provided for the establishment of a
mixed election commission of seven members with an Indian Chairman. At the invitation of the British and Egyptian Governments,
the services of Shri Sukumar Sen, Chief Election Commissioner, were
lent for the purpose of organizing the new elections in Sudan as
Chairman of the Commission. The elections have come to a successful conclusion and the work of the Election Commission has been
greatly appreciated by the countries concerned.
2. The Government of India have decided to appoint a liaison
officer at Khartoum to look after Indian nationals and Indian commercial affairs, in that country.
<pg17>
F.-FAR EAST
(i) China
India's relations with China continued to be cordial and friendly.
The Government of India continued their efforts to secure representation in the United Nations for the People's Republic of China.
A delegation was sent to Peking to discuss with the Chinese Government matters of common concern relating to Tibet. Discussions
are proceeding in Peking and will soon be nearing completion.
(ii) Korea
India efforts, since June 1950, to bring about a cessation of
hostilities in Korea, bore fruit when the two sides agreed to a procedure for the repatriation of the prisoners of war--a question which
had held up the signing of an armistice in Korea for over a year.
The procedure eventually evolved followed closely the proposals
made by India and accepted by the U.N. General Assembly in
December 1952. Earlier, India had also directed her efforts towards
(1) preventing the crossing of the 38th parallel in Korea, (2) securing
agreement among the powers concerned for a conference to discuss
Korea and other Far Eastern problems and (3) preventing China
being branded as an aggressor.
India was invited by both the Commands to assume certain responsibilities under the P.O.W. Agreement. In order to help in the
restoration of peace she accepted the invitation. She provided the
Chairman and Executive Agent of the Neutral Nations Repatriation
Commission as envisaged in the Agreement. She also provided a
custodian force to guard the prisoners of war of both sides for the

period laid down in the Agreement. Lt.-Gen. K. S. Thimayya was
India's representative on the N.N.R.C. and General Thorat was in
charge of the Custodian Force. The Commission experienced many
difficulties arising from conflicting interpretations of the terms of
the Agreement and the use of coercion by P.O.W. organisations in
the Camp. The work was, however, completed on 22nd February.
The prisoners who had not opted for repatriation in the South Camp
were restored to U.N, Custody. The prisoners in the North Camp
were conducted to China and North Korea by the Chinese and North
Korean Red Cross. 88 prisoners who had expressed a desire to go to
neutral countries were brought to India where they are under Indian
protection at present, pending final settlement. Their cases have
been referred to the Secretary General, United Nations.
<pg18>
(iii) Japan
At the invitation of the Japanese Government, a Goodwill Mission
consisting of three women Members of Parliament made a three-week
tour of Japan last September.
2. During the year, discussions continued on the settlement of
claims relating to Japanese assets in India and Indian assets in Japan,
as provided for in Articles 4 and 5 of the Treaty of peace between
India and Japan.
3. On an approach made in November 1952 by the Government
of Japan, the Government of India conveyed their agreement, on
humanitarian grounds, to the grant of clemency-to the 12 Japanese
Class 'A' war criminals who had been sentenced, in 1948, by the
International Military Tribunal for the Far East. In 1953, the Governments of the U.S.A., U.K., and others represented on the Tribunal
adopted the view that India had forfeited her right to participate in
the clemency proceedings as she was not a signatory to the Treaty
of Peace with Japan signed at San Francisco in 1951. They further
maintained that Pakistan, as a party to the Treaty, and as a successor
to British India, was eligible to exercise a vote. The Government
of India regarded this interpretation as wholly unwarrantable and
lodged a strong protest with the Governments concerned. As these
Governments have maintained their former stand, it has been decided to reiterate India's views on the subject.
G.-AFRICA
(i) British East Africa
India's interest in British East African territories arises from (a)
her general attitude towards colonialism and her desire to see subject
people achieve their independence, (b) her membership of the U.N.
whose charter lays down that non-self-governing territories should
achieve political advancement, (c) her membership of the Commonwealth, which consists of a number of races, (d) her general desire

for peace, which can be jeopardised by large-scale racial conflicts,
and (e) finally, the presence in these territories of appreciable numbers of people of Indian origin.
2. The main event in British East Africa during 1953 was the
continuance of the Emergency proclaimed in Kenya in October 1952
following the outbreak of the violent activities of the Kikuyus and
the repressive measures taken to counter them. There was however
no sign of the situation being brought under control. Military
successes have not resulted in any easing of the tension; they have
<pg19>
only succeeded in driving the hard core of the Kikuyu into the dense
forests. There have been attacks on "loyal" Africans and a general
deterioration of race relations in Kenya.
3. In relation to this emergency, the Government of India have
made it clear that, while they unreservedly condemn violence
repression alone offers no solution and that efforts should be made
to deal with the root causes of the outbreak of violence by the Kikuyu
tribe, and for the removal of their just grievances and numerous
disabilities.
4. An important objective of policy during the year was to impress
upon the local Indian community in Kenya the need for their cooperating with other racial groups in the area and for adopting a
positive attitude towards measures necessary to establish racial peace
so that a really multi-racial society can be built up on the basis of
goodwill and tolerance. There are grounds for believing that this
policy is achieving success.
5. The settler elements in Kenya who do not appreciate the policies
and objectives of the Government of India had sought to build up
the bogey of India's imperialist designs on Africa. These attempts
have not succeeded in antagonising the African population against
the Indians, although there have been isolated attacks on Indians
and Indian property.
(ii) Ethiopia
Relations with Ethiopia continued to be friendly.
2. Under the scheme, formulated at the request of the Ethiopian
Government, for permanent settlement of Indian agriculturists in
Ethiopia the first batch of 8 Indian peasant families reached Ethiopia
in October 1953. The Ethiopian Government have allotted them
about 96 acres of land per family and are giving them certain
facilities.
3. The Indian Navy ships DELHI, RANJIT and TIR visited the
Ethiopian port of Massawa in August, 1953, and were cordially
received.

(iii) Central Africa
The scheme of federating the three British Central African territories of Nyasaland, Northern Rhodesia and Southern Rhodesia was
finally put into effect in 1953. The Government of India Were greatly
<pg20>
interested in the scheme and had made clear their view that Federation should only be promulgated after consulting and obtaining the
definite consent of the African people of the territories. This was
considered of particular importance because African opposition to
the scheme had been strongly expressed. The Government of India
were also concerned for the future of the Indian population in the
three territories and at the likelihood of the future Federal Government adopting for the Federal territory the ban on Indian immigration already existing in Southern Rhodesia.
2. The Federation was, however, established in November 1953 in
spite of the opposition of the Africans. The Government of India
have urged that necessary steps should be taken for the removal of
the disabilities from which non-Europeans, including Indians, suffered
in the Federated territory and for ensuring that no fresh disabilities
are imposed, particularly with regard to immigration into the
Federation.
(iv) West Africa
Developments in West Africa presented a totally different picture
of progress towards the ultimate goals of African political and social
emancipation. In Nigeria and particularly in the Gold Coast, there
exist factors more favourable to such progress than in Central or
East Africa: for example, the absence of racial tensions due to the
presence of white settler communities a higher lever of African
education and greater adjustment among Africans to the pattern of
life of modern nation states, and stronger economies, etc. The degree
of political development especially in the Gold Coast has enabled
African leaders to co-operate in the task of accelerating development
towards self-government.
2. To India, this situation with its potentialities is of the highest
importance and the first task was therefore to establish permanent
contacts with West Africa by opening an Indian Mission there. This
was done in the second half of 1953. A Commissioner accredited to
the Gold Coast and Nigeria, with headquarters at Accra was
appointed.
(v) South Africa
The South African Government took further steps in 1953 to
implement the Group Areas Act. The Land Tenure Advisory Board
held hearings in several cities and towns. The Indian community
on the whole steadfastly continued to oppose the principle of racial

segregation explicit in the Act and took a firm stand against its
implementation.
<pg21>
2. The South African Government enacted the Immigrants Regulation. Amendment Act in 1953. The Act bans entry into South Africa
of wives and children of South African nationals of Indian origin
with the exception of certain specified categories of wives and
children who are eligible for entry into South Africa up to the 9th
February 1956. As this measure constitutes a breach of the Cape
Town Agreement of 1927, the Government of India strongly protested
against it. The South African Government, however, proceeded to
have it passed into law.
3. The questions of the treatment of people of Indian origin in
South Africa and Racial situation have been dealt with in para. 3 of
Part I of this Report.
H.-SOUTH PACIFIC REGION
Australia and New Zealand
India continued to receive economic and technical aid from the
Governments of Australia and New Zealand under the Colombo
Plan.
Mr. R. G. Casey, the Australian Minister for External Affairs, and
Mr. Marshall, the New Zealand Minister for Health, attended the 5th
session of the Commonwealth Consultative Committee of the Colombo
Plan held in New Delhi during October, 1953.
The Commonwealth Finance Ministers' Conference was held at
Sydney in January 1954. Its object was to facilitate consultations
among Commonwealth countries in regard to the economic policies
that should be followed by the sterling area countries in order to
strengthen their balance of payments and to promote the expansion
of world production and trade. The Indian delegation to the conference was headed by Shri C. D. Deshmukh, Minister for Finance.
A medium sized 14-year old elephant named 'Bhavani' was given
by the All India Women's Conference as a gift to the women and
children of New Zealand.
Fiji
On the 14th of September, 1953, an earthquake of unprecedented
intensity rocked Suva, the capital of Fiji. A message conveying the
deep sympathy of the Government of India was sent by the Prime
Minister of India to the Governor of Fiji.
Under the Cultural Scholarship Scheme of the Government of
India, about three Indian students from Fiji come to India every year
to pursue studies in various subjects.

<pg22>
I.-EUROPE
The Prime Minister attended the Queen's Coronation in June, and
after it the Conference of Commonwealth Prime Ministers.
In the larger context of the world situation, India's policy of
working actively for peace was assisted by her Commonwealth connection and especially by the support which the U.K., because of her
particular interests in the Far East and in Southern and SouthEastern Asia, was able to give to India's efforts in this direction. Inother areas, however, there was a certain amount of divergence
between Indian views and those of the U.K., particularly in colonial
Africa.
Negotiations are being carried on with the Governments of Italy
and the Netherlands for the conclusion of debt settlement agreements.
Trade talks were also held, and, trade agreements concluded, with
the U.S.S.R., Bulgaria and Czechoslovakia. The existing trade agreements with Western Germany, Norway and Poland have been
extended.
Shri K. P. S. Menon, Indian Ambassador to the U.S.S.R. and
concurrently accredited as Ambassador to Poland and Minister to
Hungary paid a visit to Poland and Hungary during the year.
Certain grievances of the Indian merchants in Gibralter have been
enquired into.
Visits of distinguished Indians to Europe
The Prime Minister took the opportunity of his visit to Londonlast summer to call a conference at Burgenstock, in Switzerland, of
the Heads of Indian Missions in Europe and the U.S.A. The conference was held from the 17th to 20th June 1953.
The Vice-President, Dr. Radhakrishnan, paid an informal visit to
Belgium, Holland, Austria and Yugoslavia in the summer of 1953.
Rajkumari Amrit Kaur, Health Minister, visited Geneva, Prague
and the U.S.S.R. during the months of May and June 1953. During
this visit she toured some of the Central Asian Republics.
Dr. P. S. Deshmukh, Minister for Agriculture headed the Indian
Delegation to the Seventh Session of the F.A.O. Conference held in
Rome in November 1953. He also visited Milan and thereafter
Yugoslavia.
<pg23>
Shri D. P. Karmarkar, Minister for Commerce headed the Indian

Delegation to the G.A.T.T. Conference held in Geneva in October
1953. He also visited West Germany, Italy, and Egypt.
Shrimati Indira Gandhi visited the U.K., Switzerland and the
U.S.S.R. in 1953. She also visited some of the Central Asian
Republics.
J.-THE AMERICAS
(i) United States
The Vice-President of India, Dr. S. Radhakrishnan, went on a
tour of Europe, the United States of America and Canada during May
to July, 1953. He spoke on India's policies and other matters to large
audiences.
Shri Anil K. Chanda, the Deputy Minister for External Affairs,
visited some parts of the United States and Canada during the latter
part of 1953.
A number of important, and influential personalities including
Congressmen and Senators from the United States visited India.
The 1946 Bilateral Air Agreement between India and the United
States of America was found to affect adversely the legitimate
interests of In an Airlines. The discussions held between the representatives of the Governments of the two countries in the summer
of 1953 proved inconclusive and notice of the termination of the
agreement was given on the 14th of January, 1954. It is expected
that a fresh Agreement will be negotiated which will safeguard
Indian interests.
Negotiations for a treaty of friendship and establishment which
have been carried on for some time past with the representatives of
the Government of the United States are continuing.
(ii) Canada
Relations between India and Canada were extremely cordial
and there has been a free exchange of views between the two
governments at high levels on various international problems.
<pg24>
(iii) Latin America
Relations with Latin American countries continued to be friendly
and there has been appreciable co-operation between them and
India's Delegation to the United Nations, particularly on racial
questions.
(iv) British West Indies
India is interested in the Caribbean chiefly because of the sub-

stantial number of persons of Indian origin settled there. For
example, there are 204,000 Indians in British Guiana where they form
46 per cent. of the population; in Trinidad there are 243,000 forming
37 per cent. In Jamaica there are 25,000; in Surinam (Dutch Guiana
over 60,000.
Indians came to the Caribbean as indentured labour and it was to
a large extent their hard work which developed the plantation
economies of the West Indian Islands. In many of the territories
e.g. British Guiana, the Indians live in great poverty and at a low
standard of life. Almost everywhere they are with the passing of
time rapidly losing their national and cultural identity. India's policy
is to encourage Indians abroad to assimilate themselves in the
countries of their domicile and to work for the emergence of multiracial or plural societies functioning democratically. At the same
time it is felt that a renewal of contacts between India and Indian
culture and these scattered populations of Indian origin will
strengthen them and will assist them to emancipate themselves.
(v) British Guiana
The promulgation in April of a new Constitution based on
universal adult suffrage passed barely noticed by the world. In
October, however, British Guiana was in the news for a few weeks
when the Governor dismissed the elected Ministers and suspended
the Constitution to the accompaniment of landings from a British
cruiser and allegations of Communist conspiracy.
The People's Progressive Party, a party based on plantation labour
and the trade unions of Indian and African Guianese workers and
the intelligentsia, had decisively won the election and secured all the
6 elected ministerships. Conflicts arose within the Party itself and
between the Party and the Head of the Government which led to
the dismissal of the ministers.
These events aroused interest in India where they were regarded
as symptomatic of certain trends in the colonial areas of the world.
This interest was heightened by the visit to India, after a visit to the
U.K., of Dr. Jagan and Mr. Burnham, two of the leading elected
Ministers who had been dismissed.
<pg25>
K.-DISTINGUISHED VISITORS FROM ABROAD
During the year under review, India attracted a large number of
distinguished visitors from abroad, including heads of governments,
ministers and eminent public men. In many cases they were the
guests of the Government and they had an opportunity of meeting
leading personalities in this country, as also to see some of the
development projects and other nation-building activities.
2. Among those who visited India were Mr. S. G. Holland, Prime

Minister of New Zealand; Mr. M. P. Koirala, Prime Minister of Nepal;
Mr. Mohammed Ali, Prime Minister of Pakistan; Sir John Kotelawala,
Prime Minister of Ceylon; Mr. L. S. St. Laurent, Prime Minister of
Canada; Mr. M. Djilas, then Vice-Chairman of the Government of
Yugoslavia; Mr. Richard M. Nixon, Vice-President of the, United
States of America; Mr. John Foster Dulles, Secretary of State of the
U.S.A. Mr. J. M. A. H. Luns, Foreign Minister of the Netherlands;
Mr. Sunarjo, Foreign Minister of Indonesia; Lord Swinton, Secretary
of State for Commonwealth Relations of the U.K.; Mr. James Sinclair,
Minister of Canada; Mr. M. A. Raschid, U Kyaw Nyein and Thakin
Kyaw Dun, Ministers of Burma; Marshal Shah Wali Khan of
Afghanistan; Mr. R. A. Butler, British Chancellor of the Exchequer;
Admiral of the Fleet Sir Rhoderick Mc Grigor, First Sea Lord of the
United Kingdom; Mr. C. R. Attlee; Mr. A. Bevan; Mr. C. F. Cobbold,
Governor of the Bank of, England; Mr. Adlai Stevenson, and
Mr. Emmanuel Celler.
3. These visits show the increasing interest which is being taken
by other countries in Indian developments and their desire to understand India's attitude on world problems.
4. State hospitality was also extended to the following visitors:
His Imperial Highness Prince Abdur Reza Pahlavi of Iran, who visited
India on a Shikar tour; The Maharajkumar of Sikkim; Leaders of
trade delegations from Burma and Ceylon; Mme. Li Teh-Chuan,
Chinese Health Minister and Mme. M. D. Kovrigina, Soviet Deputy
Health Minister, who visited the country on the invitation of the
Government of India; Dr. Ralph J. Bunche, Mr. James Torres-Bodet
and other distinguished delegates who participated in the Gandhian
Seminar; some of the delegates to the Consultative Committee of the
Colombo Plan, including Mr. R. G. Casey, Minister for External
Affairs of Australia; some of the leading delegates to the International Legal Conference; Mr. Luther Evans, Director-General of
U.N.E.S.C.O.; Mr. Georges Picot, Assistant Secretary-General of the
United Nations; the Afghan Cultural Delegation, headed by Dr. Ali
Ahmed Khan Popal, Afghan Deputy Minister for Education; and the
Soviet Cultural Delegation, headed by Mr. Nikolai N. Bespalov, Soviet,
Deputy Minister for Culture.
INDIA
BHUTAN USA BURMA CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC SRI LANKA UNITED KINGDOM PAKISTAN
NEPAL LATVIA BANGLADESH PORTUGAL INDONESIA REPUBLIC OF SINGAPORE THAILAND
EGYPT LEBANON LIBYA SYRIA TURKEY AFGHANISTAN IRAN IRAQ CHINA SAUDI ARABIA
SUDAN KOREA NORTH KOREA JAPAN KENYA ETHIOPIA NIGER NIGERIA GHANA SOUTH
AFRICA AUSTRALIA NEW ZEALAND FIJI ITALY THE NETHERLANDS BULGARIA NORWAY
SLOVAKIA GERMANY POLAND HUNGARY SWITZERLAND AUSTRIA BELGIUM YUGOSLAVIA
CZECH REPUBLIC CANADA JAMAICA
Jul 27, 1953

Administration
<pg26>
PART III-ADMINISTRATION
L.-ORGANISATION OF THE MINISTRY
(i) The Set-up A Headquarters
The Secretary General is responsible for supervision and coordination of the work of the Ministry as a whole. The Foreign
Secretary deals with the Far East, the Middle East, the North East
Frontier and Nepal, Continental Europe, the Americas, and the
United Nations Organisation. He is also in charge of Administration.
The Commonwealth Secretary deals with the Commonwealth countries (except Canada), South East Asia and Africa. The Director of
the Historical Division is also in charge of the Research. and intelligence Sections of the Ministry and of the Library. There are
five joint Secretaries, nine Deputy Secretaries and 24 Under
Secretaries. The work is divided among these officers on a functional
as well as on a regional basis.
The Ministry has 53 sections, 17 of which are administrative and
the others territorial or technical. About 500 officials are employed
in these sections and there are 46 Section Officers to supervise their
work.
There are no organised divisions at present, but groups of branches
have been placed under some Joint Secretaries and Deputy Secretaries. One Joint Secretary deals with Nepal and the North East
Frontier, Tibet and South-East Asia, in addition to emigration problems; another deals with North and South America, the United
Nations, Africa and Foreign Technical aid. The Chief of Protocol,
who is an officer of the rank of Joint Secretary deals with the United
Kingdom and Ceylon in addition to protocol work and the issue of
passports. The fourth Joint Secretary deals mainly with Europe and
the fifth is Joint Secretary, Administration. Other areas have been
placed in charge of Deputy Secretaries. Two of the Deputy Secretaries are employed on administration work, one on external publicity
and one on work relating to international conferences and the United
Nations Organisation. The Deputy Secretary, External Publicity
Division, is assisted in his work by a Director, and four Information
Officers.
Proposals for re-organisation of the Ministry and redistribution of'
the work among rationally constituted divisions, each under a
relatively senior and experienced officer, are under consideration.

The Historical Division continued to produce during 1953-54 a
number of useful papers on different topics for the Ministry, some
at the request of the Ministry and others at their own initiative.
<pg27>
The Library concentrated on the work of organising its collection
on scientific lines. Begun in 1949 on the formation of the HistoricalDivision, this work is now reaching its final stages. An interim'
catalogue for maps was prepared. Supply of serial publications was
regularised with the help of all-purpose check cards. Work has also
begun on improving reference and bibliographical service. The
Library gets over 450 periodicals of different kinds, many of which
are given free by other institutions. Some of these are regularly
circulated among the staff of the Ministry.
(ii) The Indian Foreign Service
The Indian Foreign Service has crossed the formative stage and
new entrants are now selected on the results of an annual competitive
examination which is open to university graduates within the ages
of 21 and 24. Recruits on first appointment as probationers spend a
few months at the Indian Administrative Service Training School in
Delhi where, along with cadets of other services, they receive instruction in subjects connected with the administration of the country,
and in Indian History, Economics and Hindi. They are also encouraged and assisted to acquire some understanding of India's cultural
heritage and of current political and sociological problems. At the
end of this course they are sent to a university abroad for one
academic year. During this time they study international affairs,
international law, history and economics, and also begin the intensive
study of a foreign language. On leaving the university they spend
some months in the country whose language they are studying.
Thereafter, they receive about a year's training at the headquarters
of the Government, in the Ministries of External Affairs, and
Commerce and Industry, to gain familiarity with some aspects of
their future work. A period of service at the headquarters or in a
mission abroad in the rank of an Attache may follow. At the end
of the three year probationary period, the young officer embarks on
his career as a member of the Foreign Service after crossing the final
hurdle of a departmental and a language examination. The present
schedule of training, though sufficiently extensive as well as intensive, does not give the trainees an adequate opportunity of acquiring
personal knowledge of the people of India and of the local problems.
In a democratic India, the importance of such basic knowledge is
obvious. Steps are now being taken to introduce a system whereby
young IFS probationers will be attached to the districts where they
will get intimate knowledge of the Indian scene as well as the background of our history and culture.
The present permanent sanctioned strength of the Indian Foreign
Service is 172. This number is not sufficient to meet all the requirements of our expanding diplomatic and consular representation

<pg28>
abroad. The leave reserve which is included within this number also
is not adequate and it is not possible to grant leave without keeping
important posts unfilled. The question of expansion of the cadre
strength is receiving attention.
The present number of officers appointed permanently to the
Indian Foreign Service, including probationers and those taken on
deputation from other established services, is 144. Twenty posts of
Heads of Missions are held by non-officials and 18 posts are held by
officers temporarily borrowed from other services. Ten IFS officers
are holding temporary posts or are on deputation to ex-cadre posts.
Seven candidates were recruited to the Indian Foreign Service
through the open competitive examination held by the Union Public
Service Commission in 1952. Of these, one is receiving training in
the U.S.A.; five in the United Kingdom and one has been attached
to the Middle East Centre for Arabic Studies at Shemlan (Lebanon).
FOREIGN SERVICE B.
Owing to the complicated nature of the work an officer has been
specially appointed to deal with the setting up of the IFS(B). While
the ground work has been prepared, important issues, which require
consultation and agreement between the Ministries of External
Affairs, Home Affairs, and Finance, are still, under detailed examination. These issues, which have already been informally discussed
with the Ministries' concerned and about which formal discussions
will be initiated in the near future, are:(i) Formation of a cadre of the Service.
(ii) The setting up of a U.P.S.C. Board for selection for the
initial constitution of the Service from(a) persons already in Government Service (C.S.S.),
(b) Ad hoc recruits already in service, and
(c) Indians locally employed in our Missions abroad.
(iii) Maintenance of the Service.
(iv) Framing of rules for the B Service on the same lines as;
the rules for the I.F.S.(A).
2. It is hoped to complete action and to form the I.F.S.(B) cadre
within the next few months.
(iii) Missions Abroad
South-East Asia.-Shri B. F. H. B. Tyabji has been appointed
India's Ambassador to Indonesia.
<pg29>

Middle East.-Shri Bhagwat Dayal was appointed Ambassador in
Afghanistan in the place of Wing Commander Rupchand who handed
over charge in May 1953 to Mr. G. L. Puri, Charge d' Affaires adinterim.
Shri K. M. Panikkar, India's Ambassador in Egypt, was appointed
a member of the States Reorganization Commission. He has been
succeeded by Nawab Ali Yavar Jung, Indian Ambassador in Buenos
Aires.
The Legation of India in Iraq was raised to the level of an
Embassy with effect from the Jul 29, 1953. Mr. Khub Chand,
Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary of India to Iraq
continues to hold charge of the Indian Embassy in Iraq.
Mr. John A. Thivy, who has been appointed as India's first
Minister to Syria, presented his credentials on the 14th January 1954.
Shri A. S. Dhawan succeeded Shri A. B. Thadani as the Government of India's Commissioner in Aden.
Messrs. D. Sareen and K. L. S. Pandit were appointed Vice-Consuls
at Jalalabad and Kandahar, respectively.
The opening of a trade agency in Muscat in order to look after
Indian, interests in that area is under consideration. The First Secretary at Baghdad paid periodical visits to Bahrein and Qatar and
maintained contacts with Indian nationals there.
The Commercial Section of the Embassy at Tehran was reopened
in April, 1953. Shri M. K. Roy assumed charge of the Section as
Second Secretary (Commercial) in February, 1954.
Far East.-Consequent on the Chinese Government's refusal to
accord recognition to the Indian Consulate-General at Kashgar on
the ground that Sinkiang was a closed territory, it was decided to
close down the Mission. The staff returned to India in November
1953 after handing over to the Chinese Government, for temporary
custody, all movable and immovable properties of the Government of
India in Kashgar. Almost all Indian traders had already left
Sinkiang before the Mission was closed.
An Indian Commission was opened in Hongkong in March 1953.
Africa.-Towards the end of the year, the Governments of India
and Ethiopia decided to raise their legations in Addis Ababa and
New Delhi to Embassy status.
<pg30>
An Indian Mission was established during the second half of 1953
in West Africa. A Commissioner accredited to the Gold Coast and

Nigeria with headquarters at Accra was appointed.
There are about 10,000 persons of Indian origin in Madagascar.
An Indian Consulate-General was set up there in 1952. India's
Commissioner in Port Louis (Mauritius) is concurrently accredited
as Consul-General to Madagascar. In 1953 a Vice-Consul was posted.
to Tananarive, the chief city.
South Pacific Region.-General K. M. Cariappa was appointed as
High Commissioner for India in Australia. He is concurrently
accredited to New Zealand.
Shri N. V. Rajkumar was appointed as Commissioner for India in
Fiji. (Suva).
Continent of Europe.-Shri Dharma Vira has been appointed
India's Ambassador to Czechoslovakia.
Shri A. C. N. Nambiar was appointed Minister of India with the
personal rank of Ambassador to Denmark, Finland and Sweden with
headquarters at Stockholm in succession to Shri M. J. Desai
Shri K. P. S. Menon, India's Ambassador to the U.S.S.R., was concurrently accredited as Ambassador to Poland and Minister to
Hungary.
In Switzerland, Shri Y. D. Gundevia succeeded the late Shri
Asaf Ali as Minister on the 22nd May 1953. He was concurrently
accredited as India's Minister to Austria and the Vatican on the 9th
September 1953, and 19th December 1953 respectively. The status
of the Legation at Berne has since been raised to that of an Embassy
and Shri Gundevia has been appointed India's first Ambassador to
Switzerland.
Mr. Juho Savio, a Finnish national, who has been closely connected with Indo-Finnish Social and cultural organisations, was appointed
Honorary Consul-General of India in Finland.
Shri Kewal Singh Chowdhry succeeded Shri R. K. Tandon as
Consul-General at Pondicherry on 14th November 1953.
Proposals are under consideration for the appointment of a
separate Ambassador in Yugoslavia.
A Consulate-General was opened at Geneva in July 1953 with
Shri S. Sen as Consul-General.
<pg31>
The Americas.-The question of establishing diplomatic relations
with Cuba was raised by the Government of that country and is at
present under consideration.

Proposals were being considered in 1953 to strengthen the organisation of our Commission in Trinidad and to extend the Commissioner's jurisdiction and the scope of his activities. These proposals
will be implemented in 1954.
Shri B. N. Nanda, Deputy Secretary in the Ministry was appointed
to succeed Shri A. M. Sahay as Commissioner.
Accommodation.-Continued shortage of accommodation in most
of the capitals of the world has created difficulties for Indian Missions.
The Government of India have, however, been able to acquire land
at Ankara on which they propose to build a Chancery and an
Embassy. They have also bought a building for the Indian Embassy
in Tokyo.
2. In regard to accommodation problems mentioned in the last
report, less progress has been made than was expected. A squatter
continues to occupy the building site for the mission in Singapore.
Steps are being taken to have him ejected. Work on the building,
in Karachi has not yet started, but plans for the building, which will
incorporate as many Indian characteristics as possible, will shortly
be completed. In Nairobi, more progress has been made. Houses
have been built for the staff, the Registrar and the Information
Officer; the First Secretary's house is nearing completion; and tenders
for the construction of the Commissioner's house have been invited.
3. The Government of India are about to buy a building in Peking
from the Hong Kong and Shanghai Bank, which will, after alterations,
be used as a combined Chancery and Embassy. It is also intended
to construct new houses and extensions to existing buildings in
Kathmandu. As this is likely to take some time, expenditure on this
project will be spread over two to three years.
4. There are a number of other proposals under consideration.
As funds are limited, a system of building priorities relating the
problem of accommodation shortages to rents and currencies is being
worked out. It is intended that priority should be given to places
where Government have to pay the highest rents, or where payment
has to be made in hard currency. Construction will, as far as possible,
be carried out departmentally so that the buildings may have an
Indian character in accordance with plans prepared by experts of
the C.P.W.D. This will have the further advantage of reducing cost
of construction.
113 M. of E.A.
<pg32>
(iv) Expenditure
The expenditure of this Ministry falls under four Demands, viz.
(i) External Affairs, (ii) Tribal Areas, (iii) Chandernagore and (iv)
Miscellaneous.

Total expenditure under all these heads in 1953-54 according too
the revised estimates is expected to amount to Rs. 967.35 lakhs.
Included in this amount are certain items of expenditure which are
either fixed in nature or do not relate to External Affairs proper
These are: 1.

Tribal areas including the Assam Rifles, and
provision for Economic Development Schemes
(Rs. 29.31 lakhs) and Community Projects (Rs.
8.10 lakhs) in the North East Frontier
Rs. 377.45

2.

Payments to neighbouring States and expenditure
of the Chandernagore Administration
Rs. 48.26 l

3.

Contribution to the U.N.O. and Delegations
thereto
Rs. 72.33 l

4.

Expenditure on demarcation of boundaries between
India and Pakistan, Recovery of abducted
Women and Children and implementation of
Prime Ministers' Agreement
Rs. 15.74

5.

Passport and Emigration Establishments

lakhs

akhs

akhs

lakhs
Rs. 13.48

lakhs
6.

Miscellaneous expenditure e.g. that on pilgrims
and evacuees, repatriation of Indians, loss
by exchange etc.
Rs. 5.08 la

khs
If the special items enumerated above totalling Rs. 532.34 lakhs
are excluded, the expenditure which may be described as direct
expenditure on External Relations works out to Rs. 435.01 lakhs.
This includes Rs. 51.42 lakhs on the High Commissioner's office,
London and Rs. 77.85 lakhs on pay and allowances of officers and
staff and other expenses at the Headquarters of the Ministry.
Excluding the expenditure at headquarters and in the High,
Commissioner's office, London, the expenditure incurred on ourMissions and Posts abroad comes to Rs. 305.74 lakhs. Spread over 73
Missions of which two (Lisbon and Kashgar) were closed during the
year, the average works out to Rs. 4.19 lakhs per Mission. Out of'
this expenditure an, average of Rs. 1.16 lakhs per Mission was spent
<pg33>
on pay and allowances of Heads of Missions and other officers.
Expenditure on rent for office and residential accommodation alone

worked out to Rs. 39.45 lakhs.
Every effort was made to cope with the increasing volume of
work without a corresponding increase in the number of senior
officers. The closing down of the Legation at Lisbon and the
Consulate-General at Kashgar, vacancies in establishments abroad
and in various departments of the North-East Frontier Agency, are
expected to yield a saving of Rs. 44.56 lakhs, but the bulk of this
saving will be used to cover additional expenditure on account of
expansion of Diplomatic and Consular Services India's Delegation to
Neutral Nations Repatriation Commission and Development Work
in the North-East Frontier Agency area.
M.-TRIBAL AREAS
North-East Frontier Agency
There has been an extension of administration in the tribal areas
and new administrative centres were set up. Since 1947, nearly
16,000 square miles of territory with a population of about 800,000
people have been brought under administration.
The administrative units in the North-East Frontier Agency were
readjusted and a Regulation promulgated in January 1954 by which
the entire area was divided into the following six frontier divisions:1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

Subansiri,
Kameng,
Tirap,
Siang,
Lohit,
Tuensang.

Schemes for the development of the Agency were brought within
the scope of the national Five-Year Plan. A Community Development Block and a National Extension Service Block were assigned
to it, at an estimated total cost of about Rs. 11 lakhs. A sum of
Rs. 39 lakhs was provided for the development of agriculture and
forestry, and the extension of education and medical services. The
construction of new roads was provided for at an estimated cost of
Rs. 102 lakhs. Air strips were constructed and sanction given for the
establishment of Communication Flights of the Indian Air Force at
Jorhat. The Air Force continued to carry out supply-dropping
operations in the area.
<pg34>
Government scholarships will be awarded to selected residents of
the Agency.
The administrative cadres of the North-East Frontier Agency are
being reorganised. Special Selection Boards were set up to recruit
officers for administrative posts in the Agency from the existing

services and other sources. The officers selected were put through
a course of training in Delhi and at Shillong before being posted
to their individual charges.
The opportunity afforded by the Republic Day celebrations was
utilized to invite tribal representatives from the Agency to visit New
Delhi and other places of interest.
In October 1953 there was an unfortunate incident at Achingmori
in the Tagin area, in which a small party of civil officials and Assam
Rifles was set upon by tribesmen. Some persons were killed and
several held as hostages; arms and ammunition were also lost. Three
columns were later sent to the area and they successfully completed
their mission by January 1954. They met no organized resistance
and casualties on both sides, were very small. The hostages and the
arms were recovered and many of the offenders captured. Two new
administrative centres were established and the Indian officials made
friendly contact with the tribes. Essential supplies for the officials
as well as for the local people were dropped by air.
N.-CHANDERNAGORE
A former French possession, Chandernagore, was transferred to
India de jure on the 9th June, 1952, by a Treaty between India and
France. Since then it has been administered, as an interim measure,
under regulations made by the President in accordance with Article
243 of the Constitution. In November 1953 the Government of India
appointed a Commission of Inquiry consisting of Dr. Amaranath Jha
to ascertain the wishes of the people of Chandernagore and to make
recommendations about the future administrative status of the territory. Dr. Jha's report is under examination by the Government of
India in consultation with the Government of West Bengal.
O.-CONSULAR AFFAIRS
The Consular Division of the Ministry which was set up 2 1/2 years
ago has taken over several functions from other Divisions, but the
transfer of all consular functions is not yet complete. Compilation
and Revision of chapters of Consular Instructions; advice to Indian
Missions abroad on the interpretation of these instructions as well as
<pg35>
on matters relating to marriage laws, registration of births and deaths
of Indians etc., and other legal and quasi-legal matters; legalization of
documents such as powers of attorney, affidavits and the like; transmission of Letters of Request, Commission and other judicial documents for service abroad; and the securing of information about the
deaths of Indians abroad, the properties left by them and their transfer to the legal heirs-all form part of the functions of the Consular
Division. Besides, the Division keeps watch over the working of the
Consular Offices and the levy of fees for different consular and
notarial functions performed by them. Repatriation, relief payments, recoveries, extradition, and deportation are also matters which

receive the attention of the Consular Division, besides the residual
work connected with the schemes of financial assistance to evacuees
from Burma, Malaya, etc., during World War II and the evacuee
orphans.
2. During the year under review, four chapters of Consular
Instructions have been prepared for print and one is in the Press
already. Ninety-three documents such as powers of attorney,
affidavits etc., were legalized and sent to the Foreign Missions in
India and Indian Missions abroad. Fifty-nine judicial documents,
e.g., Letters of Request and Commissions, received through the State
Governments for service abroad were sent to the Indian Missions
concerned. 80 cases of death of Indian nationals abroad were reported; in eighteen of them properties were transferred to the legal heirs
of the deceased and action is in progress in the rest. Assistance was
given to Indians in Indonesia, Indo-China, and Morocco to send
remittances to India for the maintenance of their dependants. Not
much progress, however, was made in effecting recovery of the
advances paid to Indian nationals stranded in Europe. during the
Second World War. There were 28 cases of repatriation during 1953
from countries like Iraq, Jedda, Egypt, Malaya, Switzerland etc., and
an expenditure of Rs. 4,000 was incurred on this account. Only
Rs. 400 out of this could be recovered as the repatriates were almost
destitute. Relief payments were advanced in 10 cases by the Indian
Missions abroad and recoveries effected in 8 of them.
3. The total amount advanced under the Government of India's
Scheme of Financial Assistance to Evacuees from Burma, Malaya,
etc. (war zones) was about Rs. 7,17,97,000, including a sum of
Rs. 85,000 paid in territories which are now in Pakistan. A sum of
approximately Rs. 19,01,141 has been recovered and a sum of approximately Rs. 1,45,89,722 has had to be written off up-to-date. The policy
has been to effect the maximum amount of recovery in the minimum
period of time, with due! consideration to the capacity of the evacueces
to repay without causing them undue hardship. In West Bengal,
<pg36>
recovery and writing off work is being attended to by the Branch
Secretariat of this Ministry. Temporary staff for the purpose has
had to be employed in some States which has since been disbanded
except in Madras.,
4. Under the scheme for the long-term maintenance of evacuee
children from Burma, Malaya and other places whose parents died
while trekking to India during the Second World War, 235 orphans
are being looked after by respectable institutions or individuals in
various parts of the country under the supervision of the State Governments. The orphans are maintained till they reach the age of 18
and efforts are then made to see that they are suitably settled in life.
Half the cost of the scheme is met by the Centre and the other half
by the State Government concerned.

P.-EMIGRATION
The provisions of the Indian Emigration Act, 1922, continued to be
enforced on the same basis as during the previous year. While the
emigration of "unskilled" labour was not permitted, except in the case
of specified categories and under the special or general orders of
exemption by the Government of India, emigration of "skilled"
workers was allowed under the provisions of the Act. The largest
contingent of "skilled" labour recruited by any one organisation
during the year, was the recruitment of nearly 600 workers by the
Aden Refinery Project.
2. After the introduction of the new Immigration Regulations in
Malaya and Singapore on the 1st August 1953, there was considerable reduction in the number of Indians proceeding to these territories. The new regulations imposed severe restrictions on the entry
of foreigners into Malaya and Singapore. Wherever necessary, representations were made by the Representative of the Government
of India in Malaya to the authorities concerned in order to alleviate
hardships to the people of Indian origin.
3. As a result of the reduction in the number of people going to
Malaya, the demand for deck passages on ships sailing to Malaya
has fallen considerably. Consequently, of late, there have been no
complaints of black-marketing and other malpractices on the part of
passage brokers, touts, etc., which were rampant when the traffic to
Malaya was heavy.
4. There was an appreciable fall in the incidence of illicit emigration to Ceylon. The Government of India have accepted most of the
<pg37>
recommendations made at the conference of the Central and the
Madras Government officials, held at Madras on the 17th November
1952, for the prevention of such illicit traffic. The following are some
of the important measures taken to combat illicit emigration:(a) The Protector of Emigrants at Tuticorin has been
appointed Special Officer in charge of the operations
against illicit emigration. A special police unit has
been placed at his disposal. He has been conducting
raids with the help of the Police, Customs, Port and
other local officials for arresting potential illicit
emigrants, touts, boat-owners and others responsible
for promoting this illegal traffic.
(b) Due publicity is being given about the dangers of
illicit emigration by means of handbills, posters and
pamphlets, and by radio broadcasts.
(c) A system of coastal patrolling has been started by the
Madras police authorities.

(d) Periodical conferences of the police officials of
Madras and Ceylon are to be held to review the
situation and take coordinated action.
5. The scheme which the Government of British North Borneo
had of inviting about 10,000 Indian families for permanent settlement
in that country and which was accepted in principle by the Government of India, was subsequently given up by the Government of
British North Borneo. No proposal for any large scale emigration
of Indians to any other country is under consideration.
6. The Philippine Cabinet having adopted a resolution on the 2nd
October 1951 to the effect that the Philippines should admit for
permanent residence only those aliens whose countries grant a reciprocal privilege to Filipinos, the immigration quota for Indian
nationals desiring to enter the Philippines for permanent residence
remained suspended during 1952. As a result of considerable efforts
and protracted correspondence with the Government of the
Philippines, the immigration quota for permanent residence in the
Philippines was restored to the Indian nationals who were otherwise
eligible under the provisions of the Philippine Immigration Act. This
relieved the Indian community in the Philippines of many difficulties
and hardships. The immigration quota of Indians is fixed at 50 per
annum.
<pg38>
Q.-INFORMATION SERVICES
Factual information and detailed accounts of the country's
domestic and foreign policies and programmes are made available
abroad by the Information Services of India which is the technical
side of the External Publicity Division of the Ministry. The internal
and external activities of the country are projected to other parts
of the world through the written and spoken word, newspapers,
periodicals, pamphlets and brochures, books, photographs,
cinematographic films and cultural exhibitions. Erroneous
impressions of the country and misrepresentations of its policies,
domestic and foreign, created by imperfect or distorted news and
accounts are corrected by the supply of correct information. Visits;
of press delegations from other countries are arranged to enable
people of other lands to gain first hand knowledge of India. TheInformation Service of India also reports regularly and continuously
the state of public opinion abroad on India and her policies.
2. There are in all 30 Information Posts in 26 countries which are
centrally guided by the External Publicity Division at New Delhi. Of
these, 5 posts at Colombo, Rome, The Hague, Salisbury, and Beirut
were opened during the year under report. The Missions at Jedda,
Manila, and Port of Spain were provided during the year with skeleton
publicity staff. The opening of an additional Information Post in
U.S.A. and the creation of new ones in Switzerland, Mauritius and

Fiji where there is a large population of Indian origin is under
consideration.
3. Twentysix of the Information Posts have facilities for reception
of Morsecast transmissions issued daily from Headquarters. These
are subsequently issued through bulletins or regular news sheets by
the field posts in English and/or the Language of the country in
which they operate, the frequency of such issues depending on local
requirements. This is supplemented by detailed background material
and feature articles accompanied by photographs or ebonoids according to need; during the year 5,500 ebonoids and 50,000 photographs:
were distributed through Indian missions abroad.
4. Thirty-four thousand copies of pamphlets on special topics prepared at the Headquarters, were widely distributed through the
Missions abroad. Regional posts also brought out pamphlets for
local distribution. These included publications in Arabic on
"Mahatma Gandhi", "Prime Minister of India", and "Constitution of
India", Persian, Indonesian and Turkish publications on "Muslims in
India" and Japanese and German booklets entitled "About India".
Publications which are awaiting release or which are in the press
include "India in 1953" and a collection of the Prime Minister's;
speeches on Africa.
<pg39>
5. Sets of books dealing with a variety of subjects concerning thecountry, numbering in all 8,592 volumes, were supplied to the Missions,
abroad either to constitute the nucleus of a library in the newly established Information Posts, or to augment the stock already existing,
in their libraries. These included sets of books by and about.
Mahatma Gandhi, totalling 1,108 volumes. Further, sets of Mahatma
Gandhi's "My Experiments with Truth" and the biography. of'
Gandhiji written by Kr. Tendulkar, making in all 1,449 volumes weresent to the Missions for presentation to foreign libraries and institutions.
Books of elementary standard and light literature in Hindi, weresupplied to twentysix selected Missions. Tamil books were also.
supplied to selected Missions in neighbouring countries. As an experimental measure mobile cinema vans which will also serve as
travelling libraries have been sanctioned for the Missions in British
West Indies, Mauritius and Fiji. It is proposed to supply such vans,
to some more Missions next year.
6. 1,273 prints of selected news-reels and documentary films e.g.,
"National Physical Laboratory", "Music of India", "Century of
Progress", "Wealth of Our Waters" etc., produced by the Films Division of the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, were despatched during the year to forty-six Indian Missions abroad. These wereexhibited by the Missions and also loaned for exhibition to educational and cultural institutions on a non-commercial basis. A
further 800 prints are under preparation for despatch. Besides these,

copies of four feature films which were purchased last year were
put into circulation overseas through Indian Missions on a noncommercial basis.
R.-CULTURAL RELATIONS
Various steps were taken during the year to make people in
foreign countries acquainted with Indian art and culture and
to establish closer cultural relations between them and India. These,
consisted mainly of:(a) Exhibitions of Indian paintings and photographs in foreign
countries.
(b) Visits of Indian dancers and musicians abroad and similarvisits by foreign artists to India.
(c) Exchange of cultural delegations.
(d) Award of scholarships to foreign students to study in India.
<pg40>
An exhibition of Indian paintings organised by the All India Fine
Arts and Crafts Society and sponsored by the Government of India
visited the U.S.S.R., Poland and the Federal Republic of Germany
during the last quarter of 1953. The exhibition was held in several
cities in these countries and attracted a large number of visitors.
Collections of Indian paintings were exhibited also in Kuala
Lampur and in Goa.
A collection of paintings brought together by the Calcutta Arts
Academy was sent to U.S.A. and Canada at the instance of the Government and was exhibited in several centres in these two countries.
A collection of photographs by Raymond Burnier depicting Indian
Art and Architecture was displayed in the Victoria and Albert
Museum, in London. Thereafter the collection was exhibited in
various cities in Argentina; requests for the further exhibition of
this collection received from other South American countries are
under consideration.
An exhibition of Indian paintings and objets d' art organised by
Mr. Subha Tagore is on its way for an extensive tour of countries in
the Middle East, Europe and South America.
Eight thousand copies of a calendar for 1954 containing reproductions, in colour of Indian paintings on art paper were distributed in
foreign countries through the Indian Missions.
Fine specimens of Kashmir arts and crafts and Indian saris an
brocades were put on show at Ankara and Istanbul.

Several Indian Missions abroad also organised exhibitions in connection with the Republic Day celebrations and other suitable
occasions.
A set of Indian musical instruments was presented to a school for
the blind at Colombo, Ceylon. A visit to Ceylon by Miss Shirin
Vijifdar and her party was sponsored. The recitals which were well
attended were in aid of the Ceylon Estate Workers Education Trust
which grants scholarships to the children of plantation workers for
higher studies. An amateur dance troupe was assisted to proceed to
Goa, where it participated in the Republic Day celebrations. An
Iranian Ballet toured India in May 1953 with the assistance and cooperation of the Indian Council of Cultural Relations.
About four thousand gramophone records of Indian music were
distributed to 60 Indian Missions abroad which used them for gramophone recitals and musical evenings and loaned, them to Radio
<pg41>
stations for broadcasting and to other interested institutions. These
included classical and other songs, vocal and instrumental, Karnatik
and North Indian, as well as records of Mahatma Gandhi's post-prayer
speeches.
There was an exchange of cultural delegations between Iran and
India, and between Afghanistan and India. A cultural delegation
from the Soviet Union headed by the Soviet Dy. Minister of Culture
toured India during the year.
The Cultural Scholarship Scheme which was initiated in 1949 to
promote friendly cultural relations between India and the Asian and
African countries was continued in 1953. 100 scholarships were
awarded. For financial reasons, it was impossible to meet the
expanding demand and increase the number beyond 100. Since 1949,
339 scholars have been admitted for studies in India, including
several women.
To increase the facilities for African students from East and
Central Africa, the Governments of Parts 'A' and 'B' States were
asked to give free education in their States to two African students
each. The response has been encouraging; this scheme will be
developed in 1954.
Another scheme was sanctioned in 1953 for giving 25 scholarships
to Africans for training in cottage industries in India. Only one of
these scholarships could be awarded in 1953; the scheme will be
developed in 1954.
In December 1953, over one hundred African students in India
met in a conference in Delhi which was inaugurated by the Prime
Minister.

At the invitation of the Indian Council of Cultural Relations, Mr.
Oginga Odinga, a prominent Kenya African leader paid a 7-week
visit to India early in 1953.
All India Radio started broadcasts in Swahili during the, year.
The Delhi University is examining the question of starting a
School of African Studies in order to enable Indians to study African
history and culture.
Mr. T. N. Ramachandran, Deputy Director of Archaeology in India,
delivered lectures on cultural subjects of mutual interest to India
and Thailand under the auspices of the Chulalongkorn University.
These lectures were arranged in Thailand in furtherance of the Government of India's policy of improving cultural contacts with
neighbouring countries.
<pg42>
Scientists from Burma, France, Italy, Japan, Norway, Pakistan,
Switzerland, United Kingdom, U.S.S.R., and U.S.A. attended the 41st.
session of the Indian Science Congress held at Hyderabad in January
1954. A representative of the UNESCO and two representatives of
the F.A.O. also attended the Congress.
S-RECOVERY OF ABDUCTED WOMEN AND CHILDREN
The Abducted Persons (Recovery and Restoration) Act, 1949 as
amended by the Abducted Persons (Recovery and Restoration)
Amendment Act 1952-No. LXXVII of 1952-is valid to the end of
February 1954. It is proposed to extend the Act to the end of
February 1955 because a large number of abducted persons still
remain to be recovered on both sides.
The table below shows the recoveries made both in India and'
Pakistan since the problem arose in 1947. As far as the recovery
in India of Muslim Abducted Persons is concerned, the results,
achieved in 1953 were satisfactory.
MusliAb ucted Persons recovered in India.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------From
6-12-47
to
1950
1951
1952
1953
Total
31-12-49
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------Restored to relatives
in Pakistan
12,552

1,413

1,974

1,162

2

,040

19,141

Restored to relatives
in India
926
2,000

344

276

328

126

----------------------------------------------------------------------TOTAL RECOVERIES
12,896 1,689
2,302
1,288
,966
21,141
----------------------------------------------------------------------Non-Muslim Abducted Persons recovered in Pakistan.
Arrived in India
324
8,684

6,272

871

743

2

474

Restored to relatives
in Pakistan
31
25
30
31
30
147
----------------------------------------------------------------------6,303
896
773
505
354
8,831
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------T-DIPLOMATIC AND CONSULAR MISSIONS IN INDIA
There was no change in the number of countries having diplomatic representation in India. The present number is 42. The
Legation of Iraq was raised to the status of an Embassy. 6 new
foreign Consular Posts were established in India-2 at Bombay. 3
at Calcutta and 1 at Madras. 3 foreign Consular Posts were temporarily closed during the year. The total number of foreign Consular
Posts in India at the end of the year was 81.
NEPAL
CANADA USA CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC INDIA LEBANON INDONESIA AFGHANISTAN
EGYPT IRAQ SYRIA OMAN QATAR IRAN ETHIOPIA GHANA NIGER NIGERIA MADAGASCAR
MAURITIUS AUSTRALIA NEW ZEALAND FIJI NORWAY SLOVAKIA DENMARK FINLAND
SWEDEN POLAND HUNGARY SWITZERLAND AUSTRIA YUGOSLAVIA CUBA TURKEY JAPAN
REPUBLIC OF SINGAPORE PAKISTAN KENYA CHINA HONG KONG UNITED KINGDOM
PORTUGAL FRANCE BURMA MOROCCO PHILIPPINES ITALY SRI LANKA SPAIN GERMANY
MALAYSIA SEYCHELLES ARGENTINA THAILAND
Jul 29, 1953

Appendix I EXTRACTS FROM SOME OF THE POLICY
STATEMENTS OF THE PRIME MINISER
<pg43>
APPENDIX I
EXTRACTS FROM SOME OF THE POLICY STATEMENTS OF
THE PRIME MINISER
"I visited Karachi and had long and profitable talks with the
Prime Minister of Pakistan. At the end of those talks we issued a
joint statement in the course of which we stated. that "the independence and integrity of the two countries must be fully respected,
each country having full freedom to follow a policy of its choice
in domestic as well as international affairs." "At the same time",
the statement continued, "The Prime Ministers are convinced that
the interests of both countries demand the largest possible measure
of co-operation between them and that, therefore, every effort should
be made not only to resolve the existing Indo-Pakistan disputes,
but also to promote goodwill and friendship between the two
countries. They consider this essential to progress in both countries
and to the promotion of the welfare of the common man, which is
their primary concern". By this statement our Government stands
and I have no doubt that our people generally are firmly behind
this policy. It is a matter of deep regret to me that some sections of
the people of Pakistan as well as some in India occasionally
challenge this basic policy. Only those who have little understanding of the world today and of our respective countries and have no
vision at all, can think in terms of conflict between the two
countries which geography, history and a. common past inevitably
bring together. We are firmly resolved to pursue this policy and
not to be diverted from it, even though some people may be swept
away by the passion and prejudice of the moment".
(House of The People-Aug 17, 1953).
"The mere fact of a number of countries, even though they
might not be militarily powerful or financially strong-that do not
accept the inevitability of war, do not want to do anything which
helps war, do not, if I may say so, with all respects, talk about
security and peace, in terms of heavier and heavier armaments,
will act as a brake; if there are such countries, they are, in some
measure, a brake on war. Therefore, those people who seek peace,
who welcome the idea that certain parts on the world's surface do
not want war, and do not propose to go in for war, even though
others go in for it, should have welcomed our policy. But anyhow,
whether they welcomed it or not, this was a policy which can be
understood and appreciated by our neighbour countries in Asia.
They did appreciate it. If it is so, if military aid comes from the
United States of America to Pakistan, obviously there is a breach
in that peace area, it is not an insurance of peace that it brings
<pg44>

about, but it lessens the chances of peace, undoubtedly and I have
no doubt in my mind..............
"That is why we have drawn the attention of the Pakistan.
Government to this matter. Because I would have thought, as a
matter of fact, that in a matter of such an import, in such a matter,
it would have been desirable for the Pakistan Government even
previously to keep us informed of what they were doing-whether,
or not they accept our advice-because it is a matter which concernsneighbour countries. But if they did not do-so, it would be utterly
wrong for us not to inform the Pakistan Government of our reactions, and all the possible consequences of
that action. Therefore,
in all friendliness, and at the same time, in all firmness, we have
pointed out these consequences.....................
(House of The People-23rd December 1953)
"We have had many troubles, many conflicts with Pakistan, and
some continue. We have found it difficult to resolve them. Nevertheless, whether the conflict has continued or not, it has been our
firm policy, and I do submit, that is the only logical and reasonable
policy for our country to have to work for friendly relations with
Pakistan because I see no future, - no good future, for India orPakistan except on the basis and foundation of friendly relations..."
(House of The People-23rd December 1953).
"We have declared that we should be parties to no war even if
unhappily a war breaks out. We had hoped that other Countries,
more especially the countries of Asia which were situated more
or less like us, would also follow that policy because it was to their
advantage as well as to the larger advantage of Asia. There wasno intention on our part and no effort on our part to impose anypolicy of ours on other countries of Asia but inevitably because of
our past background, common experience and the like in this matter,
there was common thinking. It did not require many arguments
from us to make a country, let us say, like Burma or any other of
our neighbouring countries to think like us. They themselves, by
their own process of reasoning and experience, arrived at the same
conclusion. Indeed, I should imagine that most countries would
arrive at that conclusion unless pressure of circumstances forced
them not to so, as a matter of fact, a number of countries of Asiawere more or less following- that line of policy. Also, in the
United Nations, there grew up gradually an Arab-Asian or AfricanAsian group of nations, conferring together and even co-operating
together. There was no binding link between them; sometimes
they did not co-operate too. Nevertheless this habit of consulting
together grew. It was a good thing. It was an encouragement
<pg45>
We, in our own quiet way, worked for and looked forward to this
area, if I may say so, as the 'No-war area' in Asia. Naturally we,
hoped that Pakistan which as in a sense, similarly circumstanced
as we are would belong to that area also. Now, if any military aid
comes to Pakistan from the United States it is obvious that Pakistan
drops out of that area. Whatever else may happen, Pakistan lines
up with a major group of Powers. Previously she might have felt,
inclined that way but it now becomes an actual fact because one
does not receive free military aid without that particular conse-

quence
war, as
India's
that if
borders

following. That is a serious thing. It means that the
it is called, comes to Pakistan and, therefore, comes to,
borders on the West and the East, on both sides. It means
a hot shooting war developed it also comes right upto the
of India.

"Now it is obvious that any such development in the shape of
aid from the United States of America to Pakistan affects all the
problems we have to deal with Pakistan because the new context
the new environments and the new background change all these
problems. Whatever they may be, one has to treat them afresh
with that new background. That is one consequence, as well as
others.
"I do not myself-and I want to make it perfectly clear-I do hot
myself look forward to any race in armaments between Pakistan and
India. Obviously I am not going to have a race with the United States
of America or with any other great country. Is it possible? Nor is
it our mood or our practice, and if some. people think in terms of
that, it is completely wrong. We propose to continue to be friendly
to these countries but at the same time to continue to carry out thepolicy of our choice and not any other people's choice".
(Council of States-24th December, 1953).
"Now, look at another aspect of this question. Obviously if
military aid comes to Pakistan from the United States of America,
it upsets all kinds of balances, the present existing equilibrium and
all that. Now, we have been considering many questions with
Pakistan in the past, gradually-rather warily-going step by stepforward towards some agreement on this issue or that issue. Now,
all those questions were considered in a particular context which
existed then, and which exists-if you like-even today. Now all
that context changes; all that background and context change when,
one of the greatest Powers of the world sponsors military aid to.
<pg46>
Pakistan. And again, I say it is a matter of little consequence how
much that aid is; it is the sponsoring of aid that makes all the
(difference in the world .....
..................
(House of The People-23rd December 1953).
"Why did we go to Korea? Was it to gain honour, glory and
prestige that we went to Korea? We went to Korea because, if we
did not go to Korea, the first thing was that there would have been
no truce, no cease-fire in Korea, the war would have gone on with
all the dangers of that war expanding. Regarding our going or not
going, I cannot speak, of course, with the prophet's certainty. but as
we saw the problem then and subsequent events have justified it
the only way at that time to get that Resolution through in the United
Nations first, and subsequently between the two Commands, was
for India to fill a gap, which no other country could fill. I am not
talking in terms of any virtue of India but it is a factual statement
that no other country was agreeable to fill that particular gap. If
that gap was not filled, then the agreement did not come off. If that
agreement did not come off, then the cease-fire did not take place
and that terrible war went on. I am not going into the merits of
the war-that presents a different story. Therefore we had to face

the problem with the utmost reluctance. We accepted the job and
I would accept it not once, but a hundred times again, because I
owe a duty not only to my country but to others."
(House of The People-24th December 1953).
"Also, if I may say so, in these matters which are no doubt
matters of world importance and in which every country of the
world is entitled to take interest, nevertheless, geographically and
otherwise, many of these matters relate to a part of Asia and it does
not seem becoming to me that problems which affect Asia and which
are happening in Asia should be disposed of largely by ignoring,
Asia. That seems to me to be a wrong approach and that approach
is one which will produce results less and less as time goes on.
Even now, it is becoming a rather difficult approach; tomorrow and
the day after it will become still more difficult till it becomes quite
impossible. It is not proper that these vital problems of Asia,
should now be disposed of as if the countries of Asia do not count
very much. Now, our approach has been and is that if we can help
we are willing to do so; if some responsibility is cast upon us which
we cannot evade without endangering that very help that we are
trying to give, then We cannot evade that responsibility. It was in
pursuance of this that we accepted certain heavy responsibilities in
Korea.
<pg47>
"You may as well blame the world in its present context as
blame the United Nations. It just represents what we are in India
and the other sixty or seventy countries which are put together in
all kinds and shapes. Certainly let us try to think of how to facilitate the working of the United Nations so that it may be able to
fulfil what has been laid down so well in the Charter in such noble
language: Let us do that Let us-if you like-vary its constitution if by doing that it will help, us or help the world. But ultimately it is not a question of varying that constitution but of dealing with the problems of the world which are reflected in the
United Nations.
"So let us-not condemn the United Nations. Let us not just turn
it down, because it is struggling with very great problems; it is
struggling with human nature, and what is worse, the nature of
independent States, independent national States none of which
rants to give up any of its sovereign powers, And so long as you
have that you will have to face all kinds of difficulties".
"I am merely putting it to the House not in a spirit of complaint
nor of making any demand or anything of that kind-as I said we
have decided not to stand for membership of the Security Councilbut merely to point out that it is going to be less and less feasible
in future for any world organisation to leave Asia out of account
or to consider Asia as only a playground for their politics, or for
their conflicts. Inevitably Asia is not going to listen to this kind
of treatment.
(Council of States-23rd September 1953).
"We have sought the friendship of all countries. We have not
agreed with what many other countries may have said or done, but
we have tried to proceed on a basis of friendly relations with all

countries, and certainly with a great country like the United States
of America. And we have thought that it was highly desirable for
India and the United States to have friendly and cooperative relations. We have received a certain measure of help from America
for some of our schemes. We welcome it, although we have made
it always clear that we cannot accept any help to which any string
is tied or any conditions are attached."
(Council of States-24th December, 1953).
"It is not a question of expressing an academic opinion, but
realizing that one of the basic facts of the world situation is this,113 M of E. A.
<pg48>
that the United Nations which presumes to be a universal organisation in this world has ceased to be that because of this first major
fact that a great. country (China) which is obviously a running
country, obviously a stable and strong country is not represented
there."
(House of The People-18th February 1953).
"Well, so far as we are concerned, we believe that war is not
inevitable, it is a dangerous possibility. Sometimes it becomes a
probability-but it is not inevitable and therefore to the utmost and
to the end one should work for its avoidance. One can work for
avoidance apart from the political or diplomatic field, essentially in
the human, psychological field, in so far as we can. Naturally, we
cannot do much but we try to do what we can in this matter.
"Our test is always this. Does this help in lessening the tensions
of today or does it add to those tensions? That is our major test.
If it adds to these tensions we are against it. If it worsens the
situation we are against it. If it somehow helps, if it goes far, that
is all the better. So that is the test that we apply whether in the
United Nations or elsewhere".
(House of

The People-18th February, 1953).

"It is quite impossible for us as a Government and as a People
to tolerate any foreign foothold in any part of India.
"After all the way of peaceful approach, though it may appear
rather humdrum, brings results more speedily and, what is more,
does not leave any trail of bitterness which is left among nations
even after they have won a victory.
"Therefore we have proceeded in regard to these foreign establishments firmly, I think, in the declaration of our policy-in the
sense of pursuing that policy in a quiet way at the same time
peacefully and not trying to take, what I would call, measures that
are not peaceful. We are perfectly alive to the questions relating
to them. We are constantly giving thought and taking such action
as may appear expedient within the four corners of that peaceful
approach.
"We have said quite, clearly in this House

that if war breaks out

anywhere-it does not matter between whom it is so far as we are
concerned, we will not admit the right of any part of India, including
<pg49>
those parts that are called foreign establishments in India, to be
associated with that war in any way. I want to make it perfectly
clear that if these places are used, directly or indirecly, in connection
with a war, we shall have to take action to stop that. I say that not,
obviously, in any sense as a threat, but because it is well to make
clear some things so that others may be aware of the consequences
of some action they might conceivably indulge in."
(House of The People-17th September 1953).
"Our long struggle for freedom in this country led us to an understanding of, and a deep sympathy with, similar struggles in other
countries. That was. the basis of our policy, even when we worked
for our own independence. That policy inevitably continues today
not only as an inheritance from the past but as an understanding of
the present. Peace, it has been said, is indivisible. So also is
freedom, and no structure of world peace can be built on the denial
of freedom to countries and large masses of people. It is a matter
of deep regret to us that this basic fact is not recognised and given
effect to in many countries.
"Even apart from the question of political freedom, the question
of racial discrimination and suppression has become one of the outstanding problems of today. We have no desire to interfere in the
affairs of other countries just as we are not prepared to tolerate any
interference with our country. But there are certain factors which
override national boundaries and which affect the well-being of the
human race. Among these factors is this question of racial discrimination and the suppression of one race by another. That is an
affront to the men and women of Asia and of Africa, as well as to
every sensitive human being. I have, therefore, ventured to express
in clear language what we think of this inhumanity and complete
denial of what the Charter of the United Nations stands for. I am
certain that, in saying so, I have echoed the feeling of every single
person of the 360 millions who inhabit this country as well as of
hundreds of millions of other peoples in Asia and Africa. We can
never tolerate this idea of racial discrimination and inequality."
(House of The People-17th August, 1953).
"We Are concerned with the fate of hundreds and thousands of
these people who, though no longer citizens and nationals of India,
were in the past connected with India, about whom we have various
agreements and assurances and the like, and therefore we have a
certain responsibility with regard to them, although they are not our
nationals.
<pg50>
"I do not mean to say that we are very virtuous and all that, and
other countries are not, but we have rather gone out of our way to
tell our own people in Africa, in East Africa, or in some other parts
of Africa, that they can expect no help from us, no protection from
us if they seek any special rights in Africa which are not in the
interests of the people of Africa.

"Now, that is a Very clear statement which
sometimes, naturally,
has not been welcomed by our people in East Africa, many of the
merchant classes there who have done well, but it is our firm policy
and I want them-our Indians abroad - to realise it, and I want others
to realise it too. And if that is our firm policy, we cannot actually
remain quiescent when things happen in various parts of Africa
which, apart from affecting Indians as such, might create dangerous
world situations. In Africa, one sees today in its extremest form
both racial discrimination and domination, and the old colonialism
at work."
(House of The People-17th September, 1953).
PAKISTAN
USA INDIA

BURMA

CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC

KOREA

CHINA

Aug 17, 1953

Appendix II PRESIDENT EISENHOWER'S STATEMENT AND LETTER TO THE PRIME MINISTER
ON U.S.-PAKISTAN MILITARY AID

<pg51>
APPENDIX II
PRESIDENT EISENHOWER'S STATEMENT AND LETTER TO THE
PRIME MINISTER ON U.S.-PAKISTAN MILITARY AID AND
THE PRIME MINISTER'S STATEMENT IN PARLIAMENT.
Text of letter from President Eisenhower (Delivered by Ambassador
Allen on Wednesday, February 24)
My dear Mr. Prime Minister,
I send you this personal message because I want you to know
about my decision to extend military aid to Pakistan before it is
public knowledge and also because I want you to know directly from
me that this step does not in any way affect the friendship we feel
for India. Quite the contrary. We will continually strive to
strengthen the warm and enduring friendship between our two
countries.
Our two governments have agreed that our desires for peace are
in accord. It has also been understood that if our interpretation of
existing circumstances and our belief in how to achieve our goals
differ, it is the right and duty of sovereign nations to make their own
decisions. Having studied long and carefully the problem of opposing possible aggression in the Middle, East, I believe that consultation
between Pakistan and Turkey about security problems will serve
the interests not only of Pakistan and Turkey, but also of the whole
free world. Improvement in Pakistan's defensive capabilities will

also serve these interests and it is for this reason that our aid will
be given. This Government's views on this subject are elaborated
in a public statement I will release, a copy of which Ambassador
Allen will give you.
What we are proposing to do, and what Pakistan is agreeing to
is not directed in any way against India. And I am confirming
publicly that if our aid to any country, including Pakistan, is misused and directed against another ins aggression, I will undertake
immediately, in accordance with my constitutional authority, appropriate action, both within and without the United Nations to thwart,
such aggression. I believe the Pakistan-Turkey collaboration agreement which is being discussed is sound evidence of the defensive
purposes which. both, countries have in mind.
I know that you and your Government are keenly aware of the
need for economic progress as a prime requisite for stability an
strength. This Government has extended assistance to India in
recognition of this fact, and I am recommending to Congress a
<pg52>
continuation of substantial economic and technical aid for this reason.
We also believe it in the interest of the free world that India have a
strong military defense capability and have admired the effective
way your Government has administered your military establishment.
If your Government should conclude that circumstances require
military aid of a type contemplated by our mutual security legislation, please be assured that your request Would receive my most'
sympathetic consideration.
I regret that there hag been such widespread and unfounded
speculation on this subject. Now that the facts are known, I hope
that the real import of our decision will be understood.
I am, my dear Mr. Prime Minister,
Sincerely,
DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER.
Text of a statement by President Eisenhower on February 25
On February 19, Turkey and Pakistan announced their intention
to study methods of achieving closer collaboration on various matters,
including means designed towards strengthening peace and security.
This Government welcomed this move and called it a constructive
step towards better ensuring the security of the whole area of the
Middle East. The Government of Pakistan has now asked the United
States for grant of military assistance.
I have said repeatedly that regional
groupings to. ensure security
against aggression constitute the most effective means to assure
survival and progress. No nation can stand alone today. My report
to the Congress on Jun 30, 1953, stated that we should strengthen
efforts towards regional political, military and economic integration.
I, therefore, under the authority granted by the Congress, am glad
to comply with Pakistan's request, subject to the negotiation of the
required Mutual Defense Assistance Program agreement. This Government has been gravely concerned over the weakness of the
defensive capabilities in the Middle East. It was with the purpose

of helping to increase the defense potential in this area that Congress,
in its last session appropriated funds to be used to assist those
nations in the area which desired such assistance, which would piedge
their willingness to promote international peace and security within
the framework of the United Nations, and which would take effective
collective measures to prevent and remove threats to peace.
<pg53>
Let me make it clear that we shall be guided by the stated purposes and requirements of the mutual security legislation. These
include specifically the provision that equipment, materials or services provided will be used solely to maintain the recipient country's
internal security, and for its legitimate self-defense, or to permit it
to participate in the defense of the Area of which it is a part. Any
recipient country also must undertake that it will not engage in any
act of aggression against any other nation. These undertakings
afford adequate assurance to all nations, regardless of their political
orientation and whatever their international policies may be, that
the arms the United States provides for the defense of the free
world will in no way threaten their own security. I can say that
if our aid to any country, including Pakistan, is misused and directed
against another in aggression, I will undertake immediately, in accordance with my constitutional authority, appropriate action both within
and without the United Nations to thwart such aggression. I would
also consult with the Congress on further steps.
The United States earnestly desires that there be increased
stability and strength in the Middle East, as it has desired this same
thing in other parts of the free world. It believes that the aspirations
of the peoples in this area for maintaining and developing their way
of life and for realizing the social advances close to their hearts will
be best served by strength to deter aggression and to reduce the
fear of aggression. The United States is prepared to help in this
endeavour, if its help is wanted.
Text of the Prime Minister's statement in the House of

the People

on 1st March 1954
Mr. Speaker, Sir, I am grateful for this opportunity to make a
statement in regard to a matter which is no doubt in the minds of
most Members of this House as well as many people in the country.
This relates to a recent letter which I received from the President
of the United States of America, together with a copy of a statement
which was issued by him. I received the letter on the 24th February,
and both that letter and the statement, I believe, appeared in the
public Press on the morning of the 26th February. Hon. Members
have seen those and I do not propose to read them, but for facility
of reference, I am placing copies of that letter and that statement,
as well as a copy of my reply, on the Table of the House. The reply
has not yet been published. It is a relatively brief reply and so I
shall read it out to the House.
<pg54>
"Dear Mr. President,
I thank

you for
in Delhi

your personal message which your Ambassador
handed to me on February 24th. With this

message was a copy of your statement in regard to the
military aid being given by the United States to
Pakistan. I appreciate the assurance you have given.
You are, however, aware of the views of my Government
and our people in regard to this matter. Those views
and the policy which we have pursued, after the most
careful thought, are based on our desire to help in
the furtherance of peace and freedom. We shall
continue to pursue that policy.
That is the reply. I should like to add a few more words in regard
to this matter. In his letter, President Eisenhower, as the House
knows, gave certain assurances, and stated what his objectives or
motives were. I have at no time in this House challenged any individual's or any country's motives-I cannot go behind their minds
We have to consider facts as they are. So far as President Eisenhower
is concerned; on my. part I am convinced that certainly he bears no
ill-will to India; he wishes well of India, and that he would not take
any step to injure India, It is not a question of motives, but rather
of certain results which inevitably follow certain actions, and it has
seemed to us in regard to this matter of military aid to Pakistan,
that the results Were bound to be unfortunate. It is stated that the
aid is merely meant to strengthen Pakistan so that it can defend
itself against aggression and also to ensure security and peace. It
is not clear to me what kind of aggression and from what quarter it
is feared. I am unable to see any danger of aggression on Pakistan
from any quarter; but perhaps to throw light on this question, the
Pakistan delegate to the United Nations, Mr. Ahmed Bokhari, only
a day or two ago spoke in New York, and made it clear as to what
his fears were. He said: "We want the guarantee that the two
biggest countries in Asia will leave us alone." He referred to China
and India. Now, it is not again clear to me how China is going to
invade Pakistan, whether it "is going to come over the Karakoram
Pass into Pakistan, or how it is going to get there. As for India, it
is not necessary for me to remind the House a; to what our attitude
has been. I may say a little about it later.
So far as ensuring security and peace are concerned, one need not
go into any argument about it. It is a fact that since this aid has
been announced there has been greater insecurity and greater tension.
Whatever, as I said, the motives may be, the result, the fact, is, there,
that there has been in India, in Pakistan, an upsetting of things as
they were and a sense of in security. In other countries in Asia, West
<pg55>
and other, there has also been a sense of the situation becoming, if
I may say so, "fluid", and a certain apprehension as to what the
consequences might be.
Now, so far as India is concerned, the House will remember that
for the last three years we have repeatedly offered a No-war Declaration to Pakistan. A No-War declaration is what is called in
perhaps more precise language a Non-Aggression Pact. Now we have
offered that repeatedly and Pakistan, has been repeatedly rejecting
that for whatever reason it may be. If there had been such a NoWar declaration or Non-Aggression Pact, obviously that would have
eased tension between the two countries and in surrounding areas
and produced a greater feeling of security in both countries. It
would have helped us to solve the problems that face us. Now it

is in the context of this rejection of our proposal for a No-War declaration that we have to view this military aid from the United States
to Pakistan. I venture to say that it is not easy to even imagine any
aggression on Pakistan as things are, either from that great country
China, or from India, regardless, I say, of motives about it. I am
looking at the barest physical possibilities of the matter.
How then does this question of aggression arise and is made a
pretext for this kind of military aid being given, from Pakistan's
side? I am wholly unaware of any possible reason which I can
understand. For my part, I would welcome the strengthening of
Pakistan, economically, even militarily, in the normal sense, if they
build themselves up I have no complaint. But this is not a normal
procedure. This is a very abnormal procedure, upsetting normality,
and in so far as it upsets normality it is a step away from peace.
Now, the President of the United States has stated that if the
aid given to Pakistan is misused and directed against another in
aggression, he will undertake to thwart such aggression. I have no
doubt that the President is opposed to aggression. But we know
from past experience that aggression takes place and nothing is
done to thwart it. Aggression took place in Kashmir six and a half
years ago with dire consequences. Nevertheless, the United States
have not thus far condemned it and we are asked not to press this
point in the interests of peace Aggression may take place again and
be denied as the previous aggression was denied till it could not be
hidden. If conditions are created for such an aggression to take
place it may well follow, in spite of the desire of the United States
to prevent it. Later long arguments will be carried on as to whether
it was aggression or not. The military aid given by the United State
to Pakistan is likely to create the conditions which facilitate and
encourage aggression.
<pg56>
The President of the United States has been good enough to
suggest that he would consider sympathetically any request from us
for military aid. In making this suggestion the President has done
less than justice to us or to himself. If we object to military aid
being given to Pakistan, we would be hypocrites and unprincipled
opportunists to accept such aid ourselves.
As I have said repeatedly, this grant of military aid by the United
States to Pakistan creates a grave situation for us in India and for
Asia. It adds to our tensions. It makes it much more difficult to
solve the problems which have confronted India and Pakistan. It is
vitally necessary for India and Pakistan to solve these problems and'
to develop friendly and co-operative relations which their geographical position as neighbours, as well as their long common history
demand. These problems can only be solved by the two countries
themselves and not by the intervention of others. It is indeed this
intervention of other countries in the past that has come in the way
of their solution. Recently a new and more friendly atmosphere
had been created between India and Pakistan, and by direct consultations between the two Prime Ministers progress was being made
towards the solution of these problems. That progress has now been
checked and fresh difficulties have arisen.
The Military aid being given by the United States to Pakistan is
a form of intervention in these problems which is likely to have more

far-reaching results than the previous types of intervention.
At the present moment there is, a considerable number of
American Observers attached to the United Nations team on either
side of the "cease-fire" line in the Jammu and Kashmir State. These
American Observers can no longer be treated by us as neutrals in this
dispute, and hence their presence there appears to us to be improper.
I have referred previously to the wider aspects of this aid,
aspects which may affect the whole of Asia. Many countries in
Asia have recovered their freedom after long years of colonial
subjection. They prize their freedom, and any intervention which
lessens their freedom is considered by us to be harmful and a step
away from both freedom and peace.
Recently, on the 26th of January the Assistant Secretary of State
in the United States, Mr. Walter S. Robertson, made a statement to
the House Appropriations Sub-Committee of the Congress of the
United States of America. Now, I have no official record of the
statement. The statement was made on January 26th. It was
released, I believe, on February 23rd or 24th I have to rely on press
reports of which I have two, which are not identical though the
<pg57>
meaning perhaps is much the same. One Press report states that'
he told the House Appropriations Sub-Committee of Congress that
the U.S.A. must dominate Asia for an indefinite period and pose a
military threat against Communist China until it breaks up internally.
Another report says that the U.S. must hold a posture of strength in
Asia for an indefinite period till these results follow. Whether it is
a posture of strength or clear domination-I do not know what the
exact words were-the idea behind it appears to be much the same.
This testimony, as I said, was made public about five days ago. It
is known that India's policy in regard to the People's Government of
China differs from that of the U.S.A. We have recognised this Government in China and have friendly relations with it. Our two
policies, therefore, in this respect are wholly opposed to each other.
What is more important is that a responsible- official of the U.S.
should say that it is their policy that the U.S.A. must dominate, Asia
for an indefinite period. Whatever the objective may be, the countries
of Asia, and certainly India, do not accept this policy and do not
propose to be dominated by any country for whatever purpose. It
is in this wider context that we must view these recent developments
and more especially the military aid to Pakistan.
The Prime Minister of Pakistan has stated that by the receipt of
this military aid, a momentous step forward has been taken towards
the strengthening of the Muslim world and that Pakistan has now
entered a glorious chapter in its history and is now cast for a significant role in world affairs. It is not for me to criticise what the
Pakistan Prime Minister says, but I have endeavoured to understand how the Muslim world is going to be strengthened through arms
supplied by a Foreign Power, and how any country is going to play
a significant role in world affairs relying on military aid from another
country.
The Prime Minister of Pakistan has also stated that this military
aid will help to solve the Kashmir problem. That is an indication of
the way his mind works and how he thinks this military aid might

be utilised.

Military aid is only utilised in war or in a threat of war.

There is another aspect which I should like to mention. These
separate pacts between countries take place some of them in the
nature of military alliances, It is for us and others to consider how
far they are in consonance with the spirit of the UN Charter, even
with the letter, I might say, But, I am not for the moment speaking
in legal or juristic terms. The United Nations was formed for a
particular purpose
and the Charter lays down that purpose. I would
like the House to consider-this is not the time to discuss this
<pg58>
matter-how far those purposes are being furthered by all these
developments that we see in regard to countries linking up militarily
against other countries, both sides often being represented in the
United Nations.
Also it is becoming rather significant how discussions on particular
vital matters affecting, world peace are avoided in the United Nations
General Assembly, and when something is discussed, previous decisions have been taken which almost appear to be imposed upon the
United Nations in the General Assembly. That, I submit, is not the
way either to work the United Nations to fulfil the purposes of the
Charter or to remove the tensions of the world.
The world suffers today from an enormous amount of suspicion
and, fear. And we have to judge every matter from this point of
view as to whether it adds to suspicion and fear or lessens them. Can
there be any doubt that the recent step taken in regard to military
aid being given to Pakistan is a step which adds to suspicions and
fears, and therefore, the tensions of the world, instead of bringing
about any feeling of security?
There is another small matter-not a small but relevant matterrelating to Kashmir. The House will remember its long history and
how for the last two years among the questions being discussed has
been the quantum of forces to be left in Kashmir with a view to
having afterwards a plebiscite; that is, a reduction of forces-sometimes it is called demilitarisation. There has thus far been no agreement on that issue. Now the whole issue has to be considered from
an entirely different point of view when across the border, across
the 'cease-fire' line on the other side, large additional forces are
being thrust from outside in Pakistan and put at the disposal of
Pakistan. It does make a difference. I said some time back that
this military aid was changing the balance of things in India and
Asia. I was not thinking so much of the relative military strength
of Pakistan or India, although that of course is a relevant matter,
but I was rather thinking of all these other upsets, to some of which
I have drawn the attention of the House.
India has no intention of surrendering or bartering her freedom
for any purpose or under any compulsion whatever.
In this grave situation that has arisen this House and the country
will, I have no doubt, stand united. This is no Party matter, but a
national issue, on which there can be no two opinions.
PAKISTAN

USA

INDIA

CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC

TURKEY

CHINA

MALI

TUNISIA

Jun 30, 1953

Appendix III INDIAN MISSIONS ABROAD

Jan 01, 1953
<pg59>
APPENDIX III
NDIAN MISSIONS ABROAD
(i) Embassies
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.

Afghanistan.
Argentina.
Belgium.
Brazil.
Burma.
China.
Czechoslovakia
Egypt.
Ethiopia.
France.
Germany

12.
13.
14.
15.

Indonesia.
Iran.
Iraq.
Ireland

16.
17.
18.

Italy.
Japan.
Mexico

19.
20.
21.

Nepal.
Netherlands.
Poland

22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.

Switzerland.
Thailand.
Turkey.
U. S. S. R.
United States of America.
Yugoslavia

Head of the Mission is also
Head of the Indian Military
Mission, Berlin.

Head of the Mission resident
in London.
Head of the Mission resident
in Washington.
Head of the Mission resident
in Moscow.

Head of the Mission resident
in Rome.

<pg60>
(ii) High Commissions.

1.
2.
3.
4.

Australia.
Canada.
Ceylon.
New Zealand

5.

Pakistan.

6.
7.

South Africa.
United Kingdom.

Head of the Mission resident
in Canberra.
Deputy High Commissioners atDacca and Lahore.

(iii) Legations
1.

Austria.

2.

Chile

3.

Denmark

4.

Finland

5.

Hungary

6.

Jordan

7.

Lebanon

Head
in
Head
in
Head
in
Head
in
Head
in
Head
in
Head

8.

Libya

in Cairo.
Head of the

Mission

resident

9. Luxembourg

in Cairo.
Head of the

Mission

resident

10. Norway

in Brussels.
Head of the

Mission

resident

11.
12.
13.
14.

of the Mission resident
Berne.
of the Mission resident
Buenos Aires.
of the Mission resident
Stockholm.
of the Mission resident
Stockholm.
of the Mission resident
Moscow.
of the Mission resident
Cairo.
of the
Mission
resident

in Paris.

Philippines.
Sweden.
Syria.
Vatican.

Head of the Mission resident'
in Berne.
(iv) Special Missions

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Malaya.
Tibet.
Bhutan
Sikkim.
United Nations.
<pg61>
(v) Commissions

1.
2.
3.

Aden.
British East Africa.
Southern Rhodesia
Northern Rhodesia.
Nyasaland.

Head of the Mission resident
in Nairobi.

4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.

British West Indies (including
British Guiana).
Fiji.
Gold Coast.
Hongkong.
Mauritius.
Nigeria

Head of the Mission resident in
Accra.

(vi) Consulates-General & Consulates.
1.
2.
3.

Alexandria.
Basra.
Belgian Congo.

4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.

Copenhagen.
Finland.
Geneva.
Goa.
Hamburg.
Hanoi.
Jeddah (Saudi Arabia).
Madagascar

12.
13.
14.
15.
16.

Medan.
Meshed.
New York.
Pondicherry.
Ruanda-Urundi.

17.
18.
19.
20.

Saigon.
San Francisco.
Shanghai.
Lhasa. (Tibet).

Head of the Mission resident
in Nairobi.

Head of the mission resident
in Port Louis.

Head of the Mission resident
in Nairobi.

(vii) Vice-Consulates
1.
2.
3.

Jalalabad. (Afghanistan).
Kandahar. (Afghanistan).
Zahidan.
(viii) Agencies

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Ceylon.
Malaya.
Gyantse.
Gartok.
Yatung.

AFGHANISTAN
ARGENTINA BELGIUM BRAZIL BURMA CHINA NORWAY SLOVAKIA EGYPT ETHIOPIA
FRANCE GERMANY INDIA INDONESIA IRAN IRAQ IRELAND UNITED KINGDOM ITALY
JAPAN MEXICO NEPAL POLAND RUSSIA SWITZERLAND THAILAND TURKEY USA
YUGOSLAVIA AUSTRALIA CANADA NEW ZEALAND PAKISTAN SOUTH AFRICA AUSTRIA
CHILE DENMARK SWEDEN FINLAND HUNGARY JORDAN LEBANON LIBYA PHILIPPINES
SYRIA BHUTAN KENYA FIJI MAURITIUS NIGER NIGERIA GHANA CONGO VIETNAM
SAUDI ARABIA CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC MADAGASCAR

Jan 01, 1953

Appendix IV FOREIGN MISSIONS IN INDIA

Jan 01, 1953
<pg62>
APPENDIX IV
FOREIGN MISSIONS IN INDIA
(i) Embassies
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.

Afghanistan
Argentina
Belgium
Brazil
Burma
China
Czechoslovakia
Egypt
Ethiopia
France
Federal Republic of Germany
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Italy
Japan
Mexico
Nepal
Netherlands
Thailand
Turkey
United States of America
U.S.S.R.
Yugoslavia

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Australia
Canada
Ceylon
Pakistan
United Kingdom

(ii) High Commissions

<pg63>
(iii) Legations
1.
2.
3.
4.

Austria
Chile
Denmark
Finland

5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.

Holy See
(Apostolic Internunciature)
Hungary
Jordan (Office not yet established)
Norway
Philippines
Portugal
Sweden
Switzerland
Syria
(iv) Consular Offices

--------------------------------------------------------------------------S. No.
Country.
Location
Status.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------1
Afghanistan
Bombay
Consulate.
2
Austria
Calcutta
Consulate.
3
Austria
Madras
Consulate.
4
Belgium
Bombay
Consulate General.
5
Belgium
Calcutta
Consulate General.
6
Belgium
Madras
Consulate.
7
Bolivia
Calcutta
Consulate General.
8
Brazil
Bombay
Consulate.
9
Brazil
Calcutta
Vice Consulate.
10
Burma
Calcutta
Consulate General.
11
Burma
Madras
Vice Consulate.
12
China
Calcutta
Consulate General.
13
China
Bombay
Consulate General.
14
Colombia
Calcutta
Consulate.
15
Colombia
Madras
Consulate General.
16
Costa Rica
Madras
Consulate General.
17
Czechoslovakia
Bombay
Consulate General.
18
Denmark
Bombay
Consulate.
19
Denmark
Calcutta
Consulate.
20
Denmark
Cochin
Consulate.
21
Denmark
Madras
Consulate.
22
Dominican Republic
Bombay
Consulate General.
23
Ecuador
Calcutta
Consulate.
24
Egypt
Bombay
Consulate General.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------113 M of F. A
<pg64>
---------------------------------------------------------------------------S. No.
Country
Location
Status
---------------------------------------------------------------------------25
Egypt
Calcutta
Consulate.
26
El Salvador
Calcutta
Consulate.
27
France
Bombay
Consulate
28
France
Calcutta
Consulate General.
29
France
Cochin
Consular Agency.
30
France
Madras
Consulate.
31
Germany
Bombay
Consulate General.
32
Greece
Bombay
Consulate General.
33
Greece
Calcutta
Consulate General.
34
Haiti
Calcutta
Consulate.
35
Indonesia
Bombay
Consulate.
36
Indonesia
Calcutta
Consulate.

37
Iran
Bombay
Consulate General.
38
Iraq
Bombay
Consulate General.
39
Israel
Bombay
Consulate.
40
Italy
Bombay
Consulate.
41
Italy
Calcutta
Consulate.
42
Japan
Bombay
Consulate General
43
Japan
Calcutta
Consulate General.
44
Liberia
Calcutta
Consulate.
45
Luxembourg
Bombay
Vice Consulate.
46
Monaco
Bombay
Consulate.
47
Nepal
Calcutta
Consulate General.
48
Netherlands
Bombay
Consulate General.
49
Netherlands
Calcutta
Consulate.
50
Netherlands
Cochin
Consulate.
51
Netherlands
Madras
Consulate.
52
Nicaragua
Bombay
Consulate.
53
Nicaragua
Calcutta
Consulate.
54
Norway
Bombay
Consulate General.
55
Norway
Calcutta
Consulate General.
56
Norway
Cochin
Vice Consulate.
57
Norway
Madras
Consulate.
58
Panama
Bombay
Consulate General.
59
Peru
Calcutta
Consulate General.
60
Portugal
Bombay
Consulate General.
61
Portugal
Calcutta
Consulate.
62
Portugal
Madras
Consulate.
63
Saudi Arabia
Bombay
Consulate General.
64
Spain
Bombay
Consulate.
65
Spain
Calcutta
Vice Consulate.
66
Spain
Madras
Vice Consulate.
67
Sweden
Bombay
Consulate General.
68
Sweden
Calcutta
Consulate.
69
Sweden
Madras
Consulate.
70
Switzerland
Bombay
Consulate General.
71
Switzerland
Calcutta
Consulate.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------<pg65>
-------------------------------------------------------------------------S. No.
Country
Location
Status
-------------------------------------------------------------------------72
Switzerland
Cochin
Consular Agency.
73
Switzerland
Madras
Consular Agency.
74
Syria
Bombay
Consulate General.
75
Thailand
Calcutta
Consulate General.
76
Turkey
Bombay
Consulate.
77
U.S.A.
Bombay
Consulate General.
78
U.S.A.
Calcutta
Consulate General.
79
U.S.A.
Madras
Consulate General.
80
Venezuela
Calcutta
Consulate General.
81
Yugoslavia
Bombay
Consulate General.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------(v)

List of new Consular Missions opened In India, during the year
1953-54
1. Consulate General for the People's Republic of China at
Bombay.
2. Consulate General for Thailand at Calcutta.

3.
4.
5.
6.
(vi)

Consulate
Consulate
Consulate
Consulate

List of Consular

for Austria at Madras.
for Ecuador at Calcutta.
for Nicaragua at Calcutta.
for Turkey at Bombay.
Missions closed temporarily during the year
1953-54

1. Consular Agency for Cuba at Bombay.
2. Consular Agency for Italy at Madras.
3. Consulate for Turkey at Calcutta.
INDIA
AFGHANISTAN ARGENTINA BELGIUM BRAZIL BURMA CHINA NORWAY SLOVAKIA
EGYPT ETHIOPIA FRANCE GERMANY INDONESIA IRAN IRAQ ITALY JAPAN MEXICO
NEPAL THAILAND TURKEY USA YUGOSLAVIA AUSTRALIA CANADA PAKISTAN AUSTRIA
CHILE DENMARK FINLAND HUNGARY JORDAN PHILIPPINES PORTUGAL SWEDEN
SWITZERLAND SYRIA BOLIVIA COLOMBIA COSTA!!DOMINICA ECUADOR EL SALVADOR
GREECE HAITI ISRAEL LIBERIA MONACO CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC NICARAGUA
PANAMA PERU SAUDI ARABIA SPAIN VENEZUELA CUBA
Jan 01, 1953

Appendix V Conventions and Agreements concluded by India

<pg66>
APPENDIX V
Treaties, Conventions and Agreements concluded by India during
1953-54
1. Evacuee Property (Implementation) Agreement between India
and Pakistan signed at Karachi on the 27th, the 28th, the 29th and
the Jul 31, 1953 and the 3rd and 4th August, 1953.
2. Indo-Pakistan (Eastern Zone) Agreement signed at Calcutta on
2nd October 1953.
3. Indo-Pakistan (Eastern Zone) Boundary Agreement signed at
Karachi on 22nd January 1954.
4. Instruments of Ratification of the Treaty of Friendship between
the President of India and the President of the Republic of Indonesia
exchanged in New Delhi on the 1st May 1953.
5. Treaty of Extradition between the Government of India and
the Government of Nepal signed at Kathmandu on the 2nd October1953.
6. Instruments of Ratification of the Treaty of Friendship between
India and Iraq exchanged on the 28th April 1953 at Baghdad.

7. Treaty of Friendship, Commerce and Navigation signed between India and the Sultan of Muscat and Oman on 19th March
1953 at Muscat.
8. Trade Agreement between the Government of India and the
Government of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics signed at New
Delhi on the 2nd December 1953.
9. Trade Agreement signed between India and Iraq on 6th May
1953 at Baghdad.
10. Trade Agreement signed between India and Turkey on the 4th
June 1953 at New Delhi.
11. Trade and Payments Agreement signed between India and
Egypt on 8th July 1953 at Cairo.
12. Trade letters dated 17th June 1953 exchanged between the
Government of India and the People's Republic of Bulgaria at New
Delhi.
13. Trade letters dated 15th July 1953 exchanged between India
and Ceylon .
14. Agreement between India and Ceylon signed at New Delhi
on 18th January 1954 relating to illicit immigration of Indians into
and citizenship. rights for persons of Indian origin in Ceylon.
15. Trade Agreement between India and Federal Republic of
Germany signed on 16th February 1954 at Bonn.
<pg67>
Trade Agreements renewed in 1953-54
(a) Trade Agreement between the Government of India and the
Government of Czechoslovak Republic signed at New Delhi on the
17th November 1953.
(b) Trade letters dated 26th June 1953 exchanged between India
and Norway at New Delhi.
(c) Trade letters dated 1st June 1953 exchanged between the Government of India and the Polish People's Republic at New Delhi.
(d) Trade Agreement between India and Austria renewed on
30th November, 1953.
(e) Trade Agreement of 1951 between India and Burma modified
in some respects by exchange of letters on the 3rd July 1953 at New
Delhi.
(f) Trade Agreement between India and Sweden renewed on 30th
June 1953.
(g) Trade Agreement between India and Yugoslavia renewed on
24th July 1953.

INDIA
PAKISTAN USA INDONESIA NEPAL IRAQ OMAN
NORWAY AUSTRIA BURMA SWEDEN YUGOSLAVIA

TURKEY

EGYPT

BULGARIA

Jul 31, 1953

Appendix VI INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS OF WHICH INDIA IS A MEMBER

Jan 01, 1953
<pg68>
APPENDIX VI
INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS OF WHICH INDIA IS A
MEMBER
1. United Nations General Assembly and its Commissions and
Committees. India is at present serving on the following(a) International Law Commission.
(b) Committee on Information from the Non-Self-Governing
Territories.
(c) Peace Observation Commission.
(d) Committee on Contributions.
(e) Administrative and Budgetary Committee.
2.

International Court of Justice.

3.

United Nations Trusteeship Council.

4. United Nations Economic and Social Council, and its following
Functional Commissions,
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
5.
6.
Hague.

Social Commission.
Fiscal Commission.
Transport and Communications Commission.
Human Rights Commission.
Narcotic Drugs Commission.
Statistical Commission.

International Labour Organization.
International Federation for Housing and Town Planning, The

7.

International

Commission on Large Dams.

8.

International

Commission on Irrigation and Drainage.

9.

World Power

Conference

10. International

Criminal Police Commission.

GERMANY

11. International

Railway Congress Association, Brussels.

12. International

Material Conferences held at Washington.

13. Food and Agriculture Organization.
14. Commonwealth. Agricultural Bureau.
15. United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, UNESCO.
<pg69>
16. National Committee for Early Childhood Education affiliated
to the World Council of Childhood Education, Paris.
17. U.N. Seminar on Youth Welfare.
18. International

Conference of Social Work.

19. International

Archives Council.

20. The Imperial

War Graves Commission.

21. International

Committee of Military Medicine and Pharmacy.

22. International

Civil Aviation Organization.

23. World Meteorological Organization.
24. International Telecommunication Union.
25. Universal Postal Union.
26. International Tea Market Expansion Board.
27. International Tea Licensing Committee.
28. Tea Council of the U.S.A. Incorporated.
29. International Cotton Advisory Committee, Washington.
30. International Tin Study Group, The Hague.
31. Inter Allied Reparation Agency, Brussels.
32. International Electro-Technical Commission.
33. Contracting Parties to the General Agreement on Tariffs and
Trade.
34. International Customs Tariff Bureau, Brussels.
35. Asian Relations Organization.
36. Commonwealth Shipping Committee.
37. Permanent International Association

of Road Congress, Paris.

38. International Association for Bridges
ing, Zurich (Switzerland).

and Structural Engineer-

39. International Union of Official Travel Organisations, Geneva.
40. Asian and Far Eastern Travel Commission.
41. International Institute of Scientific Travel Research of the
International Union of Official Travel Organisation.
42. International Council of Scientific Unions.
43. International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry.
<pg70>
44.

International Union of Pure and Applied Physics.

45.

International Union of Geography.

46.

International Scientific Radio Union.

47.

International Union of Biological Sciences.

48.

International Union of Crystallography.

49.

International Union of Astronomy.

50.

International Union of Geodesy and Geophysics.

51.

International Union of the History of Science.

52.

International Union of Theoretical and Applied Mechanics.

53.

International Commission of Table of Constants.

54.

International Committee for Birds Preservation.

55.

International Federation for Documentation.

56.

The Sterling

57.

International Hospital Federation, London.

58.

International Committee of the Red Cross, Geneva.

59.

League of Red Cross Societies, Geneva.

60.

Union International Centre Le Cancer, Park.

61.

World Health Organization.

62.

United Nations International Children's Fund.

63.

International Organisation for Standardisation.

Area Trade Coordinator, Tokyo.

64. Permanent International Association of Navigation Congresses
Brussels.
65. American Association of Port Authorities, Washington, USA.

66. Dock and Harbour Authorities Association of Great Britain.
67. International Cargo Handling Co-ordination Association,
London.
GIPD-M-113 MofEA- 18-3-54-1,800.

INDIA
USA LATVIA BELGIUM FRANCE SWITZERLAND JAPAN UNITED KINGDOM CENTRAL AFRICAN
REPUBLIC
Jan 01, 1953


