   java script is required for this page java script is required for this
   page java script is required for this page java script is required for
   this page java script is required for this page java script is required
   for this page

   Sat, February 07, 2015 at 07:14:35 IST Indian Flag
   Ministry of                      Print Content Small Font Medium Font      
    External       MEA Library      Large Font                                
    Affairs,   Ministry of External   * Sitemap                               
   Government  Affairs, Government    * Contact Us                            
    of India         of India         * Feedback                              
                                      * _____________________           [  ]  

     * Home
     * Director's Office
          * Director Lib & Info
          * Library Officers & Staff
     * Journals
          * Current Journals
          * Online Journals
          * CD-ROMs Databases
     * Online Services
          * Business Monitor Online
          * EIU
          * JSTOR
          * Janes Online Services
          * Kessing World News Archive
          * Marketline MDIC
          * Online Service Links
     * Newspapers
          * E-Newspapers
          * Subscribed Print Newspapers
     * Library Bulletins
          * Foreign Affairs Documentation Bulletin
          * Recent Additions
          * Chronicle of Events
     * Alert
          * Book Alert
          * Article Alerts
     * Important Abbrevations

 Annual Reports Prior to 1999                                                              
   * Home >   Annual Reports Prior to 1999 >   Annual Report 1982-83       * Home          
 Annual Report 1982-83                                                     * Director's    
                                                                             Office        
 CONTENTS                                                                  * Journals      
                              Introduction                                 * Online        
 CHAPTERS                                               Pages(iii-viii)      Services      
 I. India's Neighbours                                  1-6                * Newspapers    
 II. South-East Asia                                    7-9                * Alert         
 III. East Asia                                         10-12              * Important     
 IV. West Asia and North Africa                         13-15                Abbrevations  
 V. Africa (South of the Sahara)                        16-17              * Back          
 VI. Europe                                             18-24                              
 VII. The Americas                                      25-28                              
 VIII. United Nations and International Conferences     29-45                              
 IX. Foreign Economic Relations                         46-49                              
 X. Policy Planning                                     50                                 
 XI. External Publicity                                 51-54                              
 XII. Cultural Relations                                55-58                              
 XIII. Protocol                                         59                                 
 XIV. Passport, Emigration and Consular Services        60-62                              
 XV. Administration and Organisation                    63-65                              
 XVI. Use of Hindi in Official Work                     66-68                              
 Appendices                                             69-96                              
 -iii>                                                                                     
 INTRODUCTION                                                                              
 The conduct of India's foreign policy during the year under review                        
 remained firmly anchored in the nation's objectives of preserving its                     
 sovereign independence, its commitment to non- alignment, promotion of                    
 world peace, and our resolve to help bring about a new international                      
 economic order on the basis of justice and equality.                                      
                                                                                           
 The current international situation has been marked by widespread                         
 tensions and lack of progress in resolving the major political and                        
 economic issues facing the world. The erosion of detente and the                          
 revival of the cold war atmosphere, intensification of great power                        
 rivalry and general deterioration in East-West relations, a new round                     
 of the arms race and production of nuclear and other weapons of mass                      
 destruction, continuation of "local wars" and conflict situations in                      
 many regions and, finally the stalemate in global negotiations towards                    
 a new international economic order heightened the sense of concern and                    
 anxiety about the future. At the politico-strategic level, the renewal                    
 of emphasis on alliance was accompanied by search for new allies and                      
 friends, expansion of spheres of influence, and a fresh scramble for                      
 military bases and facilities and new forms of interference,                              
 intervention, political and economic pressures. The worsening security                    
 environment in the Indian Ocean area cannot but lead to new dangers and                   
 threats to the peace, stability and independence of the nations of the                    
 region.                                                                                   
                                                                                           
 It is difficult to claim that all this activity in the name of security                   
 has contributed to the real security even of the most powerful nations                    
 themselves or added to their ability to maintain world peace. There can                   
 be little doubt, however, that humanity as a whole feels less secure                      
 and more uncertain today than at any time since the last World War. It                    
 is not only the fear of a nuclear holocaust that grips the minds of men                   
 and women everywhere but equally the long-term consequences of the                        
 present trends and developments, especially for the independence and                      
 viability of non-aligned nations. Also, despite a widespread desire for                   
 a meaningful change, the present structure of international relations                     
 contains a substantial degree of inequity, discrimination and                             
 exploitation against poor nations. Their situation has been aggravated                    
 by current recession and high budgetary deficits n the industrial                         
 countries as well as by the long term problems of food, energy, trade                     
 and financial flows.                                                                      
                                                                                           
 It was against this background that leaders of non-aligned nations met                    
 in New Delhi in March. Despite short notice, India agreed to host the                     
 Seventh Non-Aligned Summit. It is a measure of the vitality and                           
 relevance of the Movement that one hundred member nations and many                        
 observer and guest delegations participated in the New Delhi                              
 deliberations. The main questions before the Summit which was still in                    
 progress at the time this report was being prepared include peace,                        
 development, disarmament                                                                  
                                                                                           
 -iv>                                                                                      
 and strengthening the independence of non-aligned nations. The Summit                     
 will issue a political and economic declaration as well as make                           
 specific proposals and recommendations on matters of common concern to                    
 the whole world. (A supplementary report on the Summit deliberations                      
 will be issued separately after the conference is over).                                  
                                                                                           
 Alongside concerted multilateral activities, India's foreign policy                       
 initiatives were directed towards promoting cooperative bilateralism in                   
 the neighbourhood and enlarging the areas of understanding and                            
 cooperation with all countries. The Prime Minister, Shrimati Indira                       
 Gandhi, showed considerable personal interest and took several bold                       
 initiatives in multilateral as well as bilateral diplomacy to promote                     
 the basic objectives of India's foreign relations. Her dialogues with                     
 the Presidents of France, USA and USSR served to underline the                            
 importance attached by India to the promotion of better understanding                     
 and cooperation between nations with differing socio-economic and                         
 political systems. Her visits to Mozambique and Mauritius gave a new                      
 dimension to India's political, economic and cultural relations with                      
 these countries. The Minister of External Affairs also undertook                          
 several tours in order to further India's foreign policy goals. As a                      
 part of the Summit preparations, senior Indian officials visited many                     
 countries in Asia, Africa and Latin America.                                              
                                                                                           
 Significant progress was made in Indo-Bangladesh relations during the                     
 year under review. Bilateral dialogue between the two Governments was                     
 continued at various levels culminating in the State visit of the Chief                   
 Martial Law Administrator of Bangladesh, Lt. Gen. Ershad, in October.                     
 An important development during the visit was the conclusion of an                        
 Agreement on the establishment of a Joint Economic Commission and                         
 another on the terms of the lease in perpetuity of the Tin Bigha area                     
 to Bangladesh. A Memorandum of Understanding was also signed by the two                   
 sides on the question of sharing of Ganga waters.                                         
                                                                                           
 The progress towards good neighbourly relations between India and                         
 Pakistan, registered in the previous year, gained ground during the                       
 year under review. While further progress was made on the establishment                   
 of an Indo-Pakistan Joint Commission, exchanges and visits at various                     
 levels contributed to a better understanding of each other's approach                     
 to the establishment of peace, friendship and cooperation in the                          
 Subcontinent. The dialogue is continuing.                                                 
                                                                                           
 The Government of India persevered also with the efforts to improve                       
 relations with China and, to this end, two rounds of official talks                       
 were held. Though the talks mainly, covered key aspects of the boundary                   
 question, several other bilateral matters were also discussed. India                      
 and China also exchanged delegations in such diverse fields as                            
 railways, petroleum, agriculture, sciences, health etc.                                   
 India continued to take active interest in the well-being and                             
 development of its other immediate neighbours, especially Nepal and                       
 Bhutan. A grant of Rs. 25 crores was pledged for the year 1982-83                         
 towards the implementation of the Fifth Plan of Bhutan.                                   
                                                                                           
 -v>                                                                                       
 In addition, India continued assistance in various projects including                     
 the construction of a major hydroelectric project at Chukha,                              
 construction of Indo-Bhutan microwave link and the building of                            
 inftastructure in Bhutan. The process of shifting Tibetan rcfugees                        
 living in Bhutan to India has been completed during the year under                        
 review.                                                                                   
                                                                                           
 Indo-Nepal relations continued to be guided by a spirit of mutual                         
 understanding. There were regular exchanges of visits, private and                        
 official, at various levels. Indo-Nepal economic cooperation took                         
 further strides with the decision to set up a joint industrial                            
 committee to strengthen industrial cooperation between the two                            
 countries. The Indo-Nepal Boundary Committee, at the joint technical                      
 level, continued its good work. India has agreed to supply 10,000                         
 tonnes of rice to Nepal on an urgent basis and to consider supply of                      
 wheat.                                                                                    
                                                                                           
 Relations with Burma, Sri Lanka and Maldives proceeded apace on cordial                   
 and cooperative lines. Cooperation with Sri Lanka under the Indian                        
 Technical and Economic Cooperation Programme as well as TCDC Programme                    
 under the UNDP auspices was further increased.                                            
                                                                                           
 India displayed considerable interest in resolving the situation in                       
 Afghanistan through a negotiated political settlement. India's policy                     
 towards Afghanistan is based on its abiding interest in the traditional                   
 non-alignment, independence, sovereignty and stability of that country.                   
                                                                                           
 India attaches great importance to the developing relationship with                       
 Iran, based on historical bonds, non-alignment and mutual benefit. The                    
 Head of Iranian Majlis, the Foreign Minister and the Deputy Foreign                       
 Minister of Iran visited India during the year while several other                        
 delegations from Iran were also received. An economic and commercial                      
 delegation from India visited Iran and signed a Memorandum of                             
 Understanding on commercial and economic cooperation.                                     
                                                                                           
 India's traditional relationship with countries in South-East Asian                       
 region maintained a steady and progressive improvement. The Kampuchean                    
 issue continued to dominate the South-East Asian political scene and,                     
 in the context of the New Delhi Non-Aligned Summit, special efforts                       
 were made to suitably explain India's position on this and allied                         
 issues to the Non-aligned members of the ASEAN group. Special efforts                     
 were made to increase trade exchanges with Malaysia, with the                             
 organisation of an Indian Trade Exhibition in that country. A                             
 significant step in the development of Indo-Thai relations was the                        
 official visit of the Indian Minister of External Affairs to that                         
 country.                                                                                  
                                                                                           
 India's commitment to develop long term cooperation with the States of                    
 IndoChina was further demonstrated during the year under review. An                       
 Agreement for Rs. 100 million credit to Vietnam was signed and an                         
 Indo-Vietnamese Joint Commission was set up. Mutual understanding                         
 prevailed in India's relations with Australia, New Zealand and Fiji.                      
 The visit of the President of Nauru was marked by the signing of                          
                                                                                           
 -vi>                                                                                      
 an Agreement for a joint venture Fertiliser Plant based on phosphate                      
 supplied by Nauru.                                                                        
                                                                                           
 Friendly relations with Japan were consolidated and developed through                     
 bilateral contacts at high levels. The Indian and Japanese Foreign                        
 Ministers exchanged visits while the Prime Minister made a stop over in                   
 Tokyo, on her way back from a visit to USA. Efforts are continuing                        
 towards the improvement of India's balance of trade with Japan.                           
                                                                                           
 Relations with ROK, DPRK and Mongolia continued to be friendly and                        
 mutually beneficial.                                                                      
                                                                                           
 India persevered in its role as a friend and partner in the political                     
 and economic development of the Arab world and maintained its policy of                   
 full support for the Arab and Palestinian cause. The visit of the PLO                     
 Chairman to India provided an opportunity for the reaffirmation of                        
 India's belief that no solution to the West Asian situation is possible                   
 without full recognition of the rights of the Palestinians. India                         
 severely condemned Israeli invasion of Lebanon and the massacre of                        
 innocent civilians. Mutually beneficial economic relations with Arab                      
 countries, especially Saudi Arabia, Iraq, UAE and Kuwait continued to                     
 be developed. Indo-Saudi relations received an impetus with the visit                     
 of the Prime Minister to Saudi Arabia. Relations with the Arab North                      
 African countries were further strengthened with exchange of visits at                    
 high level, including that of the President of Algeria and the First                      
 Lady of Tunisia to India, and those of the Indian Minister of Planning                    
 and the Speaker of the Lok Sabha to Algeria and Morocco respectively.                     
                                                                                           
 India's total and unflinching support to the cause of African freedom                     
 was further demonstrated during the year. The visit of the leaders of                     
 SWAPO and ANC of South Africa demonstrated the faith and confidence of                    
 these liberation movements in India's policy and assistance. In keeping                   
 with the tradition of high level exchange of visits with the                              
 independent countries of Africa, India played host to the Presidents of                   
 Mozambique and Nigeria and the Prime Minister of Mauritius, while our                     
 Prime Minister visited Mauritius and Mozambique. Delegations were also                    
 exchanged at various levels, with Ethiopia, Kenya, Tanzania, Mauritius,                   
 Nigeria, Zimbabwe, Burundi and Upper Volta.                                               
                                                                                           
 India's relations with Western Europe continued to expand and develop                     
 and there were wide contacts in the economic, cultural and scientific                     
 fields both at the official and non-official levels. The visit of the                     
 French President to India contributed considerably to the strengthening                   
 of Indo-French relations and underlined the increasing degree of                          
 similarity in the approaches of the two countries to key international                    
 issues. The conclusion of the nuclear fuel agreement with France for                      
 supply of enriched uranium for the Tarapur atomic power plant marked                      
 the beginning of a new area of Indo-French cooperation. As in the past,                   
 there were exchanges of visits at high level with various West European                   
 countries such as our President's visit to Ireland, the visits to India                   
 of                                                                                        
                                                                                           
 -vii>                                                                                     
 the President of Greece, the Prime Ministers of UK and Sweden, the                        
 Foreign Ministers of Austria, Denmark and Finland.                                        
                                                                                           
 The visits of the former President, Shri Sanjiva Reddy to Yugoslavia                      
 and of the Prime Minister to the Soviet Union, highlighted the                            
 ever-increasing bilateral relations with East European countries.                         
 Indo-Soviet cooperation in the economic and commercial fields was                         
 increased. The Prime Minister's visit provided an occasion for                            
 strengthening mutual trust between the leaders and ties of close                          
 friendship between India and the Soviet Union. With Yugoslavia, apart                     
 from strengthening bilateral relations, there was continuous and                          
 constant coordination concerning issues affecting the Movement of                         
 Non-Aligned countries.                                                                    
                                                                                           
 There was considerable improvement in the climate of Indo-US relations                    
 following the visit of the Indian Prime Minister to the USA in                            
 July/August. The visit helped in the resumption of annual bilateral                       
 consultations on a regular basis and facilitated increased cooperation                    
 in the economic, scientific and technological fields. India continued                     
 to seek greater understanding from the US Administration on issues of                     
 particular concern to this country. There was, however, little                            
 indication of any change in US policy to induct sophisticated armaments                   
 into the Sub-continent. Differences also persisted in the perceptions                     
 of the two countries over political developments in West and south west                   
 Asia, Indian Ocean and south east Asia.                                                   
                                                                                           
 India's relations with the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean                   
 were marked by a greater interest in tackling mutual problems and the                     
 desire to expand existing cooperation and extend it to new fields. Many                   
 useful exchanges of visits took place between India and Latin America                     
 towards this end and agreements on economic and technical cooperation                     
 were signed with a number of Central and South American countries.                        
                                                                                           
 India continued to strive towards global negotiations for the                             
 amelioration of the steadily deteriorating state of the world economy.                    
 The prospects for meaningful international economic cooperation,                          
 especially between the affluent North and severely deprived South,                        
 however, remained bleak. There was some progress in the field of                          
 South-South cooperation and follow-up on the Caracas programme of                         
 action for economic cooperation among developing countries acquired                       
 some momentum. South Asian Regional Cooperation was another area in                       
 which progress was registered during the year under review.                               
                                                                                           
 India's bilateral, economic and technical cooperation as well as trade                    
 relations, especially with developing countries, continued to receive                     
 considerable attention. The Joint Commissions with Afghanistan,                           
 Bangladesh and Iraq met and achieved significant results. The Joint                       
 Commissions with various East European countries continued to be                          
 active.                                                                                   
                                                                                           
 The renewed armaments race and the growing threat of a nuclear                            
 catastrophe lent urgency to the deliberations of the Second Special                       
 Session of the UN General                                                                 
                                                                                           
 -viii>                                                                                    
 Assembly devoted to disarmament held in July. India worked closely with                   
 other Nonaligned countries to ensure that the focus remained fixed on                     
 the urgent issue of the prevention of nuclear war and agreement on                        
 nuclear disarmament. With this end in view, India put forward a number                    
 of important proposals including a freeze on the production of Nuclear                    
 Weapons and the conclusion of a Convention on the Prohibition of the                      
 Use of Nuclear Weapons. A concrete programme of action was also                           
 presented in a message from our Prime Minister to SSOD-II. The failure                    
 of the Session to adopt even a minimal programme of urgent and                            
 practical measures for the prevention of nuclear war and towards                          
 nuclear disarmament compelled India to dissociate itself from the                         
 Chapter on conclusions of the final Declaration.                                          
                                                                                           
 There was disappointment in India and like-minded countries over the                      
 failure, once again, of the UN Ad-hoc Committee on Indian Ocean to make                   
 progress towards making the Indian Ocean a Zone of Peace. Even the                        
 prospects of holding the United Nations Conference on Indian Ocean have                   
 greatly receded owing to the uncompromising attitude of some                              
 non-regional powers who have sought to exploit the prevailing tensions                    
 within the region. The renewed appeal of the Non-aligned countries for                    
 the establishment of the Zone of Peace in the Indian Ocean is a shot in                   
 the arm for the concept and its supporters.                                               
                                                                                           
 It was a matter of deep satisfaction for India that the UN Convention                     
 on the Law of the Sea and four related resolutions were adopted in                        
 April and opened for signature from December. India has signed the                        
 official Act of the Conference as well as the Convention on the Law of                    
 the Sea. India's interests have been protected in the Convention and                      
 its status as a pioneer investor in the international sea bed area has                    
 been recognised.                                                                          
                                                                                           
 In accordance with the Prime Minister's directive to ensure the maximum                   
 efficiency together with economy in expenditure, a high level committee                   
 has been set up to study the working of the Indian Missions abroad and                    
 to suggest measures to improve their functioning. The committee is                        
 expected to submit its report by the middle of May.                                       
                                                                                           
 The principal thrust of India's diplomatic activity during the year                       
 under review has thus been towards reducing tensions and improving the                    
 climate of peace. In a year of unprecedented activity, India can                          
 rightly lay claim to having worked with much success towards these                        
 goals. Even if the serious international problems remain unsolved,                        
 hopes of progress have been revived because of the demonstration of                       
 unity of purpose and action by the Movement of Non-Aligned countries.                     
 The coming year promises to be another period of increasing endeavour                     
 to further the causes cherished by the majority of mankind, namely,                       
 peace, disarmament and international cooperation.                                         
                                                                                           
 -1>                                                                                       
 INDIA'S NEIGHBOURS                                                                        
                                                                     Top                   
 The political situation in Afghanistan continued to remain fluid and                      
 tense, causing concern about its negative impact on the peace and                         
 stability of the entire region. The Government of India's policy                          
 towards Afghanistan was guided by India's abiding interest in the                         
 independence, sovereignty, non-alignment, stability and security of                       
 Afghanistan, and the well-being of its people.                                            
                                                                                           
 The Government of India have, from the beginning, held that the                           
 situation in Afghanistan can only be resolved through a negotiated                        
 political settlement. In this context, India supported efforts of the                     
 UN Secretary-General to establish a dialogue between Afghanistan,                         
 Pakistan and Iran, in the hope that it would lead to direct                               
 negotiations and, ultimately, to a comprehensive settlement of all                        
 issues affecting the Afghan situation. India's approach, reflecting the                   
 non-aligned consensus of February 1981 has gained acceptance and                          
 support in the international community.                                                   
                                                                                           
 Bilaterally, Indo-Afghan relations gained in content through economic                     
 exchanges which reflected India's desire to assist in the development                     
 process of Afghanistan.                                                                   
                                                                                           
 Good neighbourliness and friendly cooperation have characterised                          
 Indo-Bangladesh relations, and it has remained the constant endeavour                     
 of the Government of India to continue to nurture the development of                      
 harmonious relations with Bangladesh and foster bilateral cooperation                     
 in as many areas as possible. During the past year especially, the                        
 Governments of the two countries have been able to make progress in                       
 dealing with some of the major outstanding issues between them.                           
                                                                                           
 As in the past, bilateral dialogue between the two Governments was                        
 continued at the level of Secretaries and other senior officials of the                   
 Foreign Offices of the two countries, as well as at the political                         
 level. The visit of the Minister of External Affairs, Shri Narasimha                      
 Rao, to Bangladesh in May formed part of the chain that began with his                    
 visit in August 1980, the return visit by the Bangladesh Foreign                          
 Minister to India in September 1981, culminating in the State visit of                    
 the Bangladesh Chief Martial Law Administrator, Lt. Gen. H.M. Ershad in                   
 October 1982.                                                                             
                                                                                           
 A landmark in Indo-Bangladesh relations was the State visit paid by Lt.                   
 Gen. H.M. Ershad to India on 6 and 7 October in response to an                            
 invitation extended by the Prime Minister. The visit was characterised                    
 by warmth and cordiality. During the visit, the two Governments                           
 concluded agreements on the establishment of a Joint Economic                             
 Commission and on the terms of the lease-in-perpetuity of the Tin Bigha                   
 area, which                                                                               
                                                                                           
 -2>                                                                                       
 will provide Bangladesh overland transit facilities through a corridor                    
 across Indian territory thus affording it access to its enclave.                          
                                                                                           
 A Memorandum of Understanding was also signed by the two sides on the                     
 question of Ganga Waters. India and Bangladesh have agreed to work                        
 towards a permanent and early solution for the augmentation of the                        
 Ganga Waters to meet the requirements of both countries, so that the                      
 shortages which have to be shared at present do not become a permanent                    
 feature. While over the next 18 months sharing of waters during the                       
 lean period will be ensured, the two sides will jointly complete the                      
 pre-feasibility study of the possibilities of augmentation.                               
                                                                                           
 The Government of India continued its efforts to improve relations with                   
 Pakistan on the basis of its commitment to respect the sovereignty,                       
 territorial integrity and stability of Pakistan and its desire to                         
 establish a friendly and mutually beneficial relationship.                                
                                                                                           
 Several high-level visits were exchanged to this end, the foremost                        
 being the visit of President Zia-ul-Haq to New Delhi on 1 November,                       
 which imparted a fresh impetus to Indo-Pakistan relations. The Pakistan                   
 Foreign Minister had visited India from 29 January to 1 February 1982,                    
 for bilateral talks. Discussions also took place at the official level                    
 in May, August and December.                                                              
                                                                                           
 One concrete result of the deliberations was the finalisation of the                      
 Indo Pakistan Joint Commission proposed by the Indian Prime Minister,                     
 Shrimati Indira Gandhi, in 1982, Following the directive given by the                     
 two Heads of Government on 1 November, discussions were held in                           
 December on the Indian draft which had been handed over to the                            
 Government of Pakistan in June. An Agreement establishing an                              
 Indo-Pakistan Joint Commission for cooperation in various fields was                      
 initialled on 24 December.                                                                
                                                                                           
 There has been a simultaneous movement towards clarification of the                       
 concepts underlying the Pakistani draft of an Agreement on                                
 Non-aggression and Non-use of Force given to India in May, and India's                    
 draft of a Treaty of Peace, Friendship and Cooperation, handed over to                    
 Pakistan in August. The discussions, which had to be postponed owing to                   
 the vitiation of the atmosphere caused by Pakistan's statement on Jammu                   
 and Kashmir at the UN Human Rights Commission meeting in February 1982,                   
 and the appointment of observers from the 'northern areas' in                             
 Pakistan-Occupied Kashmir to the Pakistan Federal Council, were sought                    
 to be resumed at the instance of the Prime Minister, Shrimati Indira                      
 Gandhi, who addressed a letter to President Zia on 25 May. Subsequent                     
 exchanges contributed to a better understanding of each other's                           
 perceptions.                                                                              
                                                                                           
 India and Pakistan signed a Protocol on Consular Access on 2 November.                    
 The Protocol provides for regular exchange of information on nationals                    
 of each country                                                                           
                                                                                           
 -3>                                                                                       
 detained or imprisoned in the other, consular access to them and                          
 discussions on the modalities of their exchange.                                          
                                                                                           
 The cordial relations between India and Bhutan continued to progress on                   
 the basis of trust, confidence and mutual benefit. Highly satisfactory                    
 achievements were made in all spheres of cooperation. The King of                         
 Bhutan visited India in March, and the Foreign Minister, on an                            
 unofficial visit, during November/December. Aside from this, senior                       
 officials of both countries exchanged visits in order to ensure that                      
 cooperation in multifarious spheres went on apace.                                        
                                                                                           
 India has played an important role in the development of Bhutan's                         
 economy since the inception of Bhutan's planning process. India has                       
 decided to make a contribution of Rs. 134 crores towards the 5th Plan                     
 of Bhutan during the period 1981-87. As part of this contribution,                        
 India pledged a grant of Rs. 25 crores for the year 1982-83. Although                     
 Bhutan is seeking multilateral assistance and is hopeful of generating                    
 its own internal resources, the assistance from India continues to be                     
 the preponderant source of financing.                                                     
                                                                                           
 Indian economic assistance to Bhutan is not restricted to the Plan                        
 support that it gives. The Government of India is constructing a major                    
 hydro-electric project at Chukha which is expected to be commissioned                     
 by the end of 1984 and will produce 336 MW of power. The power thereby                    
 generated will meet the needs of Bhutan and, in addition, will meet the                   
 requirements of the north-eastern region of India. This project, which                    
 is being financed by India on a grant-cum-loan basis in the ratio of 60                   
 : 40, will cost about Rs. 180 crores. The project has shown highly                        
 satisfactory progress and is working almost to schedule.                                  
                                                                                           
 Amongst other projects of importance that India is financing and                          
 constructing in Bhutan is the Indo-Bhutan microwave link. This link is                    
 expected to be completed in 1983 and will greatly facilitate Bhutan's                     
 communications. The Penden Cement Plant with an installed capacity of 1                   
 lakh tonnes per annum, which was completed and gifted to the Royal                        
 Government of Bhutan by India, is performing well and is supplying                        
 cement to India's north-east region in addition to meeting the                            
 requirements of Bhutan and the Chukha Hydel Project. Construction of                      
 roads, bridges and the like is being carried out with Indian                              
 assistance; and blacktoping of Bhutan's major east-west high-way is                       
 being carried out as part of Bhutan's 5th Plan.                                           
                                                                                           
 Discussions are taking place between India and Bhutan to consider the                     
 possibility of harnessing the water resources of the Manas and Sankosh                    
 rivers. A pre-feasibility study was carried out by Indian experts in                      
 1982.                                                                                     
                                                                                           
 The national airline of Bhutan, Druk Air, is expected to start                            
 operations in February 1983. The airline would be operated in technical                   
 and commercial collaboration                                                              
                                                                                           
 -4>                                                                                       
 with Indian Air Lines. India is providing pilots and other technical                      
 personnel to assist the Bhutanese in setting up their airline.                            
                                                                                           
 Technical cooperation between the two countries is facilitated by the                     
 deputation of a large number of Indian experts to Bhutan. Experts in                      
 agriculture and forestry, industry, road-building, minerals, geological                   
 exploration and communications have been deputed from India. Besides, a                   
 large number of Bhutanese students receive higher education in India on                   
 scholarships. India has also been providing a large number of teachers                    
 for Bhutan's educational institutions.                                                    
                                                                                           
 All 1500 Tibetan refugees living in Bhutan, whom India had agreed to                      
 receive, have arrived in India. The 728 refugees who came in 1982 are                     
 now settled in Dehra Dun.                                                                 
                                                                                           
 Indo-Nepal relations remained friendly and cordial during the year                        
 under review. Based as these are, on ties that are rich, diverse and                      
 timeless, there were constant attempts to realise yet further                             
 dimensions of cooperation between the two countries. To this end, a                       
 meaningful dialogue was carried on at various levels throughout the                       
 year on issues of mutual interest. Discussions were held by the                           
 President and the Prime Minister with the King during his private visit                   
 here in April. The Minister of Industries, Shri N.D. Tiwari, headed the                   
 Indian delegation to the Solidarity Meeting in December held under the                    
 auspices of UNIDO and the Nepalese Government. He also held discussions                   
 on bilateral issues with the Nepalese Prime Minister and the Industries                   
 Minister. There was a regular exchange of visits at the level of                          
 Foreign Secretary and other senior officers.                                              
                                                                                           
 Economic cooperation was, as always, an important base of Indo-Nepal                      
 relations. In the area of water resources, a subject of considerable                      
 significance to both countries, there was a constant exchange of views                    
 on how best to implement the agreements already arrived at on common                      
 river projects. Work proceeded smoothly on the Rs. 48 crore Devighat                      
 Project which is expected to be completed much ahead of schedule in                       
 June 1983.                                                                                
                                                                                           
 In March 1982, a fresh agreement was signed with the Government of                        
 Nepal for the supply of iodised salt and the setting up of iodisation                     
 plants in Nepal at a total cost of Rs. 2 crores. This salt assistance                     
 programme is extremely important for controlling goitre in the hill and                   
 remote areas of Nepal.                                                                    
                                                                                           
 The 5th Inter-Governmental Committee (IGC) meeting between India and                      
 Nepal to discuss problems related to trade and transit and unauthorised                   
 trade was held in Kathmandu in May and was marked by the same friendly                    
 and constructive approach that characterised the previous meetings.                       
 Problems relating to these areas were sorted out and Nepal expressed                      
 much appreciation for India's cooperation and help.                                       
                                                                                           
 -5>                                                                                       
 The second meeting of the Joint Technical Level Indo-Nepal Boundary                       
 Committee was held at Kathmandu in July. The reports of the field teams                   
 were reviewed and it was decided to continue the work along the general                   
 pattern adopted earlier. A joint review of the inspection work is to be                   
 undertaken shortly.                                                                       
                                                                                           
 In September, discussions were held with an industrial delegation from                    
 Nepal on ways and means of strengthening industrial cooperation between                   
 the two countries. It was also decided to set up a Joint Industrial                       
 Committee for this purpose. The Committee is expected to come into                        
 existence shortly.                                                                        
                                                                                           
 An important on-going project nearing completion is the Central Sector                    
 of the East-West Highway. It is proposed to hand over the completed                       
 stretches to the Nepalese Government in the near future.                                  
                                                                                           
 Another important aspect of cooperation was on the food front. India                      
 signed an agreement with Nepal in September for the supply of 10,000                      
 tonnes of rice on an urgent basis. Discussions are presently going on                     
 for the supply on for the supply of 15,000 tonnes of wheat                                
                                                                                           
 India's relations with Burma continued at an even pace. A Burmese                         
 delegation led by the Managing Director of the Burmese Export-Import                      
 Corporation, visited India in December for discussions on trade                           
 matters. The Indian Ambassador to Burma gifted prosthetic and orthotic                    
 components to the Hospital for the Disabled in Rangoon. A National                        
 Defence College delegation from India visited Burma in September. The                     
 visit further strengthened the friendly relations between the two                         
 countries. An Indian Book Exhibition organized by the UBS Publishers in                   
 Rangoon in October, drew a large number of visitors.                                      
                                                                                           
 Warmth and cordiality continued to inform Indo-Sri Lanka relations                        
 during the period under review.                                                           
                                                                                           
 The Governments of India and Sri Lanka continued to be in touch in                        
 respect of the residual problem of stateless persons of Indian origin.                    
 The earnest desire indicated by President Jayewardene to have the                         
 problem solved as early as possible, has facilitated the efforts of the                   
 two Governments.                                                                          
                                                                                           
 Bilateral exchanges between the two countries under the Indian                            
 Technical and Economic Cooperation (ITEC) Programme and the TCDC                          
 activities under UNDP auspices were further increased. During the year,                   
 10 senior Indian engineers were sent to Sri Lanka in connection with                      
 the Mahawali Development Project. Besides providing training facilities                   
 for Sri Lanka personnel in India, services of Indian experts were made                    
 available to that country.                                                                
                                                                                           
 -6>                                                                                       
 India continued to have close political, economic and cultural                            
 relations with the Maldives.                                                              
                                                                                           
 Several requests for technical experts including teachers and doctors,                    
 were received and met. Places in Indian educational institutions were                     
 also made available to Maldivian students. A Maldivian Foreign Service                    
 probationer was given training at the Lal Bahadur Shastri National                        
 Academy of Administration in Mussoorie. India provided medicines worth                    
 Rs. 1.04 lakhs to fight the diarrhoea epidemic which broke out in                         
 Maldives in summer. India also gifted material worth Rs. 25,000 to the                    
 Government of Maldives as help for the handicapped.                                       
                                                                                           
 India attaches importance to developing close relations with Iran,                        
 based on historical bonds, non-alignment and mutual benefit. Several                      
 high-level visits were exchanged to further this objective.                               
 The Speaker of the Iranian Majlis, Hojjattoleslam Rafsanjani, visited                     
 India in August. He held talks with the Prime Minister, Shrimati Indira                   
 Gandhi, which led to a better understanding of each other's views on                      
 international issues and enhancement of the mutual desire to strengthen                   
 the friendly relations between the two countries. Earlier, an Iranian                     
 delegation led by the Deputy Minister for Mines and Exploration had                       
 visited India in February. The Iranian Foreign Minister paid an                           
 official visit to India from 30 April to 2 May at the invitation of the                   
 Minister of External Affairs. This was followed by the visit of the                       
 Iranian Deputy Foreign Minister to Delhi in October, to discuss                           
 consular and cultural relations. The Deputy Minister for Mines and                        
 Metals of Iran also visited India in December, for discussions on the                     
 Kudremukh Project.                                                                        
                                                                                           
 From India, an economic and commercial delegation went to Iran in                         
 March. This was followed by an official visit, in August, by the                          
 Commerce Minister. A Memorandum of Understanding on commercial and                        
 economic cooperation was signed during this visit. Draft agreements for                   
 setting up an Indo-Iranian Joint Commission and for Cultural                              
 Cooperation are also in the process of finalisation.                                      
                                                                                           
 -7>                                                                                       
 SOUTH-EAST ASIA                                                                           
                                                                     Top                   
 In line with India's traditional and close relationship with the                          
 countries in the region, the period under review was characterised by                     
 the exchanage of several important visits and activities of                               
 considerable bilateral significance.                                                      
                                                                                           
 Kampuchea dominated the South-East Asian political scene. In the                          
 context of the Non-Aligned Summit Meeting in New Delhi, India's                           
 position was suitably explained to the non-aligned members of the ASEAN                   
 grouping as well as of Indo-China.                                                        
                                                                                           
 In economic and technical areas, bilateral relations with practically                     
 all the countries in the region saw a steady and progressive increase.                    
 A Joint Commission was established with Vietnam in December. During his                   
 visit to Fiji in connection with CHOGRM in October, the Minister of                       
 External Affairs had the opportunity of meeting several leaders of the                    
 Pacific countries with whom India already has significant                                 
 economic/technical relations. Earlier, in May, during the State visit                     
 of the President of Nauru to India, an agreement of significant                           
 economic importance was signed.                                                           
                                                                                           
 Progressive increase in activities of bilateral significance,                             
 especially of an economic and technical nature, characterised India's                     
 relations with Indonesia during the period.                                               
                                                                                           
 Special efforts were made to increase trade exchanges with Malaysia.                      
 The Malaysian Minister of Primary Industries, Dato Paul Leong, paid a                     
 visit to India in March. An Indian Trade Exhibition, comprising heavy                     
 and light engineering products, electrical and electronic components,                     
 cotton and handlooms, machine tools, tractors and agricultural                            
 equipment, was held in Kuala Lumpur from 29 October to 7 November. The                    
 exhibition, organised by the Trade Fair Authority of India was                            
 successful in displaying the wide variety of technological and                            
 sophisticated goods produced by India and promoting trade relations                       
 between the two countries.                                                                
                                                                                           
 The Secretary in the Ministry of External Affairs Shri K.S. Bajpai,                       
 visited Singapore in October. Coupled with his visit to Jakarta this                      
 provided an opportunity for                                                               
                                                                                           
 -8>                                                                                       
 explaining India's position regarding the Non-Aligned Summit Meeting in                   
 New Delhi, especially with reference to the Kampuchean issue.                             
                                                                                           
 Bilateral relations between India and the Philippines remained friendly                   
 and there was increased interaction between the two countries in                          
 technical and economic matters.                                                           
                                                                                           
 A significant step in the development of Indo-Thai relations was the                      
 official visit paid by the Minister of External Affairs, Shri P.V.                        
 Narasimha Rao, to Thailand in February 1982. The visit led to an                          
 improvement in mutual understanding of the positions of the two                           
 countries on a number of important international issues and to better                     
 bilateral relations. The Thai Deputy Minister of Agriculture, Mr.                         
 Boon-Ua Prasertsuwan, paid a visit to India in March 1982.                                
                                                                                           
 There was considerable strengthening of India's relations with the                        
 Indo-China states during the period under review. As a result of the                      
 recommendations made by a team of experts which visited Laos and                          
 Kampuchea in January 1982, the Government of India announced                              
 humanitarian assistance worth Rs. 10 million to Kampuchea.                                
                                                                                           
 The People's Republic of Kampuchea participated, for the first time, in                   
 the India International Trade Fair held in New Delhi in November.                         
                                                                                           
 Friendly bilateral relations between the Lao People's Democratic                          
 Republic and India continued to make steady progress.                                     
                                                                                           
 There were useful exchange of visits between India and Vietnam at a                       
 high level. The Minister of External Affairs paid an official visit to                    
 Vietnam in February 1982. The Vietnamese Foreign Minister, Mr. Nguyen                     
 Co Thach, paid two visits to India, in April and December. These visits                   
 underlined the strong mutual desire of the two countries to develop                       
 long ter cooperation.                                                                     
                                                                                           
 An agreement for a government-to-government credit of Rs. 100 million                     
 for purchase of diesel locomotives, spares and textile equipment from                     
 India was signed in Hanoi in November. A protocol for bilateral trade                     
 during 1983, and a Plan of Action for cooperation in science and                          
 technology between the two countries, were agreed to in December at the                   
 time of the Vietnamese Foreign Minister's visit. An Indo-Vietnamese                       
 Joint Economic, Scientific and Technical Commission was established in                    
                                                                                           
 -9>                                                                                       
 December. In October, a delegation led by the Chairman of the People's                    
 Committee of Ho Chi Minh City, Mr. Mai Chi Tho, visited India at the                      
 invitation of the Minister of State for External Affairs.                                 
                                                                                           
 Indo-Australian relations continued to be cordial. The Minister of                        
 External Affairs, Shri P.V. Narasimha Rao, visited Australia in                           
 October.                                                                                  
                                                                                           
 Several Indian delegations representing the commercial, scientific,                       
 metals and minerals and project fields visited Australia during the                       
 period.                                                                                   
                                                                                           
 India participated in an International Book Exhibition inaugurated by                     
 the Australian Prime Minister in Canberra in August.                                      
                                                                                           
 The Secretary, Australian Department of Trade and Resources, Mr. J.                       
 Scully, visited India in April and discussed bilateral issues with                        
 special reference to commercial matters.                                                  
                                                                                           
 The former New Zealand Prime Minister and current leader of the                           
 opposition, Mr. Bill Rowling, visited India in September and made                         
 courtesy calls on the President, the Minister of External Affairs, the                    
 Minister of State for External Affairs, and the Commerce Minister.                        
                                                                                           
 The Minister of External Affairs, accompanied by Secretary in the                         
 Ministry, Shri K.S. Bajpai, visited Fiji in October for Commonwealth                      
 Heads of Government Regional Meeting, and had meetings with the Prime                     
 Minister of Fiji.                                                                         
                                                                                           
 A meeting of the Working Group of Energy was held in Suva from 20 to 25                   
 September. India was the convener of the Group, with participation by                     
 Science and Technology delegates.                                                         
                                                                                           
 A number of books selected by the National Book Trust of India, were                      
 displayed at an exhibition held in May at the Fiji Institute of                           
 Technology.                                                                               
                                                                                           
 The President of the Republic of Nauru, Mr. Hammer DeRoburt, paid a                       
 State visit to India from 25 to 31 May, at the invitation of the                          
 President of India. The high light of the visit was the signing of a                      
 Participation Agreement for a joint venture between India and Nauru for                   
 the setting up of a Phosphoric Plant at Paradeep. The President of                        
 Nauru also paid private visits to India in December and February.                         
                                                                                           
 -10>                                                                                      
 EAST ASIA                                                                                 
                                                                     Top                   
 During the year, Government persevered with the effort to improve                         
 relations with China and to make progress on the boundary question in                     
 the official talks held for this purpose.                                                 
                                                                                           
 The second round of official talks on the boundary question and on the                    
 development of bilateral relations was held in Delhi from 17 to 20 May.                   
 The third round was held in Beijing from 29 January to 2 February,                        
 1983. The talks were wide-ranging and conducted freely and frankly in a                   
 cordial atmosphere. India endeavoured to make constructive suggestions                    
 for facilitating discussion of the boundary question as well as for                       
 creating an atmosphere propitious for a settlement. However, progress                     
 on the boundary question has yet to be achieved. The talks are expected                   
 to continue.                                                                              
                                                                                           
 The exchange of delegations in various fields continued. India sent to                    
 China a railway delegation, a petroleum delegation, an agricultural                       
 delegation, a scientists' delegation and a social scientists'                             
 delegation, and China sent a health delegation, a dairy delegation and                    
 a scientific delegation.                                                                  
                                                                                           
 Friendly relations with Japan were consolidated and developed during                      
 the year through intensified bilateral contacts and meetings at a high                    
 level. The Minister of External Affairs, Shri P.V. Narasimha Rao,                         
 visited Japan for the 3rd Consultative Meeting with the Japanese                          
 Minister for Foreign Affairs, held in Tokyo on 19 April. The Prime                        
 Minister, Shrimati Indira Gandhi, made an overnight halt in Tokyo on 5                    
 August at the invitation of the then Japanese Prime Minister, Mr. Zenko                   
 Suzuki, on her way back to India from the United States. Later, the                       
 Japanese Foreign Minister, Mr. Yoshio Sakurauchi, visited India from 27                   
 to 30 August, when the 4th Consultative Meeting of the two Foreign                        
 Ministers was held. The extensive, wide-ranging and thorough exchange                     
 of views between the two countries on international, regional and                         
 bilateral questions served to underline their common interest in the                      
 peace and security of the region, and promoted better mutual                              
 understanding of international and regional questions on which their                      
 perspectives are not always identical.                                                    
                                                                                           
 A disquieting trend in Indo-Japanese trade during the year was the                        
 further widening of the adverse balance against India which first                         
 occurred in the previous year. In order to ensure the growth of trade,                    
 to protect and expand Indian exports and to safeguard bilateral                           
 economic relations against global recessionary trends, special efforts                    
                                                                                           
 -11>                                                                                      
 were made by the India-Japan Business Cooperation Committee. The 5th                      
 Joint Meeting of the Standing Committees of the India-Japan Business                      
 Cooperation Committee held at Kawana, Japan, on 12 April, set the                         
 target for reaching a volume of twoway trade of US 5 billion dollars in                   
 the next five years, and decided to establish task forces in order to                     
 promote trade by sector and by commodity.                                                 
                                                                                           
 The 15th Joint Meeting of the India-Japan Business Cooperation                            
 Committee was held in New Delhi on 7 and 8 December, at which detailed                    
 and in-depth discussions on the development of bilateral trade and                        
 economic relations were held.                                                             
                                                                                           
 Notwithstanding some negative trends affecting Indian exports and the                     
 impact of the world economic situation on bilateral trade relations,                      
 the year saw some promising developments. At the Aid India Consortium                     
 meeting held in Paris in June, the Government of Japan pledged                            
 assistance to India of the value of Rs. 133 crores (Yen 33 billion)                       
 which is an increase of Rs. 20 crores over the previous year's credit.                    
 The Maruti-Suzuki automobile joint venture was negotiated during the                      
 year, serving as a model for discussions initiated between other Indian                   
 and Japanese parties with a view to concluding similar collaborative                      
 arrangements in the automobile and other sectors. In August, at a                         
 meeting organised in Tokyo on the initiative of the Engineering Export                    
 Promotion Council, a large number of businessmen from both countries                      
 conducted a detailed examination of the possibilities of joint                            
 tendering and contracting in third countries.                                             
                                                                                           
 The annual joint meeting of the India-Japan Study Committee was held in                   
 New Delhi on 8 and 9 November. While the meeting as usual provided the                    
 occasion for a wide exchange of views on international and regional                       
 questions in a non-official framework, it also undertook a detailed                       
 study of Japan's experience in introducing technology and of India's                      
 agricultural development, with a view to locating fruitful avenues of                     
 cooperation between the two countries in the scientific, technological                    
 and other areas.                                                                          
                                                                                           
 As in the past, India's relations with the Republic of Korea (ROK) and                    
 the Democratic People's Republic of Korea (DPRK), based on historical                     
 ties, remained warm and friendly. India continues to favour the                           
 peaceful reunification of the two Koreas through direct bilateral                         
 negotiations and has taken note of the various statements and proposals                   
 made by both sides towards this end.                                                      
                                                                                           
 The visit to India of the Foreign Minister of the Republic of Korea,                      
 Mr. Bum Suk Lee from 22 to 25 January, 1983, marked another milestone                     
 in the continuing friendly dialogue between the two countries. The                        
 Korean Foreign Minister was warmly received and had an extensive                          
 exchange of views with the Minister of External Affairs, on                               
 international, regional and bilateral questions of mutual concern.                        
 During his visit the Korean Foreign Minister was also received by the                     
 President, the Vice-President, the Prime Minister and the Speaker of                      
 the Lok Sabha.                                                                            
                                                                                           
 -12>                                                                                      
 India's economic and trade relations with the Republic of Korea                           
 received considerable stimulus through contracts concluded during the                     
 year, including those for the import into India of television tubes,                      
 the fabrication of a platform for the ONGC and the construction of                        
 ships. It has, however, been noted that the balance of trade has swung                    
 further in favour of the Republic of Korea. Detailed examination of the                   
 possibilities of expanding Indian exports and of thus balancing trade                     
 has been undertaken through the meetings of the India-Korea Joint                         
 Business Council. The 4th meeting of the Joint Business Council was                       
 held in New Delhi on 17 March, 1982. The Standing Committee of the                        
 Council met in Seoul on 5 November.                                                       
                                                                                           
 During the year, several visits of commercial and other groups were                       
 exchanged. Apart from a delegation of the FICCI, groups of Indian                         
 businessmen visited Seoul, notably to study the procedures and                            
 institutions for the promotion of foreign trade and exports in the ROK.                   
                                                                                           
 India's relations with the DPRK remained warm and friendly. The                           
 Government took note of the importance attached by the DPRK to the 70th                   
 birthday celebrations of President Kim II Sung on 15 April. The Prime                     
 Minister sent a message of greetings to the DPRK President, and the                       
 Minister of State for Industry, Steel and Mines, Shrimati Ram Dulari                      
 Sinha, represented the Government at the celebrations held in Pyong                       
 Yang on this occasion.                                                                    
                                                                                           
 The warm and friendly relations between India and the Mongolian                           
 People's Republic were further developed by the visit to India, from 12                   
 to 14 August, of Foreign Minister Mr. Mangalyn Dugersuren. In their                       
 talks, the Foreign Ministers of the two countries exchanged views on                      
 international, regional and bilateral questions in an atmosphere of                       
 cordiality and understanding. Both in the talks between the Foreign                       
 Ministers and during the Mongolian Foreign Minister's call on the Prime                   
 Minister, Shrimati Indira Gandhi, the sincere desire of both sides to                     
 develop and strengthen their close ties was stressed.                                     
                                                                                           
 Extending the areas of cooperation that have already been established                     
 between the two countries, a Programme for Cooperation in the field of                    
 Health and Medical Sciences for the period 1982-83 and a Protocol for                     
 Cooperation in the field of Agricultural Research and Education were                      
 concluded during the Mongolian Foreign Minister's visit.                                  
                                                                                           
 -13>                                                                                      
 WEST ASIA AND NORTH AFRICA                                                                
                                                                     Top                   
 During the period under review, the situation in West Asia held the                       
 dangerous possibility of a wider conflagration, due to the wanton and                     
 unabashed Israeli aggression against Lebanon and the PLO. A redeeming                     
 feature, however, was the near-universal condemnation of, and revulsion                   
 against, the genocidal actions of Israel against the unarmed and                          
 hapless civilians in Lebanon. A further de-stabilising factor in the                      
 area was the continued fighting between Iran and Iraq. As a member of                     
 the Non-Aligned Ministerial Committee, India made every effort to seek                    
 a peaceful solution to the unfortunate conflict. A positive factor in                     
 the gloomy environment was the active role played by the Non-Aligned                      
 Movement, with its steadfast support to the PLO and the Arabs                             
 generally. India continued its role as friend and partner in the                          
 political and economic developments in the Arab world. The highlight of                   
 this relationship was the visit of the Prime Minister, Shrimati Indira                    
 Gandhi, to Saudi Arabia in April.                                                         
                                                                                           
 Israel's massive air, land and sea assault on the Palestine Liberation                    
 Organisation's forces in Lebanon in June led to heightened tension in                     
 the region. This and sub-sequent developments brought about a new                         
 situation, which triggered off significant peace initiatives including                    
 the Fez Plan and the Reagan Plan. Continued Israeli violations of                         
 various fragile cease-fire agreements and heavy shelling of civilian                      
 areas of besieged West Beirut resulted in a large number of civilian                      
 casualties and destruction of property. Flouting all UN resolutions and                   
 world public opinion, Israel used military means to seek narrow                           
 political objectives. The PLO leadership, offices and combatants had                      
 eventually to evacuate Beirut.                                                            
                                                                                           
 India continued its policy of full support for the Arab and Palestinian                   
 cause and took various initiatives to resolve the Lebanese crisis.                        
 Government contracted various other governments, including those of the                   
 US, the USSR and France, directly and through diplomatic channels. The                    
 Israeli invasion was condemned in clear terms by the Prime Minister and                   
 the Minister of External Affairs in their speeches in Parliament and                      
 elsewhere. It was reiterated that India would work for a peaceful                         
 settlement acceptable to all concerned.                                                   
                                                                                           
 As a member of the 9-country Non-Aligned Committee set up by the                          
 Extraordinary Meeting of the Coordinating Bureau at Nicosia, India                        
 played an important role in regard to the situation arising out of the                    
 Israeli invasion of Lebanon.                                                              
                                                                                           
 -14>                                                                                      
 The cordial ties with the PLO were further strengthened when Chairman                     
 Arafat visited India at the invitation of the Prime Minister from 21 to                   
 23 May. India's consistent and principled support for the Arabs and the                   
 Palestinians received favourable notice.                                                  
                                                                                           
 The Prime Minister, Shrimati Indira Gandhi, visited Saudi Arabia in                       
 April. The warmth of the welcome accorded to her gave evidence of the                     
 friendly Indo-Saudi relations. The visit further enhanced the                             
 well-developed bilateral relations between India and Saudi Arabia. It                     
 also acted as a catalyst to the process of greater economic and                           
 technical cooperation in both public and private sectors. High-level                      
 Saudi business delegations came to India in October and November. India                   
 ratified the Economic and Technical Cooperation Agreement that was                        
 signed between India and Saudi Arabia and in accordance with its                          
 provisions, the Indo- Saudi Joint Commission, Co-chaired by the Finance                   
 Ministers of the two countries, is scheduled to hold its first meeting                    
 early in 1983.                                                                            
                                                                                           
 Efforts to strengthen mutually beneficial political, economic,                            
 commercial and cultural bonds between India and the countries of the                      
 Gulf continued. The Minister of External Affairs visited Bahrain; the                     
 Ruler of Sharjah came to India and the Minister of Water and                              
 Electricity of the UAE visited India. A Cultural and Technical                            
 Agreement with Qatar was ratified. A loan from the Kuwait Fund for the                    
 Thal Vaishit Fertilizer Project was arranged.                                             
                                                                                           
 Egypt under President Hosni Mubarak has been seeking the re-                              
 establishment of its role in the Arab world and in the Non- Aligned                       
 Movement. President Mubarak paid an official visit to India from 30                       
 November to 2 December along with a high-powered delegation. India                        
 agreed to the setting up of an Indo-Egyptian Joint Commission. A                          
 Parliamentary delegation paid a six-day visit to Egypt from 30                            
 December.                                                                                 
                                                                                           
 India's economic relations with Iraq remained strong despite the                          
 difficulties caused by the continuing war. At present, there are 97                       
 Indian companies executing projects worth over Rs. 5,000 crores in                        
 Iraq, and a large number of Indian experts and workers are stationed                      
 there. The Indian participation in the Baghdad International Fair 1982                    
 was greatly appreciated. The Minister of State for Railways, Shri C.K.                    
 Jaffar Sharief, was present at the inauguration of the Fair, and had                      
 useful discussions. The Foreign Minister of Iraq, Mr. Sadoun Hammadi,                     
 visited India in July as a personal envoy of the President. The                           
 Minister of State for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Hammadi Alwan, also visited                    
 India in the same capacity.                                                               
                                                                                           
 -15>                                                                                      
 Relations with the Democratic People's Republic of Yemen and the Yemen                    
 Arab Republic continued to grow at a satisfactory pace. Medicines,                        
 blankets and a medical team were sent to provide relief to the flood                      
 victims in DPRY and to the victims of an earthquake in the YAR. A                         
 six-member medical team was also deputed to the YAR. A six-member                         
 medical team was also deputed to the Yar.                                                 
                                                                                           
 Indo-Algerian relations received a further fillip with the visit of the                   
 Algerian President, Mr. Chadli Bendjedid, to India in April. The                          
 Minister of Planning, Shri N.D. Tiwari, visited Algeria as Co-chairman                    
 of the Indo-Algerian Joint Commission. The Commission reviewed economic                   
 cooperation and identified areas for further cooperation.                                 
                                                                                           
 A Parliamentary delegation led by the Speaker of the Lok Sabha, Dr.                       
 Balram, Jakhar, visited Morocco from 11 to 16 January.                                    
                                                                                           
 The Crown Prince of Jordan, Prince Hassan, paid an official visit to                      
 India in March.                                                                           
                                                                                           
 Madam Wassila Bourguiba, wife of Tunisian President Mr. Habib                             
 Bourguiba, paid a successful visit to India in November.                                  
                                                                                           
 -16>                                                                                      
 AFRICA (SOUTH OF THE SAHARA)                                                              
                                                                     Top                   
 In Africa, India vigorously pursued its policy of continued support to                    
 liberation movements and anti-apartheid campaigns, while maintaining                      
 close cooperation in the political, economic, scientific and technical                    
 fields with the independent countries of the region. In pursuit of                        
 India's well-known support for the cause of the African people, India                     
 renewed its all to the international community, through the UN and                        
 other forums, for the complete and effective isolation of the racist                      
 regime in South Africa and increased international pressure to force it                   
 to abandon its abhorrent policy of apartheid, internal repression and                     
 continued illegal occupation of Namibia. On numerous occasions, the                       
 Prime Minister, the Minister of External Affairs and various leaders of                   
 Indian delegations to international conferences reiterated India's                        
 total support to the "frontline States" which have been subjected to                      
 terrorisation and destabilisation by the racist regime, and strongly                      
 condemned the Pretoria regime for the continuation and consolidation of                   
 its repugnant system of apartheid through political manoeuvring and                       
 fraudulent means in total disregard of international public opinion.                      
 India also unequivocally condemned the racist regime's deliberate                         
 attempts at subverting the negotiations for the early independence of                     
 Namibia. India further categorically rejected, through the UN General                     
 Assembly debate on Namibia in December, the move to link Namibian                         
 independence negotiations with the extraneous issue of the presence of                    
 Cuban troops in Angola. As part of this policy, India Maintained its                      
 firm moral, material and diplomatic support to the liberation movements                   
 in South Africa, in particular the African National Congress (ANC) of                     
 South Africa and SWAPO of Namibia, India played host to the acting                        
 President of ANC, Mr. Oliver Tambo, in January 1983, and to the                           
 President of SWAPO, Mr. Sam Nujoma, in February 1983.                                     
                                                                                           
 In keeping with the tradition of high-level exchange of political and                     
 official visits with the independent countries of Africa, India                           
 received the Heads of State of Mozambique and Nigeria in April 1982 and                   
 January 1983 respectively, while the Prime Minister of India paid                         
 visits to Mozambique and Mauritius in August. The Union Minister of                       
 Commerce, Shri Shivraj Patil, visited Ethiopia in November when, apart                    
 from signing a trade agreement with Ethiopia and holding a conference                     
 of Indian Commercial Representatives in Africa, he also reached                           
 agreement with the UN Economic Commission for Africa regarding India's                    
 assistance to ECA projects in developing African countries. Among other                   
 high-level visitors from Africa were the Ministers for Manpower,                          
 Planning and Development and Information from Zimbabwe in April,                          
                                                                                           
 -17>                                                                                      
 the Minister of Commerce and Industry of Burundi in June, and the                         
 Minister of Transport from Upper Volta in September.                                      
                                                                                           
 Indo-Mozambique relations took on a new dimension when, in April, the                     
 President of Mozambique paid an official visit to India and the Prime                     
 Minister, Shrimati Indira Gandhi, paid a return visit in August. As a                     
 result, a protocol on economic cooperation and a cultural agreement                       
 were signed in April and India agreed to provide a fresh line of credit                   
 worth Rs. 50 million to Mozambique.                                                       
                                                                                           
 The Prime Minister, Shrimati Indira Gandhi, paid an official visit to                     
 Mauritius from 23 to 25 August, at the invitation of the Mauritian                        
 Prime Minister, Mr. Aneerood Jugnauth. The Indian Prime Minister was                      
 the first foreign dignitary to be invited by the new Government after                     
 the June general elections. The Prime Minister's visit has given a                        
 further fillip to the bilateral political and economic relations                          
 between the two countries. India has agreed to give a credit of Rs. 100                   
 million to enable Mauritius to tide over its financial difficulties and                   
 also offered to help it in oil refining and prospecting, civil                            
 aviation, shipping and small scale industries. An agreement on                            
 avoidance of double taxation was also signed during the Prime                             
 Minister's visit. A relief of Rs. 10 lakhs was announced for the                          
 displaced Illois community of Diego Garcia.                                               
                                                                                           
 The President of Nigeria paid a State visit to India in January 1983;                     
 he was also the Guest of Honour at the Republic Day Celebrations.                         
 During the visit, a trade agreement and a protocol on cooperation                         
 between the Nigerian Buildings and Road Research Institute and the CSIR                   
 were signed. Instruments of ratification of the Cultural agreement were                   
 also exchanged.                                                                           
                                                                                           
 The traditionally close relations between India and Tanzania were                         
 further strengthened with the signing of an air services agreement with                   
 that country in September. In Zambia, the Mahatma Gandhi Memorial                         
 Clinic, set up with funds raised by the local Indian community and                        
 equipment supplied by the Government of India, was inaugurated in Kabwe                   
 in April. Later in the month, the Zambian President inaugurated a                         
 bicycle plant with a capacity for producing 100,000 bicycles annually,                    
 set up with Indian assistance at Chipata.                                                 
                                                                                           
 -18>                                                                                      
 EUROPE WESTERN EUROPE                                                                     
                                                                     Top                   
 With Western Europe, which has further emerged as a positive and                          
 important entity in the world, India's relations continued to expand                      
 and develop. These relations were further consolidated by several                         
 important visits and by a growing appreciation among the countries of                     
 Western Europe of India's special problems and sensibilities. Apart                       
 from the French President, the other important visits were by the                         
 President of the EEC Commission, the President of Greece, the Prime                       
 Minister of Sweden and the British Prime Minister, as well as the                         
 Foreign Ministers of France, Denmark, UK and Austria. There were wide                     
 contacts between India and the countries of Western Europe in the                         
 cultural, scientific and economic fields, both at official and                            
 non-official levels. A Joint Business Council was established between                     
 India and Italy, and Parliamentary delegations from some European                         
 countries made visits to India.                                                           
                                                                                           
 Western Europe continued to be the most important trading partner of                      
 India and the ten EEC countries account for nearly 27 % of India's                        
 total trade. During the year under review, an agreement was signed                        
 between the EEC and India providing for the establishment of a                            
 Delegation of the EEC in New Delhi. Approval of the competent Indian                      
 authority was obtained and the agreement will enter into force shortly.                   
 Some of the personnel of the Delegation have already arrived in India                     
 and the EEC Representative is expected to take up his charge soon. The                    
 President of the EEC, Mr. Gaston Thorn, visited India in                                  
 October/November. He had useful discussions with the Ministers of                         
 External Affairs, Commerce and Finance.                                                   
                                                                                           
 West European Countries also accounted for a large segment of India's                     
 development cooperation assistance, both multilaterally and                               
 bilaterally. They participated in technical and financial investments                     
 in this country. The major donors were the UK, the FRG, the                               
 Netherlands, France, Sweden, Denmark and Norway. India is one of the                      
 largest recipients of bilateral aid from several of these countries.                      
 However, due to the recession now prevailing in the world, all these                      
 countries are trying to limit, if not reduce, their aid to developing                     
 countries.                                                                                
                                                                                           
 The President of France, Mr. Francois Mitterrand, paid an official                        
 visit to India from 27 to 30 November. He reviewed the international                      
 situation with the Prime Minister, Shrimati Indira Gandhi, and                            
 exchanged views on several world issues. The talks                                        
                                                                                           
 -19>                                                                                      
 between the two sides covered economic, commercial, scientific,                           
 technological and cultural matters. The atmosphere was extremely                          
 cordial, particularly since the issue of fuel for the atomic power                        
 station at Tarapur had been resolved on the eve of President                              
 Mitterrand's arrival and was announced in the newspapers the same day.                    
 The visit contributed considerably to the strengthening of Indo-French                    
 relations in general and helped to improve the prospects for bilateral                    
 exchanges in several fields. The increasing degree of convergence in                      
 the approaches of the two countries on key issues constitutes a                           
 positive element which could contribute to stability and peace in the                     
 region.                                                                                   
                                                                                           
 The French Foreign Minister, Mr. Claude Cheysson who accompanied the                      
 President, had also paid a visit to India in August, when he held                         
 discussions with the Minister of External Affairs on bilateral matters                    
 in addition to various international issues such as Indo-China and West                   
 Asia. The French Minister for Culture, Mr. Jack Lang, was also a member                   
 of the President's party and had several discussions on Indo-French                       
 cultural cooperation. Of the various commercial agreements signed with                    
 France during the year, the most notable were those signed in July, in                    
 the field of telecommunications.                                                          
                                                                                           
 Relations between India and the FRG continued on an even keel. The FRG                    
 remains one of the major donors to India, giving aid to the tune of Rs.                   
 148 crores of low-interest credit and Rs. 14.2 crores as grants. India                    
 remained the FRG's chief partner in development cooperation and the                       
 highest recipient of financial assistance from Bonn.                                      
                                                                                           
 Several exchanges took place between the United Kingdom and India. The                    
 Prime Minister visited Britain in March to inaugurate the Festival of                     
 India which proved to be a great success. The Minister of State for                       
 Commerce also visited Britain in June. The British Prime Minister, Mrs.                   
 Margaret Thatcher, made a transit halt in India in September. In                          
 addition to this, the Duke of Edinburgh, the Duke of Gloucester, the                      
 Lord Mayor of London, the Minister of Defence and the Minister of State                   
 for Foreign Affairs visited India in 1982. A British Parliamentary                        
 delegation also came to this country.                                                     
                                                                                           
 The disbursal of UK's assistance to India in 1982-83 would be to the                      
 tune of Rs. 164.8 crores. In addition to this, Rs. 7.8 crores as a                        
 special grant would also be available for the Rihand Super Thermal                        
 Power Station. All assistance received from the UK since June 1975 has                    
 been in the form of outright grant. However, the assistance is                            
 substantially linked to conventional imports of goods and services of                     
 British origin. A non-UK content of 20% of the FOB value is normally                      
 permitted in such goods and services provided this is an integral part                    
 of the goods supplied and cannot be put to use independently.                             
                                                                                           
 The President of India, Shri Neelam Sanjiva Reddy, visited Ireland in                     
 May. Indo-Irish trade, though small, has been growing steadily.                           
                                                                                           
 -20>                                                                                      
 The visit of Prince Bernard of the Netherlands to India in May was a                      
 significant event in Indo-Dutch relations. The President of India made                    
 a technical halt in the Netherlands in October. Among the developed                       
 countries, the Netherlands is one of the most generous donors of                          
 development assistance and its ODA has surpassed the target of 0.7% of                    
 GNP. India is the largest beneficiary of Dutch bilateral assistance and                   
 has so far received approximately Rs. 725 crores. In 1982, India                          
 received about Rs. 80 crores.                                                             
                                                                                           
 The Austrian Foreign Minister, Dr. Willibald Pahr, transited through                      
 India in May. Austria is a member of the Aid-India Consortium and                         
 extends aid and technical assistance to India.                                            
                                                                                           
 The then Swedish Prime Minister, Mr. Thorbjorn Falldin, visited India                     
 in February. During his stay, he called on the President and had a                        
 number of discussions with the Prime Minister. The two leaders                            
 discussed the possibilities of reinforcing further the economic,                          
 industrial and trade relations between India and Sweden. They concluded                   
 that prospects were particularly favourable for closer cooperation in                     
 the engineering. metallurgical, energy, forestry, transport and                           
 communications sectors and requested their Ministers of Industry to lay                   
 down the basis for further work in these fields. An agreement was                         
 signed during the visit for Swedish economic and technical assistance                     
 to the Tamil Nadu Social Forestry Programme. The Indian side also                         
 suggested cooperation in the field of environmemtal protection.                           
                                                                                           
 The President of Greece, Mr. Constantine Karamanlis, visited India in                     
 March. The discussions centred on the international situation, matters                    
 of mutual interest and bilateral issues. The visit strengthened the                       
 existing cordial relations between Greece and India.                                      
                                                                                           
 The then Danish Foreign Minister, Mr. Kjeld Olesen, visited India in                      
 March. He stressed the importance that Denmark attaches to the                            
 Non-Aligned Movement and to India's role in it. Denmark is one of the                     
 few countries to have reached the target of 0.7% of GNP as ODA. The                       
 Danish Foreign Minister stated that Denmark was aiming at 1% aid even                     
 though it faced certain economic problems at home.                                        
                                                                                           
 The Finnish Foreign Secretary, Mr. M. Tuovinen, visited India in April.                   
 The Indo-Finnish official talks held on 2 April revealed the close                        
 similarity of views between the two countries.                                            
                                                                                           
 -21>                                                                                      
 THE USSR AND EASTERN EUROPE                                                               
                                                                                           
 India's relations with the Soviet Union and other countries in Eastern                    
 Europe have been friendly and cordial and cooperation in different                        
 fields developed satisfactorily. The period under review witnessed an                     
 increase in trade and a widening of economic relations. The principal                     
 high-level visits to this area were those of President Shri N. Sanjiva                    
 Reddy to Yugoslavia; of the Prime Minister to the Soviet Union; of the                    
 Speaker of the Lok Sabha to Romania, and of the Minister of External                      
 Affairs to Bulgaria.                                                                      
                                                                                           
 There was an intensification of cooperation in the economic and other                     
 fields and an exchange of high-level visits with the Soviet Union. The                    
 Prime Minister, Shrimati Gandhi, was received with great warmth and                       
 hospitality by the Soviet Government and people during her visit in                       
 September. She had wide-ranging talks with the late President Brezhnev,                   
 the Soviet Prime Minister and other Soviet leaders on bilateral                           
 relations and leading international issues. Besides Moscow, the Prime                     
 Minister visited the Star City (Where Indian cosmonauts for the                           
 Indo-Soviet Space Programme are being trained), Tallin and Kiev. She                      
 was honoured by the University of Kiev with a degree honoris causa.                       
                                                                                           
 The Joint Declaration signed by the two leaders indicated profound                        
 satisfaction at the results of the visit and noted that it had further                    
 strengthened mutual trust between the leaders and ties of close                           
 friendship between the peoples and welcomed the expansion of                              
 cooperation in various field. The importance of international                             
 cooperation in the preservation and consolidation of peace and                            
 stability in Asia and the world on the basis of peaceful co-existence                     
 was noted.                                                                                
                                                                                           
 India mourned the passing away, in November, of President Brezhnev, an                    
 outstanding statesman and friend of India. The Prime Minister visited                     
 Moscow to attend the funeral. During this visit, she had a meeting with                   
 the newly-elected General Secretary of the Central Committee of the                       
 CPSU, Mr. Y. V. Andropov, which took place in an atmosphere of warmth                     
 and cordiality. The mutual desire of India and the USSR to further                        
 strengthen friendship and cooperation was re-affirmed.                                    
                                                                                           
 The Minister of External Affairs, Shri P.V. Narasimha Rao, had visited                    
 Moscow in September to attend the meeting of the Indo- Soviet Joint                       
 Commission. Other leading visitors during the year were the then Union                    
 Information and Broadcasting Minister, Shri V.P. Sathe, and the Chief                     
 of Staff of the Army and the Navy.                                                        
                                                                                           
 Among the distinguished visitors from the Soviet Union, was the Defence                   
 Minister, Marshal Ustinov who, during his visit, called on the                            
 President and the Prime Minister.                                                         
                                                                                           
 The Soviet Minister for Construction of Heavy Industry Enterprises and                    
 President of the Soviet-Indian Friendship Society, Mr. N.V. Goldin, and                   
 the First Deputy                                                                          
 -22> Chairman of the Supreme Court of the USSR, Mr. S. I. Gusev,                          
 visited India in September. The Deputy Chairman of the Presidium of the                   
 Supreme Soviet of the USSR and Chairman of the Kazakh SSR Presidium,                      
 Mr. S. N. Imashev, also came to participate in the Independence Day                       
 festivities.                                                                              
                                                                                           
 Indo-Soviet trade and economic cooperation developed further during the                   
 period under review, both sides working closely for the realisation of                    
 the objectives set out in the Long Term Programme of Economic, Trade,                     
 Scientific and Technical Cooperation of March 1979, and the Agreement                     
 on Economic and Technical Cooperation signed during President                             
 Brezhnev's visit to India in December 1980.                                               
                                                                                           
 The trade turnover between India and the Soviet Union in 1982 is                          
 expected to be over Rs. 3,000 crores. The 1983 Trade Plan envisages a                     
 turnover of Rs. 3,625 crores, an increase of 11% over the previous                        
 year. The Soviet Union continues to be India's single largest trade                       
 partner.                                                                                  
                                                                                           
 The Monitoring Group of the Indo-Soviet Joint Commission had earlier                      
 met in Moscow in March. Working Groups for cooperation in Power and                       
 Coal met in New Delhi in December. The credit agreement for the second                    
 phase of the Vishakhapatnam Steel Plant was finalised in the same                         
 month. The Vice-Chairman of the State Committee for Foreign Economic                      
 Relations of the USSR, Dr. Litvinenko, visited India and had                              
 discussions on the expansion of Indo-Soviet economic cooperation. Other                   
 visitors included the Soviet Ministers for Land Reclamation and Water                     
 Management and the Forest and Timber Industry.                                            
                                                                                           
 Leading visitors from the Indian side connected with economic                             
 cooperation, included the then Union Minister of Irrigation, Shri Kedar                   
 Pandey.                                                                                   
                                                                                           
 The visit of the Minister of External Affairs, Shri P. V. Narasimha                       
 Rao, to Bulgaria in May was in continuation of the active exchange of                     
 high-level visits between the two countries. He had discussions on                        
 bilateral and international issues with the Foreign Minister of                           
 Bulgaria, Mr. Petar Mladenov. He also called on the Prime Minister, Mr.                   
 Grisha Filipov, and the President, Mr. Todor Zhivkov. The trust and                       
 goodwill between the two countries as well as the mutual desire for                       
 further strengthening friendship and cooperation were reaffirmed.                         
                                                                                           
 India's relations with Czechoslovakia developed in the tradition of                       
 friendship and cooperation. The Czechoslovak Minister for General                         
 Engineering, visited India at the invitation of the Minister of                           
 Industry, Steel and Mines in October. The Indo-Czechoslovak Trade Plan                    
 for 1983 provides for a turnover of Rs. 3,862 million, a growth of 14 %                   
 over 1982.                                                                                
                                                                                           
 -23>                                                                                      
 There was a steady growth of cooperation with the GDR and the exchange                    
 of visits indicated the cordial relations between the two countries.                      
 The principal high-level visit from the GDR was that of the Minister of                   
 Culture, Mr. Hans Joachim Hoffman. The Cultural Exchange Programme for                    
 1982-84 was signed on this occasion. Mr. Hoffman called on the Prime                      
 Minister and had talks with other leaders.                                                
                                                                                           
 Trade between India and the GDR has been expanding. The Trade Plan for                    
 1983 provides for a total turnover of Rs. 2,982 million, an increase of                   
 15 % over the previous year.                                                              
                                                                                           
 Member of the Planning Commission, Shri Mohammad Fazal, visited the GDR                   
 in April and conducted talks with GDR Planning Commission officials on                    
 cooperation in the field of planning.                                                     
                                                                                           
 Other high-level visitors included the Chief of the Air Staff, Air                        
 Chief Marshal Dilbagh Singh.                                                              
                                                                                           
 India's friendly relations with Hungary continued to develop well in                      
 various fields. The Minister of Culture and Education of the Hungarian                    
 People's Republic, Mr. Imre Pozsgay, visited India in April. During the                   
 visit, the Indo-Hungarian Cultural Exchange Programme for 1982-84 was                     
 signed.                                                                                   
                                                                                           
 The Prime Minister of Poland, General Jaruzelski, sent messages to the                    
 Prime Minister, Shrimati Indira Gandhi, explaining internal                               
 developments in Poland and also indicating Poland's interest in                           
 economic cooperation with India. The 1983 Indo-Polish Trade Plan                          
 provides for a turnvover of Rs. 3.456 million an increase of 26 % over                    
 the previous year.                                                                        
                                                                                           
 The Polish Foreign Minister, Mr. Olszowski, visited India in November,                    
 and had talks with the Minister of External Affairs, Shri P. V.                           
 Narasimha Rao. He also called on the Prime Minister. He reviewed the                      
 internal situation in Poland and also explained Poland's willingness to                   
 participate in India's programme of energy development.                                   
                                                                                           
 Indo-Romanian relations were marked by exchange of political and                          
 economic delegations which further strengthened friendship and                            
 cooperation. The Speaker of the Lok Sabha, Dr. Balram Jakhar, led a                       
 5-member delegation to Romania at the invitation of the Grand National                    
 Assembly. He had talks with President Ceausescu and other dignitaries.                    
 The urgent necessity of reducing international tensions through                           
 negotiations was stressed, as well as the need for measures to reduce                     
 the gap between rich and poor countries. 4 EA/82-5                                        
                                                                                           
 -24>                                                                                      
 The Indo-Romanian trade plan for 1983 provides for a turnover of Rs.                      
 3,130 million, an increase of 19 % over the previous year.                                
                                                                                           
 India's relations with Yugoslavia developed satisfactorily in a spirit                    
 of friendship and cordiality. India and Yugoslavia continued their                        
 cooperation in non-aligned forums. The then President, Shri N. Sanjiva                    
 Reddy, visited Belgrade in May, where he was warmly received by the                       
 leaders and the people of Yugoslavia. In his talks with the President                     
 of the Presidency of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, Mr.                    
 Sergei Kraigher, views were exchanged on a number of bilateral and                        
 international issues. The importance of the UN Charter and non-                           
 alignment were stressed, and special attention was devoted to                             
 international economic cooperation and to measures for establishing a                     
 New International Economic Order. A Yugoslav Parliamentary delegation,                    
 led by the President of the Assembly, visited India in March. Another                     
 important visitor was the member of the Presidency of the Socialist                       
 Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, Mr. Radovan Vlajkovic. He called on the                   
 President and the Prime Minister.                                                         
                                                                                           
 -25>                                                                                      
 THE AMERICAS NORTH AMERICA                                                                
                                                                     Top                   
 The visit of the Prime Minister, Shrimati Indira Gandhi, to the United                    
 States in July/August marked the beginning of a dialogue between India                    
 and the United States. During her visit, the Prime Minister held talks                    
 with President Reagan and met senior officials of his Administration.                     
 She addressed US Congressmen from the House of Representatives and the                    
 Senate, besides addressing meetings of American and Indian                                
 intellectuals and businessmen. Her discussions covered regional                           
 questions and international issues. It was India's endeavour not merely                   
 to articulate its views on important political and economic questions,                    
 but to seek greater understanding from the US Administration on issues                    
 of particular concern and sensitivity to India.                                           
                                                                                           
 On the eve of the Prime Minister's visit to the United States, an                         
 understanding was reached between Indian and US officials on the                          
 question of fuel supply for the Tarapur atomic power station. This                        
 understanding envisaged the substitution of USA by France as the source                   
 of fuel within the framework of the 1963 Indo-US Agreement and the 1971                   
 Trilateral Agreement. Subsequently, India and France signed an                            
 Agreement on 26 November, and an exchange of notes took place between                     
 the Governments of India and the USA on 30 November, formally                             
 confirming this understanding.                                                            
                                                                                           
 During the Prime Minister's visit, India and the United States examined                   
 ways and means to strengthen cooperation in various fields. A                             
 delegation of the US Overseas Private Investment Corporation is                           
 scheduled to visit India to explore possibilities of further American                     
 investments in India. An exchange of trade delegations between the two                    
 countries was also envisaged. On the cultural side, a concerted effort                    
 would be made by the two countries to intensify cultural exchanges, so                    
 as to project better each country's heritage to the other. A Blue                         
 Ribbon Panel was also constituted to identify priority areas for                          
 bilateral collaboration in the field of science and technology.                           
                                                                                           
 Despite an improvement in the climate of relations, differences between                   
 India and the United States continued to persist on a number of issues                    
 of special concern to India. There was little indication of any                           
 reconsideration on the part of the US Administration of its decision to                   
 supply sophisticated arms to Pakistan which was completely                                
 disproportionate to that country's actual defence needs. India's                          
 concern on this issue was reiterated on a number of occasions including                   
 the Prime Minister's visit. Differences between the two countries in                      
 their perceptions of political events in West and                                         
                                                                                           
 -26>                                                                                      
 South-West Asia continued. India's anxiety over the presence of                           
 non-littoral naval forces in the Indian Ocean remains at odds with US                     
 actions. Nevertheless, it was hoped that the growing dialogue between                     
 the two countries at various levels would improve bilateral relations,                    
 despite the differing world views held by the two Governments.                            
                                                                                           
 On the economic side, India continued to be concerned by US policy                        
 towards multilateral development banks. Of particular concern to India                    
 has been the negative impact of US decisions on the IDA programme of                      
 the IBRD, and on India's request for assistance in certain key sectors                    
 such as energy.                                                                           
                                                                                           
 The practice of bilateral official consultations was resumed in 1982,                     
 and talks took place on 16 November in New Delhi. The Indian team for                     
 the bilateral talks was led by the Foreign Secretary, Shri M. Rasgotra                    
 and the US side by the Under Secretary for Political Affairs, Mr.                         
 Lawrence Eagleburger.                                                                     
                                                                                           
 Three Sub-Commissions of the Indo-US Joint Commission met as scheduled.                   
 The meeting of the Sub-Commission on Education and Culture took place                     
 in February in New Delhi. This Session was jointly chaired by Shri G.                     
 Parthasarathi and Dr. Franklin Long. The Economic and Commercial                          
 Sub-Commission also held its meeting in February in New Delhi, under                      
 the Co-chairmenship of Secretary, Department of Economic Affairs, Shri                    
 R. N. Malhotra, and Assistant Secretary, Mr. Robert Hormats. The                          
 Agricultural Sub- Commission met in June, in Washington. Secretary,                       
 Agriculture, Shri S. K. Mukherjee, led the Indian side while the US                       
 side was led by Under Secretary Mr. S. G. Lodrick.                                        
                                                                                           
 The meeting of the Indo-US Policy Group regarding the Blue Ribbon Panel                   
 on Science and Technology took place in November. This was co-chaired                     
 by Member, Planning Commission, Professor M. G. K. Menon, and the                         
 Science Adviser to the US President, Dr. George Keyworth. Areas of                        
 specific interest to the two countries were identified.                                   
                                                                                           
 The year witnessed a number of other visits from India to the United                      
 States including that of the Finance Minister, Shri Pranab Mukherjee,                     
 and the then Minister of Information and Broadcasting, Shri Vasant                        
 Sathe. An Indian delegation led by the Speaker of the Lok Sabha, Dr.                      
 Balram Jakhar, and including the Minister of Works, Housing and                           
 Parliamentary Affairs, Shri Bhishma Narain Singh, visited the United                      
 States in November, to observe the US elections.                                          
                                                                                           
 The birth centenary of President Roosevelt was marked in India by a                       
 seminar sponsored by the Ministry of External Affairs on "Roosevelt and                   
 Nehru-Styles of Democratic Leadership".                                                   
                                                                                           
 In a year of continued friendly relations between India and Canada, the                   
 positive approach displayed by the Canadian Government towards the IDA                    
 programme was, in particular, appreciated by the Government of India.                     
                                                                                           
 -27>                                                                                      
 The Finance Minister, Shri Pranab Mukherjee, visited Canada in                            
 September for the IMF meeting at Toronto. During his visit, the Finance                   
 Minister met the Canadian Secretary of State for External Affairs.                        
                                                                                           
 The Canadian Minister of Transport, Mr. J. L. Pepin, visited India in                     
 September. During his visit, Mr. Pepin and accompanying members of his                    
 delegation called on the Prime Minister and the Ministers of Shipping                     
 and Transport, Finance, Defence, Planning and Railways. Meetings were                     
 also held with the Ministers of State for Civil Aviation, Energy and                      
 Coal as well as with officials of the Ministry of External Affairs.                       
                                                                                           
 An Air Services Agreement was signed between the Governments of India                     
 and Canada on 20 July, in New Delhi.                                                      
                                                                                           
 SOUTH AND CENTRAL AMERICAS AND THE CARIBBEAN                                              
                                                                                           
 India's relations with the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean                   
 were marked by a greater interest in mutual problems and the desire to                    
 increase cooperation and understanding with these countries. In view of                   
 the deteriorating global economic situation, there was recognition that                   
 the developing countries, even those which are geographically far                         
 removed, must cooperate in fighting the problems of under-development.                    
 Against this background, many useful exchange of visits took place                        
 between Indian and Latin American leaders, providing an opportunity to                    
 discuss matters of common interest.                                                       
                                                                                           
 Dr. Rafael Caldera, former President of Venezuela and President of the                    
 Inter-Parliamentary Council, visited India at the invitation of the Lok                   
 Sabha Secretariat, from 23 to 27 April. Subsequently, Dr. Oswaldo Paez                    
 Pumar, Director General in the Ministry of External Relations of                          
 Venezuela, visited India in September. Dr. Leopoldo Diaz Bruzual,                         
 President of the Central Bank of Venezuela, visited India for a week                      
 from 17 to 24 April, to discuss bilateral issues which could lead to                      
 greater cooperation between the two countries.                                            
                                                                                           
 A significant development during the year under review was the request                    
 of Colombia to be admitted to the Non-Aligned Movement. The Colombian                     
 President, Dr. Belisario Betancur, sent a special envoy, former                           
 President, Misael Borrero Pastrana, to meet the Prime Minister,                           
 Shrimati Gandhi, and to express Colombia's desire to join the                             
 Non-Aligned Movement. Colombia's application to the Non-Aligned                           
 Movement for membership will be taken up at the Non- Aligned Summit to                    
 be held in India in March 1983. A Colombian Parliamentary delegation,                     
 led by Dr. Gustavo Dajer Chadid, President of the Senate of Colombia,                     
 visited India in June.                                                                    
                                                                                           
 -28>                                                                                      
 The Legal Adviser to the Peruvian President and former Minister of                        
 Justice in the Government of Peru, Dr. Felipe Osterling, visited India                    
 as guest of the ICCR in June.                                                             
                                                                                           
 The Vice-Minister for International Economic Relations of Argentina,                      
 Dr. Felix Alberto Pena, visited India in August.                                          
                                                                                           
 An agreement on economic and technical cooperation was signed between                     
 India and Mexico on 12 November. This was followed by an agreement                        
 between Oil India and Mexico's PROTEXA, under which the Mexican Oil                       
 Exploration Agency was given a contract for on-shore drilling and                         
 ancillary services in the Mahanadi Basin. A protocol of cooperation was                   
 also signed between Engineers India Limited and the Mexican Petroleum                     
 Institute to facilitate greater cooperation between the two.                              
                                                                                           
 With Cuba, India continued to have friendly contacts. The Minister of                     
 External Affairs, Shri P. V. Narasimha Rao, visited the country in June                   
 to attend the Plenary Session of the Ministerial Meeting of the                           
 Coordinating Bureau of the Non-Aligned countries. The Cuban                               
 Vice-Minister for Foreign Affairs, Dr. Peregren Torras, came to India                     
 in August, to continue further discussions on the Non-Aligned Summit                      
 Meeting. The Cuban Vice- President Mr. Carlos Rafael Rodriguez visited                    
 India from 2 to 6 February, for consultations in connection with the                      
 Non-Aligned Summit. He called on the President and the Prime Minister                     
 and had two rounds of talks with the Minister of External Affairs,                        
 exchanging ideas on the more important topics likely to come up at the                    
 Summit.                                                                                   
                                                                                           
 A Parliamentary delegation of 35 members led by the Speaker, Dr. Balram                   
 Jakhar, attended the 28th Commonwealth Parliamentary Conference in                        
 October, held in the Bahamas.                                                             
                                                                                           
 During the year under review, Argentina and Britain were involved in an                   
 armed conflict over the Malvinas/Falkland Islands in the South                            
 Atlantic. India regretted the outbreak of hostilities and urged both                      
 sides to resolve the problem through peaceful negotiations and to                         
 desist from the use or threat of use of force.                                            
                                                                                           
 -29>                                                                                      
 UNITED NATIONS AND INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCES                                              
                                                                     Top                   
 As in the past, India played an active and constructive role in various                   
 international conferences and different sessions of the United Nations                    
 General Assembly and Security Council which were held during 1982. The                    
 main developments during the year related to Israel's wanton attack on                    
 Lebanon and the UK-Argentina war on the question of Falkland (Malvinas)                   
 Islands. The General Assembly also held its Second Special Session on                     
 Disarmament from 7 June to 10 July. There were also resumed Special                       
 Sessions on Palestine and the Situation in Occupied Arabs Territories.                    
                                                                                           
 During the year, India continued to play an active role in the UN on                      
 social and humanitarian issues. Apart from its involvement in the work                    
 of the Third Committee of the General Assembly and other related UN                       
 bodies like ECOSOC, the Human Rights Commission, Committee on                             
 Non-Governmental Organisations and the Advisory Committee on the                          
 International year of Disabled Persons, India continued to chair the                      
 Consultative Committee for Voluntary Fund for the UN Decade for Women.                    
                                                                                           
 The Non-Aligned Movement held several meetings during the year. These                     
 were the Extraordinary Ministerial Meetings of the Coordinating Bureau                    
 in Kuwait (5 to 8 April); Nicosia (15 to 17 July) ; Havana (31 May to 5                   
 June); Meeting of the Foreign Ministers and Heads of Delegation of the                    
 Non-Aligned Countries to the 37th Session of UNGA in New York (4 to 9                     
 October) and the Ministerial Meeting of the Coordinating Bureau at                        
 Managua (Nicaragua) from 10 to 14 January 1983.                                           
                                                                                           
 Emergency Special Sessions of the General Assembly and Security Council                   
 Meetings                                                                                  
                                                                                           
 The Ninth Emergency Special Session of the UN General Assembly was held                   
 from 29 January to 5 February, 1982, in view of the failure of the                        
 Security Council meeting of 20 January to adopt a resolution on the                       
 question of the situation in the occupied Arab Territories. After a                       
 lengthy debate, the Assembly adopted a resolution with 86 in favour, 21                   
 against and 34 abstentions. India co-sponsored with 55 other countries                    
 the Resolution which declared that Israel's record and actions                            
 confirmed that it was not a peace-loving Member State and its continued                   
 occupation and effective annexation of the Syrian Golan Heights                           
 constituted "a continuing threat to international peace and security".                    
 The resolution also called on all Member States to cease forthwith all                    
 dealings with Israel in order to totally isolate it in all fields, and                    
 called on all operational                                                                 
                                                                                           
 -30>                                                                                      
 agencies of the UN system and others to bring their relations with                        
 Israel in line with the terms of the resolution.                                          
                                                                                           
 The General Assembly resumed from 20 April its Seventh Emergency                          
 Special Session (adjourned in July 1980), to consider the question of                     
 Palestine as requested by the Coordinating Bureau of the Non-Aligned                      
 countries. India spoke in the debate and also co-sponsored the                            
 resolution which was adopted on 28 April with 86 for 20 against and 36                    
 abstaining, reaffirming that "all the provisions of the Hague                             
 Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of                      
 War" be applied to "all territories occupied by Israel since 1967,                        
 including Jerusalem".                                                                     
                                                                                           
 In view of the continuing Israeli aggression against Lebanon, the                         
 Seventh Emergency Special Session of the General Assembly was resumed                     
 for two days on 25 and 26 June, and again from 16 to 19 August, to                        
 discuss the situation in the Middle East, especially in Lebanon. India                    
 co-sponsored the resolutions which were adopted at these meetings. The                    
 resolution adopted on 20 June condemned Israel for its non-compliance                     
 with the earlier Security Council resolutions, while in the August                        
 Session it was also resolved that an international conference on                          
 Palestine would be held in Paris in August 1983.                                          
                                                                                           
 On the Falkland crisis, the Government of India distressed at the                         
 deterioration of Argentine-UK relations, issued a statement on 3 April                    
 regretting the use of force by the Government of Argentina to resolve                     
 what was essentially a political problem. India appealed to the parties                   
 concerned to desist from the use or threat of use of force and to                         
 return to the process of peaceful negotiations. Later, participating in                   
 the Security Council debate on 25 May, India's Permanent Representative                   
 made an appeal for action in support of the purposes and principles of                    
 the UN Charter to restore peace and assist in the peaceful resolution                     
 of the dispute. The question of Malvinas/ Falkland Islands was                            
 inscribed on the agenda of the 37th Session of the UN General Assembly,                   
 at the request of 20 Latin American countries.                                            
                                                                                           
 Disarmament                                                                               
                                                                                           
 During the year under review, India played a significant and                              
 constructive role in the Committee on Disarmament in Geneva. As in                        
 earlier years, the Indian approach was to focus attention on the issue                    
 of prevention of nuclear war, and press for multilateral negotiations                     
 on urgent measures for nuclear disarmament. It was largely due to the                     
 pressure that India exercised, in association with other non-aligned                      
 and neutral countries within the Committee on Disarmament, that a                         
 consensus could be reached on the setting up of an Ad hoc Working Group                   
 on the Prevention of Nuclear War, with a view to reaching agreement on                    
 certain appropriate and practical measures for the prevention of                          
 nuclear war. The proposal also won the support of the group of                            
 Socialist                                                                                 
                                                                                           
 -31>                                                                                      
 countries represented in the Committee on Disarmament. Interest in the                    
 proposal was also expressed by certain West European States.                              
                                                                                           
 The Second Special Session of the UN General Assembly devoted to                          
 Disarmament (SSOD-II) was held in New York from 7 June to 10 July. The                    
 Session was convened with the objective of adopting a comprehensive                       
 Programme of Disarmament that would chart the course towards the goal                     
 of General and Complete Disarmament under effective International                         
 Control, and to review the progress achieved in the implementation of                     
 the recommendations and decisions of the First Disarmament Session of                     
 UNGA held in 1978. As a member of the Preparatory Committee for the                       
 SSOD-II, India worked closely with other non-aligned countries to                         
 ensure that the focus of the international community continued to                         
 remain on the urgent issues of the Prevention of Nuclear War and                          
 Nuclear Disarmament. The Indian delegation was led by the Minister of                     
 External Affairs, Shri P. V. Narasimha Rao.                                               
                                                                                           
 At the Session, India put forward a number of important proposals among                   
 which were a draft resolution entitled 'Freeze on Nuclear Weapons',                       
 proposing that all nuclear-weapon states should agree to a freeze on                      
 nuclear weapons and the adoption of a Convention on the Prohibition of                    
 the use of Nuclear Weapons, and submitted a draft convention for                          
 consideration. India, with Mexico, co-sponsored a draft resolution on                     
 the prevention of nuclear war.                                                            
                                                                                           
 The Prime Minister, Shrimati Indira Gandhi, in a message to the SSOD-II                   
 put forward the following concrete programme of action:-                                  
                                                                                           
 (i) The Session should negotiate a binding convention on the non-use of                   
 nuclear weapons;                                                                          
                                                                                           
 (ii) As a first step towards the eventual reduction of existing                           
 stockpiles, there must be a freeze on nuclear weapons, providing for                      
 the total stoppage of any further production of nuclear weapons,                          
 combined with a cut-off in the production of fissionable material for                     
 weapon purposes;                                                                          
                                                                                           
 (iii) Immediate suspension of all nuclear weapon tests;                                   
                                                                                           
 (iv) Towards this objective, disarmament negotiations must once again                     
 revert to the task of achieving a Treaty on General and Complete                          
 Disarmament, within an agreed time-frame as was discussed between the                     
 USA and USSR in the Agreed Principles and Draft Treaties of the early                     
 sixties. Although the problems involved have become far more complex,                     
 the basic approach and the principles then formulated could still                         
 provide a basis for meaningful negotiations; and                                          
                                                                                           
 (v) The United Nations and its Specialised Agencies should take the                       
 lead in educating the public on the dangers of nuclear war, the harmful                   
 effects of the                                                                            
                                                                                           
 -32>                                                                                      
 arms race on the world economy as well as the positive aspects of                         
 disarmament and its link with development.                                                
                                                                                           
 In addition, the Prime Minister suggested that the Session should                         
 consider issuing a call to devise legally-binding restrictions on                         
 various types of scientific and technological research for purposes                       
 that are inconsistent with humanitarian laws and principles. It was                       
 recommended that the Secretary- General may be requested to undertake                     
 an independent expert study towards that end.                                             
                                                                                           
 The Second Special Session ended in failure, primarily because of the                     
 refusal of the major powers to accept any concrete and practical                          
 measures for halting and reversing the arms race, in particular the                       
 nuclear arms race. There was also a refusal on their part to accept any                   
 multilateral discipline on their behaviour and action in the field of                     
 disarmament and international security. The Session was, therefore,                       
 compelled to adopt a bland consensus document which merely reaffirmed                     
 the commitment on the part of the members of the UN to the Final                          
 Document of the First Special Session. The failure to adopt even a                        
 minimal programme of urgent and practical measures for the prevention                     
 of nuclear war and for nuclear disarmament, in disregard of the hopes                     
 and expectations of peoples all over the world, led India to dissociate                   
 itself from the Chapter on Conclusions of the concluding Document of                      
 the Second Special Session.                                                               
                                                                                           
 37th Session of the UN General Assembly                                                   
                                                                                           
 The 37th Session of the UN General Assembly commenced on 21 September.                    
 The Indian delegation to the Session was led by the Minister of                           
 External Affairs, Shri P.V. Narasimha Rao, who addressed the General                      
 Assembly on 1 October when he reaffirmed India's commitment to the                        
 principles and purposes of the UN. He referred to India's efforts at                      
 building up self-reliance internally and maintenance of an independent                    
 policy externally. Commenting on the report of the UN                                     
 Secretary-General, the Minister said that the hands of the                                
 Secretary-General needed to be strengthened so that he could advise                       
 and, if necessary, even prod the Security Council into action to                          
 prevent outbreak of fresh conflicts. The Minister of External Affairs                     
 blamed the Permanent Members of the Security Council for their                            
 inability to rise above their narrow national objectives, thereby                         
 paralysing and immobilising the Security Council.                                         
                                                                                           
 The Secretary-General of the United Nations, Mr. Javier Perez de                          
 Cuellar, presented his first report to the General Assembly which                         
 generated considerable interest during the Session. India co-sponsored                    
 the resolution on the report of the Secretary- General, which                             
 emphasised the need to strengthen the role and effectiveness of the                       
 United Nations as indispensable for the maintenance of international                      
 peace and security, and called upon the organs of the United Nations to                   
 discharge their responsibilities fully and effectively. The resolution                    
 was adopted by consensus.                                                                 
                                                                                           
 -33>                                                                                      
 The issue of disarmament once again came up at the 37th Session. The                      
 proposals put forward by India at the Second Special Session had been                     
 communicated to the 37th regular Session of the General Assembly for                      
 consideration and action. India's proposal for a freeze was adopted by                    
 an overwhelming majority including positive votes cast by China and the                   
 Soviet Union, both nuclear weapon states. According to the terms of                       
 this resolution, the multilateral negotiating body in Geneva, the                         
 Committee on Disarmament, will consider negotiations on the Prohibition                   
 of the Use of Nuclear Weapons, taking as a basis the draft Convention                     
 submitted by India at the Second Special Session.                                         
                                                                                           
 India and Sweden, along with a number of non-aligned and neutral                          
 countries, also submitted a proposal for a UN study on the implications                   
 of military research and development for disarmament, with a view to                      
 ensuring that achievements of science and technology are ultimately                       
 used only for peaceful purposes. This proposal too was supported by an                    
 overwhelming majority in the General Assembly.                                            
                                                                                           
 India voted in favour of the UN General Assembly resolution on                            
 Malvinas, which, inter alia, requested the two Governments (UK and                        
 Argentina) to resume negotiations with a view to finding an early                         
 peaceful solution to the dispute on sovereignty over the islands and                      
 requested the UN Secretary-General to undertake a renewed mission of                      
 good offices.                                                                             
                                                                                           
 The problem of West Asia received considerable attention from the                         
 General Assembly which adopted a number of resolutions many of which                      
 were co-sponsored by India. The new major elements in the resolutions                     
 were the support by the General Assembly for the Arab Peace Plan,                         
 adopted at the 12th Arab Summit Conference held at Fez, Morocco, the                      
 acknowledgement of the Declaration of the PLO "to pursue its role in                      
 the solution of the question of Palestine on the basis of the                             
 attainment in Palestine of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian                      
 people in accordance with the relevent resolutions of the UN," and the                    
 acknowledgement of "the right of all the States in the region to                          
 existence within internationally recognised boundaries".                                  
                                                                                           
 A number of Arab and Islamic countries placed their reservations on the                   
 credentials of the delegation of Israel to the 37th Session, voicing                      
 their indignation over Israel's flagrant and persistent violation of                      
 the principles of international law and the United Nations Charter.                       
 Taking note of the reservations made, the Indian delegation observed                      
 that this reflected a sense of outrage by the overwhelming majority of                    
 the Member States of the United Nations over the defiant refusal by                       
 Israel to comply with the UN resolutions and violation of its Charter                     
 obligations. The Indian representative added that it was also a                           
 reflection of the feeling of horror and revulsion of the International                    
 Community over the brutal acts of Israel against the Lebanese and                         
 Palestinian people and the genocidal massacre perpetrated there. India                    
 placed on record its historical and consistant support to the people of                   
 Palestine and the Arab cause. The General Assembly, however, approved a                   
 Finnish motion by 74 votes in favour, 9 against                                           
                                                                                           
 -34>                                                                                      
 and 31 abstentions, not to take any action on the proposal made by Iran                   
 to reject Israeli credentials to the 37th Session of the General                          
 Assembly. Most Arab countries did not participate in the vote on the                      
 Finnish motion. India abstained.                                                          
                                                                                           
 The General Assembly also adopted a resolution on the armed Israeli                       
 aggression against Iraqi nuclear installations. While voting for the                      
 resolution, as it clearly expressed the condemnation by the                               
 international community of the blatant act of aggression committed by                     
 Israel against Iraq, the Indian delegate stated that the gravity of the                   
 Israeli crime would not have been any the less had Iraq not been a                        
 signatory to the NPT or the attack had been directed against any other                    
 target in Iraq. It was clarified that India's support to the resolution                   
 was without prejudice to its well known views on such issues as NPT and                   
 related fullscope safeguards which figured in the resolution.                             
                                                                                           
 As in previous years, the General Assembly adopted a resolution on the                    
 cooperation between the United Nations and the Organisation of the                        
 Islamic Conference seeking to expand the institutional linkage between                    
 the UN and the Islamic Conference. The resolution was adopted without                     
 vote. In this context, India registered its view that a narrow                            
 sectarian approach in dealing with political, economic, social,                           
 cultural or humanitarian questions or the use of religious sentiments                     
 for promoting sectarian interests should be discouraged. India                            
 expressed the hope that the Islamic Conference would strive for a                         
 progressive, sovereign and just society and for a world order based on                    
 freedom, equality, justice and brotherhood.                                               
                                                                                           
 The resolution adopted by the UN General Assembly on Afghanistan was                      
 similar to the one adopted last year except for a reference to the                        
 constructive steps taken by the UN Secretary- General in the search for                   
 a solution of the problem. The Indian delegate took note of the                           
 progress made by the Secretary-General as a vindication of the approach                   
 of India which had advocated a comprehensive political solution from                      
 the very beginning. The Indian representative noted that the                              
 co-sponsors of the draft resolution had chosen to emphasise, as in the                    
 previous year, only one element of a comprehensive solution to the                        
 detriment of others which had equal validity and applicability. India                     
 called upon the General Assembly to make a collective contribution to                     
 the furthering of a settlement of this question. The resolution was                       
 adopted by 114 votes in favour, 21 against and with 13 abstentions.                       
 India abstained.                                                                          
                                                                                           
 As in previous years, the General Assembly adopted a resolution                           
 sponsored by Pakistan on the establishment of a Nuclear Weapon-Free                       
 Zone in South Asia by 99 votes in favour, 2 against (India and Bhutan),                   
 and 45 abstentions.                                                                       
                                                                                           
 The situation in Kampuchea once again proved to be controversial in the                   
 deliberations of the General Assembly. An amendment to exclude the                        
 acceptance of the credentials of Democratic Kampuchea, sponsored by a                     
 number of non-aligned countries, including India, was rejected with 29                    
 votes in favour, 90 against and 27 abstentions. The substantive                           
 resolution on Kampuchea was adopted by 115 votes in favour, 23                            
                                                                                           
 -35>                                                                                      
 against and 20 abstentions. India abstained on the ground that the                        
 adoption of a resolution that satisfied only one side would obstruct                      
 rather than encourage constructive contacts. India advocated a                            
 comprehensive political solution as recommended by the Movement of                        
 Non-Aligned countries.                                                                    
                                                                                           
 The prospects for holding a Conference on the Indian Ocean receded                        
 further when the General Assembly voted a resolution requesting the Ad                    
 hoc Committee "to make every effort to accomplish the necessary                           
 preparatory work for the conference including consideration of its                        
 functioning not later than the first half of 1984". The Western powers                    
 maintained that there was no possibility of convening a Conference as                     
 long as foreign intervention in Afghanistan continued. In addition,                       
 they wanted the Ad hoc Committee on the Indian Ocean to harmonise views                   
 with regard to the concept of the zone of peace and the objectives of                     
 the Conference. The resolution, prepared after months of intensive                        
 negotiations, followed the pattern of the resolution of 1981 since the                    
 Western powers held to their inflexible position. India played an                         
 active and constructive role in the negotiations as the spokesman of                      
 the Non-Aligned countries in the Ad hoc Committee.                                        
                                                                                           
 The debate on the question of apartheid in the plenary session of the                     
 General Assembly was based mainly on the report of the UN Special                         
 Committee against Apartheid, in the preparation of which India had                        
 played an active role. The General Assembly adopted as many as 14                         
 resolutions on the policy of apartheid of the Government of South                         
 Africa. India co-sponsored most of these resolutions. India's                             
 representative in the Special Committee against Apartheid was also                        
 elected Chairman of the Task Force for political prisoners in South                       
 Africa.                                                                                   
 The question of Namibia was once again considered in the plenary of the                   
 General Assembly which adopted 5 resolutions on the subject by an                         
 overwhelming majority. These resolutions were prepared and submitted                      
 for the Assembly's consideration by the UN Council for Namibia of which                   
 India is a member. In keeping with its longstanding and deeprooted                        
 commitment to the Namibian cause, India supported all the resolutions.                    
 The draft resolution on the programme of work of the UN Council for                       
 Namibia was also introduced by India in the General Assembly.                             
                                                                                           
 The General Assembly adopted a number of resolutions on various                           
 de-colonisation matters which included Western Sahara and East Timor.                     
 On Western Sahara, India voted in favour of a resolution tabled by                        
 Algeria. On East Timor, India, as in previous years, voted against the                    
 resolution which, however, was adopted by the Assembly by 55 votes for,                   
 46 against and 50 abstentions.                                                            
                                                                                           
 Other UN Conferences                                                                      
                                                                                           
 The World Assembly on Ageing was held in Vienna from 26 July to 6                         
 August. The Prime Minister's message to the Conference emphasised that                    
 "pooling of experiences                                                                   
                                                                                           
 -36>                                                                                      
 and ideas from different countries will be useful in helping us to                        
 tackle our own problem." The Indian delegation's role was constructive                    
 and prominent in this conference, and resulted in the acceptance of an                    
 International Plan of Action on Ageing.                                                   
                                                                                           
 The Second UN Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses of Outer                    
 Space (UNISPACE-82) was held in Vienna from 9 to 21 August. The Indian                    
 delegation was led by the Secretary, Department of Space, Prof. S.                        
 Dhawan. The Prime Minister's message to the Conference drew attention                     
 to the use of advanced technologies to reduce the glaring wealth                          
 disparities which divided people into the rich and the poor and the                       
 expression of her hope that the Conference would strive to ensure peace                   
 in space. During the Conference, the Indian delegation helped to forge                    
 agreements on contentious issues such as the militarisation of space'                     
 utilisation of the geo-stationary orbit, direct broadcasting by                           
 satellites, and remote sensing of earth by satellites. Besides, India                     
 participated in the exhibition held concurrently with the Conference,                     
 where it displayed applications of space technology to developmental                      
 purposes.                                                                                 
                                                                                           
 The IAEA-sponsored International Conference on Nuclear Power Experience                   
 was held in Vienna from 13 to 17 September. The Indian delegation, led                    
 by the Chairman of the Atomic Energy Commission, Dr. H.N. Sethna, made                    
 valuable contributions, drawing particular attention to the needs and                     
 experiences of nuclear programmes in developing countries. India was                      
 once again designated as one of the nine globally most advanced                           
 countries in nuclear technology, for membership on the IAEA Board of                      
 Governors. The 26th General Conference of the IAEA from 20 to 24                          
 September saw the rejection by the Conference of the credentials of the                   
 Israeli delegation. Along with other Non-Aligned Member States, India                     
 continued to maintain its principled position on issues such as the                       
 Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty and full-scope safeguards.                               
                                                                                           
 The Prime Minister, Shrimati Indira Gandhi, sent a message of good                        
 wishes to the Conference on Women and Apartheid organised by the                          
 Special Committee against Apartheid, at Brussels from 17 to 19 May.                       
 Member of Parliament, Shrimati Krishna Sahi, who attended the                             
 Conference from India, played an active role in the deliberations of                      
 the Conference.                                                                           
                                                                                           
 Meeting of the Non-Aligned Movement                                                       
                                                                                           
 During the year, the Non-Aligned Movement held a number of meetings. In                   
 pursuance of the decision of the Ministerial Conference of the                            
 Non-Aligned Countries held at the UN Headquarters in New York during                      
 September 1981, the Coordinating Bureau of the Non-Aligned countries                      
 met in Kuwait from 5 to 8 April, in order to evaluate the situation and                   
 take practical measures to strengthen comprehensive assistance to the                     
 struggle of the Palestinian people under the leadership of the                            
 Palestine Liberation Organisation (PLO). In all, 80 member countries                      
 participated in the meeting, including all the 34 members of the                          
 Coordinating Bureau. The Indian delegation was led by the Minister of                     
 External Affairs, Shri P.V. Narasimha Rao.                                                
                                                                                           
 -37>                                                                                      
 The Conference adopted a Programme of Action. The Ministers decided,                      
 inter alia, to call upon the UN Secretary-General to initiate contacts                    
 with all parties to the Arab-Israeli conflict with a view to achieving                    
 a comprehensive, just and lasting solution. The Conference called upon                    
 the UN Security Council to apply comprehensive and mandatory sanctions                    
 against Israel under the provisions of chapter VII of the UN Charter,                     
 until Israel complied with the relevant UN resolutions.                                   
                                                                                           
 Another Ministerial-level meeting of the Coordinating Bureau of the                       
 Non-Aligned countries was held in Havana from 31 May to 5 June, and was                   
 attended by all the 34 members of the Bureau and 48 other members of                      
 NAM. The Indian delegation was led by the Minister of External Affairs.                   
 While Cuba was the Chairman of the Ministerial meeting, Zambia was                        
 elected Chairman of the political committee and India of the Economic                     
 Committee. The Conference succeeded after prolonged discussions in                        
 adopting consensus decisions on various important political and                           
 economic issues such as the Middle East and Palestine, South-East Asia,                   
 South-West Asia, Indian Ocean, Southern Africa and Disarmament. On                        
 Malvians, the Ministers deplored the use of a large military force by                     
 the UK and called for a cessation of hostilities and for a just,                          
 negotiated, peaceful and permanent settlement in accordance with the                      
 Security Council resolutions and decisions of the NAM.                                    
                                                                                           
 As Chairman of the Economic Committee, India played an active and                         
 constructive role in redrafting the economic part of the Declaration.                     
 The highlights of the Declaration on economic issues included a                           
 balanced approach on the conceptual framework of the introductory and                     
 subsequent chapters. The Conference made definite and concrete                            
 recommendations on global negotiations, transfer of resources, monetary                   
 and financial issues, trade, ECDC and Science and Technology.                             
                                                                                           
 Another Extraordinary Ministerial meeting of the Coordinating Bureau                      
 was held in Nicosia from 15 to 17 July, at the request of Chairman                        
 Yasser Arafat of the Palestine Liberation Organisation (PLO), in order                    
 to examine the grave situation in Lebanon brought about by Israeli                        
 aggression. The meeting was attended by 32 members of the Bureau                          
 including India, and 27 other members of NAM. The Indian delegation was                   
 led by the Minister of External Affairs. India became Chairman of the                     
 Drafting Committee at this meeting as well. Speaking in the general                       
 debate, Shri Narasimha Rao put forward a five-point proposal for                          
 dealing with the existing situation and advocated a comprehensive                         
 settlement of the question of Palestine.                                                  
                                                                                           
 The meeting adopted a Communique and a Programme of Action. The meeting                   
 condemned Israel for its aggression against Lebanon and the Palestinian                   
 people and for its refusal to comply with the UN resolutions. It called                   
 upon all Member States of the Movement and also other States, to take                     
 appropriate measures by severing diplomatic, economic, cultural and                       
 other relations with Israel. It set up a nine member Committee                            
 consisting of Cuba, Nicaragua, Guyana, Senegal, Benin, Cyprus,                            
                                                                                           
 -38>                                                                                      
 Yugoslavia, Sri Lanka and India, to take appropriate measures to                          
 maintain a continuing and vigilant watch over the situation in Lebanon.                   
                                                                                           
 The annual meeting of the Ministers and Heads of Delegation of the                        
 Non-Aligned countries attending the regular session of the UN General                     
 Assembly was held in New York from 4 to 9 October, to consider the                        
 position they might take with regard to various items on the agenda of                    
 the General Assembly Session. The Indian delegation was led by the                        
 Minister of External Affairs. The meeting expressed its gratitude to                      
 the Prime Minister, Shrimati Indira Gandhi, for responding positively                     
 to the proposal to hold the VII Non-Aligned Summit in New Delhi. Shri                     
 Narasimha Rao, who was designated as the first speaker at the meeting,                    
 proposed the dates for the Summit as 7 to 11 March, 1983, and announced                   
 India's intention to commence consultations on a Draft Document. His                      
 suggestion was accepted. Cuba, as Chairman, also presented a report at                    
 the meeting, which highlighted the activities of the 9- nation                            
 Ministerial Committee on Lebanon. The meeting decided to convene an                       
 Extraordinary Ministerial Meeting of the Coordinating Bureau in                           
 Managua, Nicaragua, from 10 to 14 January, 1983. This meeting discussed                   
 the problems of Central and South America as well as certain                              
 organisational issues relating to the VII Non- Aligned Summit in New                      
 Delhi.                                                                                    
                                                                                           
 In view of the uncertainties caused by the continuing war between Iran                    
 and Iraq, doubts were raised on the feasibility of holding the VII                        
 Summit in Baghdad. When approached by several non-aligned states for                      
 hosting the Summit, India responded positively in spite of the                            
 logistical and practical difficulties involved in organising a Summit                     
 at such short notice, provided the entire Movement felt that India                        
 should host the VII Summit. The current Chairman of the Movement,                         
 President Fidel Castro of Cuba, ascertained the consensus over the                        
 change in venue through the circulation of a letter and on the basis of                   
 the response declared that the members were "unanimously" in favour of                    
 holding the VII Summit in Delhi. The VII Summit will be held in New                       
 Delhi from 7 to 11 March, 1983, and will be preceded by a meeting of                      
 the Foreign Ministers on 3 and 4 March.                                                   
                                                                                           
 The New Delhi Summit will deliberate upon issues of concern and                           
 importance to the non-aligned countries. On the political side, the                       
 Heads of State/Government will undertake a general review and appraisal                   
 of the international political situation and of measures of solidarity                    
 of the Non-Aligned countries in the implementation of their policy.                       
 They will also devote attention to issues like the role of the                            
 Non-Aligned Movement, colonialism, racism, disarmament and                                
 international security, West Asia and the Indian Ocean. On the economic                   
 side, discussion will be focused on an assessment of the world economic                   
 situation, global negotiations and achievement of NIEO, emergency                         
 measures on trade, finance, food and energy. The Summit will also draw                    
 up an action programme for economic cooperation laying down specific                      
 areas of cooperation in various fields among non-aligned and developing                   
 countries. At the conclusion of the Conference, it is expected that a                     
 Declaration will be issued setting forth                                                  
                                                                                           
 -39>                                                                                      
 the views of Heads of State/Government on the various international                       
 problems discussed and indicating the areas where the non-aligned                         
 countries should coordinate their actions.                                                
                                                                                           
 By virtue of the VII Summit being hosted in India, the responsibility                     
 of Chairmanship of the Movement will also be discharged by India for                      
 the next three years. Unqualified support for the change of venue of                      
 the VII Summit to New Delhi reflected the prestige which India enjoys                     
 in the Non-Aligned Movement as a result of its principled and balanced                    
 position on international issues.                                                         
                                                                                           
 International Law : Developments and Activities                                           
                                                                                           
 During 1982, the International Law Commission completed the final                         
 reading of the draft articles on the topic of the Treaties concluded                      
 between States and International Organisations or between two or more                     
 International Organisations, and recommended that an international                        
 conference of plenipotentiaries be convened to conclude a convention on                   
 the topic. The Commission considered other topics such as State                           
 Responsibility, International Liability for Injurious Consequences                        
 arising out of acts not prohibited by International Law, Jurisdictional                   
 Immunities of States and their Property, Status of the Diplomatic                         
 Courier and the Diplomatic Bag not accompanied by Diplomatic Courier,                     
 and Draft Code of offences against the Peace and Security of Mankind.                     
 The Commission further reviewed its Programme of work for the current                     
 five years and established priorities which will guide the study of the                   
 topics on its programme of work.                                                          
                                                                                           
 On 30 April, 1982, the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of                      
 the Sea adopted the Convention on the Law of the Sea together with four                   
 related resolutions namely, on Preparatory Commission, Protection of                      
 Preparatory Investments in Pioneer Activities by States and private                       
 consortia, Rights and Interests of Territories which have not attained                    
 independence or self- government, and on the right of recognized                          
 liberation movements to sign the Final Act of the Conference. All these                   
 documents were adopted as a package by a single vote of 130 in favour,                    
 4 against and 17 abstentions. Voting against were Israel, Turkey, the                     
 United States and Venezuela. The United States voted against the                          
 Convention because of its dissatisfaction with the provisions of the                      
 Convention concerning deep sea-bed mining.                                                
                                                                                           
 On 10 December, the Final Act of the Conference and the UN Convention                     
 on the Law of the Sea were opened for signature in Montego Bay,                           
 Jamaica. The Final Act was signed by more than 150 States and other                       
 delegations. The Convention was signed by 117 States and Namibia and                      
 the Cook Islands. India signed the Convention as well as the Final Act.                   
 Since more than 50 States have signed the Convention, the Preparatory                     
 Commission has been convened to hold its first session in Jamaica from                    
 15 March, 1983 onwards, to take preparatory steps for the establishment                   
 of the                                                                                    
                                                                                           
 -40>                                                                                      
 International Sea Bed Authority, the Law of the Sea Tribunal, and to                      
 prepare Draft Rules.                                                                      
                                                                                           
 According to a resolution passed by the 37th General Assembly on 3                        
 December, 1982, the expenses of the Preparatory Commission are to be                      
 borne out of the regular budget of the United Nations. It is estimated                    
 that about four million dollars would be needed for the work of the                       
 Preparatory Commission during 1983. This UN Resolution was approved by                    
 135 votes in favour, 2 against (USA and Turkey) and 8 abstentions. The                    
 US opposed the provision of funds for the work of the Commission from                     
 the regular budget of the UN because of its overall opposition to the                     
 Convention on the Law of the Sea. The United States also announced, on                    
 30 December, that it would not pay its share of assessed contribution                     
 of about one million dollars towards the expenses of the Preparatory                      
 Commissioni in 1983. Arrangements are, nevertheless, under way, for the                   
 Commission to meet and carry out its work in accordance with its                          
 mandate.                                                                                  
                                                                                           
 Of particular interest to India is the Resolution governing preparatory                   
 investment in pioneer activities which established an interim regime                      
 for protecting pioneer investments in deep sea-bed mining. This had                       
 been requested by the Western Industrialised countries which wanted to                    
 ensure that the Consortia, that had been spending money for mineral                       
 prospecting and development of technology for deep sea-bed mining,                        
 could be sure of being able to mine the sea-bed when it became                            
 commercially feasible. The Resolution listed four States namely, USSR,                    
 France, India and Japan and four Consortia controlled by 8 States                         
 namely, USA, UK, FRG, Canada, Netherlands, Belgium, Italy and Japan, as                   
 "Pioneer Investors" States and Consortia which have spent an amount of                    
 US 30 million dollars prior to 1 January, 1983 in deep seabed mining                      
 activities qualify as Pioneer Investors for registration with the                         
 Preparatory Commission. Thus the scheme would permit 8 Potential                          
 mine-sites to be explored by States and Consortia of East and West, if                    
 their controlling States have signed the Convention. There would be no                    
 commercial production until the Convention comes into force. When it                      
 does, the registered Pioneer Investors are assured of production                          
 authorisation to mine their sites upto the limits permitted by the                        
 overall sea-bed production ceiling established under the Convention.                      
 During the same period, the business arm of the International Sea Bed                     
 Authority called the Enterprise would be authorised to mine two sites.                    
 The scheme allows other developing countries, which may be in a                           
 position to do so to become Pioneer Investors by 1 January, 1985.                         
                                                                                           
 The Convention will enter into force 12 months after 60 States have                       
 ratified it. Fiji was the first State to deposit its Instrument of                        
 Ratification on 10 December. Although 117 States from all regions have                    
 signed the Convention, the position of the non-signatories, especially                    
 from the European Economic Community and other States controlling                         
 Pioneer Investors, could conceivably create difficulties in the                           
 effective                                                                                 
                                                                                           
 -41>                                                                                      
 implementation of the Convention, particularly its provisions                             
 concerning deep sea-bed mining. Of the EEC countries, only five States                    
 have signed the Convention. The UK, FRG, Belgium, Luxembourg and Spain                    
 have not signed. Of the Pioneer Investors, France, India, USSR, Canada                    
 and Netherlands have signed the Convention. The United States, UK, FRG,                   
 Italy, Belgium and Japan have not signed it.                                              
                                                                                           
 The United States has only signed the Final Act of the Conference.                        
 Though they are entitled to participate in the work of the Preparatory                    
 Commission as observer, they have announced that they would not                           
 participate in the work of the Preparatory Commission. Later, in                          
 December, they announced that they would not pay for the expenses of                      
 the PREPCOM. In September, USA, UK, FRG and France had also concluded                     
 an agreement for resolving their disputes as explorers in sea-bed                         
 mining.                                                                                   
                                                                                           
 The Convention establishes a 12-mile territorial sea, another 12-mile                     
 contiguous zone and a 200-mile exclusive economic zone. The Coastal                       
 States would have sovereign rights over the continental shelf for the                     
 purpose of exploring and exploiting its natural resources. The shelf                      
 would extend up to at least 200 nautical miles from the shore, and in                     
 certain cases may extend up to 350 miles. An exception has been made                      
 for the southern part of the Bay of Bengal where the outer limits may                     
 extend up to I kilometre thickness of sedimentary rocks which in the                      
 case of Sri Lanka, may extend up to 500 nautical miles or more from                       
 their coastline. The same exception will apply to India in that region.                   
 A decision to this effect has been embodied in the Final Act of the                       
 Conference. Coastal States would share with the International Sea-Bed                     
 Authority part of the revenue they derive from the exploitation of the                    
 resources from any part of their shelf beyond 200 nautical miles. A                       
 developing State which is a net importer of the minerals produced from                    
 the shelf beyond 200 nautical miles has been exempted from making such                    
 payment. Delimitation of overlapping shelves would be on the same basis                   
 as for the exclusive economic zone. A Commission on the limits of the                     
 continental shelf would make recommendations to States on the outer                       
 limits of the continental shelf.                                                          
                                                                                           
 Detailed provisions have been made in the Convention concerning the                       
 International Sea-Bed Area and its resources which have been declared                     
 as the Common Heritage of Mankind. A parallel system of exploitation                      
 would govern the exploration and exploitation of the resources of the                     
 International Sea-Bed Area. All activities in the Area would be under                     
 the control of the International Sea-Bed Authority which would also                       
 conduct its own mining operations through its Enterprise. At the same                     
 time the Authority would contract with private and State ventures to                      
 give them mining rights in the area so that they could operate in                         
 parallel with the Authority. The system of exploitation will be                           
 reviewed after 15 years of commercial production. The Convention also                     
 provides for financial arrangements, production limitation and                            
 protection of interests of landbased producers.                                           
                                                                                           
 -42>                                                                                      
 The Convention is open for signature and accession to States,                             
 associated States and International Organisations, like the European                      
 Economic Community.                                                                       
                                                                                           
 India continued to participate in the deliberations of the Legal                          
 Sub-Committee of the UN Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space.                    
 The Sub-Committee held its tewnty first session in Geneva from 1 to 19                    
 February 1982, and discussed, inter alia, the questions concerning the                    
 legal implications of remote sensing of the earth from space, with the                    
 aim of formulating draft principles, the possibility of supplementing                     
 the norms of international law relevant to the use of nuclear power                       
 sources in outer space, and the definition and or delimitation of outer                   
 space activities bearing in mind, inter alia, questions related to the                    
 geostationary orbit.                                                                      
                                                                                           
 Regarding the remote sensing of the earth by satellites, the                              
 Sub-Committee conducted a first review of the draft principles, in                        
 particular principles relating to access to data (principle XII) and                      
 dissemination of data obtained from remote sensing activities                             
 (principle XV). While no final decision was reached, the exchange of                      
 views during the meeting of the group focused on certain outstanding                      
 issues such as the access of the sensed States as well as other States                    
 to the data gathered through remote sensing, the question whether the                     
 authorisation of the sensed States was needed prior to carrying out the                   
 remote sensing, and whether the sensing State could indiscriminately                      
 publish the results of the remote sensing, and whether the sensed                         
 States could oppose such a publication, and the question as to what                       
 would be the method for settling differences.                                             
                                                                                           
 In regard to the use of nuclear power-source objects in outer space,                      
 the Committee following a proposal by its Chairman, discussed the                         
 assistance to States affected by accidental re- entry of a space object                   
 with a nuclear power-source on board. During the discussions, some                        
 delegations felt that the existing norms of international law should be                   
 supplemented while others felt that prior to the decision on                              
 supplementing the existing international law, several questions such as                   
 definition of 'necessary assistance', methods of determining the extent                   
 and duration of search and clean-up operations, the steps immediately                     
 to be taken by the affected State, the payment of costs of search and                     
 clean-up operations not conducted by the launching State, should be                       
 further discussed with a view to working out mutually acceptable                          
 concepts.                                                                                 
                                                                                           
 Regarding the definition and/or delimitation of outer space, some                         
 delegations felt that such a definition and delimitation should take                      
 place without further delay and that it ought to be spatial namely,                       
 that agreement should be reached on a certain altitude as the boundary                    
 between air space and outer space. The view was also expressed that                       
 outer space law has thus far been successfully developed and applied                      
 without a definition or delimitation of outer space, and a future                         
 definition or delimitation would cause more problems than it would                        
 solve. The question of the geostationary orbit had been the subject of                    
 close consideration and there again opinions had differed.                                
                                                                                           
 -43>                                                                                      
 The General Assembly at its 37th Session adopted a Resolution on                          
 Principles Governing the Use by States of Artificial Earth Satellites                     
 for Direct Television Broadcasting by a majority vote. According to                       
 these principles, a State which intends to establish or authorise the                     
 establishment of an international direct television broadcasting                          
 satellite service shall, without delay, notify the proposed receiving                     
 State or States of such intention and shall promptly enter into                           
 consultation with any of those States which so request.                                   
                                                                                           
 The United Nations Commission on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL)                       
 held its 15th Session at New York from 26 July to 6 August. Its report                    
 contained an account of the progress made by the working Groups on the                    
 subjects of International Contract Practices, International Payments,                     
 International Commercial Arbitration and the New International Economic                   
 Order. The Working Group on International Contract Practices is                           
 examining the draft uniform rules on liquidated damages and penalty                       
 clauses which have been prepared by the UNCITRAL Secretariat.                             
 Thereafter, the Commission will take a decision as to form, na m ely,                     
 whether these rules should be in the form of a Convention or in the                       
 form of Model Law. The examination of the Draft Convention on Bills of                    
 Exchange and International Promissory Notes and Draft Convention on                       
 International Cheques is almost complete. These Draft Conventions will                    
 now be submitted to governments for their comments. It is worth noting                    
 that the Working Group has successfully completed its work in the                         
 highly technical field of negotiable instruments law. It is hoped that                    
 this will facilitate the international financial and commercial                           
 transactions and will further the interests of the international                          
 community.                                                                                
                                                                                           
 The UNCITRAL is also discussing the Model Rules on Arbitration Law                        
 which should be of particular interest to those developing countries                      
 who still do not have a law on arbitration. The Working Group on New                      
 International Economic Order has been examining the various clauses                       
 related to contracts for the supply and construction of large                             
 industrial works. The discussion on the clauses has been completed. The                   
 UNCITRAL Secretariat would now draft a legal guide on this subject.                       
                                                                                           
 A significant outcome of the work of the Sixth Committee of the General                   
 Assembly at its 37th Session was related to agenda item 122 on Peaceful                   
 Settlement of Disputes between States, which adopted, by consensus, the                   
 Manila Declaration on Peaceful Settlement of Disputes. India joined in                    
 the consensus and welcomed the Manila Declaration which, inter alia,                      
 stresses the need for settling international disputes "on the basis of                    
 sovereign equality of States and in accordance with the free choice of                    
 means".                                                                                   
                                                                                           
 On the basis of a recommendation of the Sixth Committee, the General                      
 Assembly approved by a recorded vote of 136 votes in favour, I against                    
 (USA) and no abstentions, convening of a UN Conference on the                             
 Succession of States in respect of State property, Archives, and Debts                    
 in Vienna from 1 March to 8 April, 1983.                                                  
                                                                                           
 -44> With regard to agenda item 127 relating to the Report of the                         
 Special Committee on the Charter of the United Nations and on the                         
 Strengthening of the Role of the Organisation, the Sixth Committee                        
 considered the Libyan proposal regarding amendment of the Charter to                      
 either eliminate or reduce the role of veto in the Security Council,                      
 and to make resolutions of the General Assembly relating to the                           
 maintenance of international peace and security binding. The Permanent                    
 Members of the Security Council, with the exception of China, took                        
 exception to the Libyan proposal and opposed attempts to amend the                        
 Charter of the United Nations. India emphasised the desirability of                       
 trying to rectify, through practice, the loopholes or imbalances in the                   
 working of the United Nations Charter, rather than go in for the                          
 impractical prospect of amending the Charter. The Special Committee on                    
 Charter Review will continue its work during 1983.                                        
                                                                                           
 The Sixth Committee also reviewed the progress made with respect to the                   
 question of development of a convention prohibiting the activities of                     
 mercenaries, development of principles relating to the non-use of force                   
 and the creation of a New International Economic Order.                                   
                                                                                           
 The Hague Conference on Private International Law is working closely                      
 with the UNCITRAL on the subject of Conflict of Laws, namely on the Law                   
 applicable to International Sale of Goods. For this purpose, it invited                   
 the non-members of the Hague Conference who are members of the                            
 UNCITRAL. A session of the Special Commission of the Hague Conference                     
 was held at the Hague from 6 to 15 December. India participated for the                   
 first time in the work of this Conference. The Conference discussed the                   
 various issues relating to the Choice of Law in case of conflict of                       
 laws applicable to international sale of goods.                                           
                                                                                           
 During the year, India concluded 73 treaties and agreements of which a                    
 list is given at Appendix I.                                                              
                                                                                           
 Elections to UN bodies and other International Institutions                               
                                                                                           
 Shri Brajesh Mishra was reappointed as the UN High Commissioner of                        
 Namibia for a one-year term beginning 1 January, 1983. India's                            
 Permanent Representative to the UN, Shri N. Krishnan, was re-elected as                   
 Vice-President of the UN Council for Namibia. Vice-President of the                       
 Indian Standard Institution, Shri D.C. Kothari, was elected as the                        
 President of the International Organization of Standardization for the                    
 term 1983-1985. Rear Admiral F. L. Fraser was elected as Director and                     
 President of the Directing Committee of the International Hydrographic                    
 Bureau, Monaco. India was re-elected to the UN Commission on Human                        
 Rights for a three-year term and to the Commission on Social                              
 Development and the Commission on Non-Governmental Organisations for                      
 four- year terms beginning 1 January, 1983. India was re-elected as a                     
 member of the World Health Organization Joint Co-ordinating Board of                      
 the Special Programme for Research and Training in Tropical Diseases                      
 for three-year term beginning 1 January, 1983. India was re-elected as                    
 member of the Administrative Council of the                                               
                                                                                           
 -45>                                                                                      
 International Telecommunication Union as also to the Inter-                               
 governmental Oceanographic Commission of UNESCO for the term 1983-84.                     
 Director in the Legal and Treaties Division of the Ministry, Dr. R.K.                     
 Dixit, was unanimously elected as Chairman of the Panel of Legal                          
 Experts of the International Telecommunication Satellite Organization.                    
                                                                                           
 Lists of major international conferences/meetings/seminars organised by                   
 government/non-governmental organisations in which India participated                     
 and of which India became a member, are at Appendices II, III and IV.                     
                                                                                           
 -46>                                                                                      
 FOREIGN ECONOMIC RELATIONS                                                                
                                                                     Top                   
 The year witnessed further deterioration of the state of the world                        
 economy as well as a crisis in international economic cooperation.                        
 North-South negotiations were virtually paralysed and there was an                        
 erosion of the spirit of multilateralism. As the world recession                          
 deepened, developing countries intensified their attempts to reverse                      
 the negative trends. India continued its efforts at focusing attention                    
 on North-South and South-South economic relations and played a key role                   
 in these deliberations. It took the initiative to convene the New Delhi                   
 Consultations in February 1982, among senior representatives of 44                        
 developing countries to take stock of the various issues involved. This                   
 proved useful and timely in generating an atmosphere of constructive                      
 cooperation. There was a consensus that the launching of Global                           
 Negotiations would represent the most far- reaching endeavour of the                      
 international community for multilateral international cooperation for                    
 development. There was also agreement on the urgency of taking                            
 immediate steps in certain key areas affecting developing countries,                      
 such as food, energy, trade and financial flows. Following the New                        
 Delhi Consultations, the developing countries came up with a new                          
 proposal for the enabling resolutions for the launching of Global                         
 Negotiations which took into account most of the concerns of the                          
 industrial nations. It was largely this accommodation shown by the                        
 Group of 77 that prompted the seven major industrialised nations to                       
 come up with a statement at their Summit meeting in Versailles in June                    
 supporting the early launching of these negotiations.                                     
                                                                                           
 Though the general world economic outlook and the prospects for                           
 meaningful international economic cooperation remained bleak, the year                    
 showed some progress in the field of South-South cooperation. The New                     
 Delhi Consultations, inter alia, focused on the opportunities and                         
 perspectives for such cooperation covering specifically, implementation                   
 and financing mechanisms in the sectors of trade, food, science and                       
 technology and energy. Some important ideas which emerged a result of                     
 these discussions were subsequently followed up in the relevant                           
 international forums. These included two Indian proposals namely, the                     
 setting up of a multilateral financing facility for project development                   
 in developing countries and the establishment of an expert level                          
 agricultural coordinating group to formulate a matrix, based on the                       
 four major parameters of need, potential, technology and capital, for                     
 undertaking joint ventures and collaboration projects.                                    
                                                                                           
 Follow up of the Caracas Programme of Action for Economic Cooperation                     
 among Developing Countries also acquired some momentum. A series of                       
 sectoral meetings                                                                         
                                                                                           
 -47>                                                                                      
 took place during the year, including the meeting of Heads of National                    
 Agencies of Science and Technology held in New Delhi in May. The                          
 reports of these meetings were considered by the Inter- governmental                      
 Follow up and Coordination Committee which outlined the future course                     
 of action for the implementation of the various accommodations and also                   
 framed guidelines for holding further ECDC technical meetings. The                        
 suggestions of the IFCC were endorsed by the Ministers of the Group of                    
 77 at their annual meeting in October. There were important gains for                     
 developing countries as a result of these various ECDC activities. Some                   
 of them were the launching of the negotiations on Global System of                        
 Trade Preferences among developing countries, the call for the                            
 harmonisation of the Caracas Programme of Action and the Non- Aligned                     
 Action Programme for ECDC to avoid duplication of effort, the                             
 strengthening of the implementation and coordination mechanisms of the                    
 Caracas Programme of Action like the ECDC account, the core group of                      
 assistants to the chairman of the Group of 77 and the stress on closer                    
 coordination among the various chapters of the Group of 77. These                         
 developments underscored the commitment and determination of developing                   
 countries to fully explore and strengthen their potential for achieving                   
 collective selfreliance.                                                                  
                                                                                           
 South Asian Regional Cooperation was another area in which progress was                   
 registered during 1982. The third meeting of Foreign Secretaries of the                   
 region (Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, Maldives, Nepal, Pakistan and Sri                      
 Lanka) was held in Islamabad in August. It was agreed at this meeting                     
 that, on the basis of the reports of the various working groups, an                       
 integrated programme of action in the eight agreed areas of cooperation                   
 (agriculture, postal services, meteorology, transport, health and                         
 population activities, telecommunications, science and technology and                     
 rural development) should be prepared, with specific recommendations                      
 regarding modalities and mechanisms for implementation, coordination                      
 and monitoring, and to the extent possible, with indications of the                       
 financial implications of the short-term component of the programme and                   
 possible funding arrangements for its long-term components. The idea is                   
 that once the elements of the integrated programme are worked out,                        
 action can be initiated immediately in these areas and projects where                     
 expenditure can be met from available financial resources. The Foreign                    
 Secretaries are expected to finalise the integrated programme at their                    
 next meeting which will also consider the possibility of a Ministerial                    
 level meeting to launch the programme and give directions for future                      
 course of action. Regional cooperation in South Asia, as it is                            
 emerging, represents an important political initiative which will have                    
 far-reaching and mutually beneficial effects on the economic                              
 development of the concerned countries.                                                   
                                                                                           
 A growing and important dimension of India's economic and                                 
 scientific-technical cooperation is the holding of periodic meetings of                   
 Joint Commissions which have been established between India and various                   
 countries.                                                                                
                                                                                           
 The sixth meeting of the Indo-Afghan Joint Commission for Economic                        
 Cooperation was held in Kabul in May. It identified areas of technical                    
 and economic cooperation that would be of direct benefit to the people                    
 of Afghanistan.                                                                           
                                                                                           
 -48>                                                                                      
 The first meeting of the Indo-Bangladesh Joint Economic Commission was                    
 held in New Delhi on 16 and 17 November, under the Co-chairmanship of                     
 the Minister of External Affairs, Shri P.V. Narasimha Rao, and the                        
 Foreign Minister of Bangladesh, Mr. Shams- Ud-Doha. The Joint                             
 Commission has imparted greater impetus and content to the economic                       
 relationship between the two countries.                                                   
                                                                                           
 The Iraqi Minister for Oil, Mr. Qassim A. Taqi, led the Iraqi                             
 delegation to the 8th session of the Indo-Iraq Joint Commission in New                    
 Delhi from 10 to 15 January, 1983. The session reviewed past progress                     
 and indetified areas of cooperation and exchanges for 1983.                               
                                                                                           
 Progress was made in the economic relations between India and Italy at                    
 the Fifth meeting of the Joint Commission held in Rome in November.                       
 Several offers for projects for production and/or transfer of                             
 technology with financial assistance were made by the Italian side, in                    
 fields like electronic teleprinters, fertilisers and thermal and                          
 hydropower plants. The two sides agreed to set up a Joint Business                        
 Council.                                                                                  
                                                                                           
 There was an upsurge in economic contacts between India and the East                      
 European countries through the meetings of India's Joint Commissions                      
 with these countries. During the year under review, meetings of the                       
 Indo-Soviet, Indo-Bulgarian, Indo-Czechoslovak, Indo-GDR,                                 
 Indo-Hungarian, Indo-Polish and Indo-Romanian Joint Commissions were                      
 held at Ministerial level, at Moscow, Sofia, Prague, Berlin, Budapest,                    
 Warsaw and New Delhi respectively. At these meetings, important aspects                   
 of economic cooperation such as sectoral cooperation in metallurgy,                       
 power, coal and oil, diversification and expansion of trade; industrial                   
 cooperation in third-country projects, cooperation in agriculture,                        
 drugs, pharmaceuticals and mining, were discussed in depth.                               
                                                                                           
 India's economic and technical cooperation with the developing                            
 countries continued to progress during the year under report. A sum of                    
 Rs. 7.13 crores was earmarked for implementation of various ITEC                          
 Programmes during the year 1982-83. This was in addition to the                           
 individual technical and economic cooperation programmes with Nepal,                      
 Bhutan and Bangladesh.                                                                    
                                                                                           
 India paid a contribution of Rs. 16.68 lakhs to the Economic Commission                   
 for Africa in addition to its contribution of Rs. 90 lakhs to the IDU                     
 of Commonwealth Fund for Technical Cooperation under the ITEC                             
 Programme. Other activities included gifting of equipment and spares,                     
 valued at Rs. 29 lakhs, to Cuba for UNIDO aided project, and equipment                    
 worth Rs. 9 lakhs for the Butiama Workshop in Tanzania. The two                           
 Indian-aided Research Centres established in Vietnam under ITEC started                   
 functioning. A proposal for conducting 10 feasibility studies in PDRY                     
 by NIDC was also finalised.                                                               
                                                                                           
 Seven hundred and twenty nine ITEC experts were deputed to various                        
 developing countries since the inception of the ITEC Programme.                           
 Detailed break-up of these experts is given at Appendix XIII.                             
                                                                                           
 -49>                                                                                      
 One hundred and fortysix Indian experts are currently assisting various                   
 countries under the ITEC Programme of the Ministry of External Affairs                    
 as detailed in Appendix XIV. One thousand two hundred foreign trainees                    
 from various countries received training in India in technical and                        
 specialised fields including agriculture, management, banking,                            
 insurance, public administration, civil aviation, English language,                       
 water resources development, journalism, industry, fruit and vegetable                    
 processing, machine tools, dairy development and rail technology. A                       
 sizable number of trainees came from countries such as Sri Lanka,                         
 Sudan, Tanzania, Malaysia, Iraq, Laos, PDRY, Vietnam and Suriname.                        
 There were 32 trainees from Africa, West Asia and South Asia. Nearly 10                   
 economic delegations and study teams visited countries like Vietnam,                      
 Kampuchea, Botswana, Tanzania, Togo and Mauritius. A number of                            
 delegations from Uganda, Madagascar, Zimbabwe and Mauritius were                          
 provided local hospitality under ITEC.                                                    
                                                                                           
 -50>                                                                                      
 POLICY PLANNING                                                                           
                                                                     Top                   
 The Policy Planning and Review Division of the Ministry, strengthened                     
 after the merger with the Historical Division, now consists of a corps                    
 of foreign service and research cadre officers, with supporting staff                     
 and facilities including a modern library. The Division functions under                   
 the overall guidance of the Foreign Secretary and the supervision of an                   
 Additional Secretary.                                                                     
                                                                                           
 During the year under review, the Policy Planning and Review Division                     
 prepared about 50 policy papers and background notes on subjects of                       
 concern and special interest to India in the external domain. In                          
 preparing the studies, the Division interacted with other Divisions in                    
 the Ministry as well as with other Ministries and Departments in order                    
 to impart a multiple perspective to this study. As in the past, such                      
 studies were circulated to Missions abroad and territorial divisions of                   
 the Ministry as well as to other concerned departments and agencies in                    
 the Government.                                                                           
                                                                                           
 The Division also continued to maintain contact with area studies                         
 centres of universities where scholars are involved in research and                       
 study of international affairs. The officers of the Division took part                    
 in various Seminars relating to India's foreign policy as well as on                      
 international affairs, at home and abroad. Mention may be made of the                     
 Seminar on Nepal at the Banaras Hindu University in March 1982; Seminar                   
 on India's Security.-The Politico-Strategic Environment, organised at                     
 the India International Centre, New Delhi, also in March 1982; the UN                     
 Seminar on Israeli violations of Human Rights in Occupied Territories,                    
 held at Geneva in October 1982; Seminar on India and Africa in World                      
 Affairs at S.V. University, Tirupati; and Seminar on South                                
 Asia-Stability and Regional Cooperation, Organised by the Centre for                      
 Research in Rural and Industrial Development, Chandigarh in January                       
 1983. Scholars and other experts were invited to the Ministry for panel                   
 discussions while visiting Indian Ambassadors were requested to hold                      
 discussions with officers of the Division.                                                
                                                                                           
 In addition, studies on Bangladesh, Nepal and Sri Lanka as well as one                    
 on Foreign Policy Issues in the Eighties, have been commissioned, which                   
 are expected to be ready shortly.                                                         
                                                                                           
 The Division has been actively associated in the preparation of briefs,                   
 basic documents and other studies for the VII Non- Aligned Summit. As                     
 usual, the Division coordinated the work relating to the Annual Report                    
 of the Ministry.                                                                          
                                                                                           
 Within the Division, a special Cell has been set up to look after                         
 matters relating to people of Indian origin settled abroad. The                           
 information processed by the Cell is utilised in improving cultural                       
 contacts between India and Overseas Indians.                                              
                                                                                           
 -51>                                                                                      
 EXTERNAL PUBLICITY                                                                        
                                                                     Top                   
 The External publicity Division continued to provide publicity and                        
 public relations support to the conduct of India's foreign relations.                     
                                                                                           
 The Division was reorganised earlier in the year to make for better                       
 coordination between its various sections and between the Division and                    
 the Indian Missions abroad, so as to provide comprehensive and prompt                     
 guidance to the Missions in their press, public relations and publicity                   
 work. Missions were regularly briefed on political, economic, social                      
 and general development in India to enable them to interpret all                          
 aspects of India's foreign policy and internal developments to the                        
 public and media of the countries of their accreditation.                                 
                                                                                           
 Against the backdrop of a deteriorating international situation                           
 consequent upon increased great power rivalry and its growing impact                      
 nearer home in the Indian Ocean and South and South-East Asia, the                        
 Division provided publicity support in the renewed thrust of India's                      
 policy to mitigate discord and work towards friendly relations with                       
 neighbours, including Pakistan, Bangladesh and China. It was                              
 highlighted that India's sincere desire to have friendly and prosperous                   
 neighbours was the natural outcome of its policy to seek reduction in                     
 international tension and to build an environment of peace and                            
 cooperation.                                                                              
                                                                                           
 The Official Spokesman continued to meet with the Press every working                     
 day.                                                                                      
                                                                                           
 India's participation in international Conferences such as the New                        
 Delhi Consultations and the Second UN Special Session on Disarmament as                   
 also the Prime Minister's visits abroad, were utilised by the Division                    
 to project not only India's views but the aspirations of the developing                   
 countries in general in securing a new world order. In this context,                      
 the country's contribution and capability in cooperating with other                       
 developing countries was highlighted. Efforts were also made to project                   
 India's firm commitment to democracy, non-alignment and world peace,                      
 peaceful uses of nuclear energy and outer space, moral and material                       
 support against apartheid and in support of majority rule in Namibia,                     
 and support for the Palestinian cause.                                                    
                                                                                           
 During the year, special attention was paid to the following aspects of                   
 the work of the Division:                                                                 
                                                                                           
 (1) Publicity material sent to the Missions was geared to be responsive                   
 to issues of topical interest and to attitudes and views in different                     
 countries. The                                                                            
                                                                                           
 -52>                                                                                      
 requirements of the Missions, in terms of photographs, slides,                            
 documentary and feature films, books, as well as background material on                   
 economic, social and cultural developments, were met on a continuing                      
 basis.                                                                                    
                                                                                           
 (2) A phased programme to modernise and up-date the equipment available                   
 with the Missions abroad, started in 1981-82, was continued.                              
                                                                                           
 (3) The system of reporting by Missions was kept up and improved. An                      
 additional report has been added to the regular reports to enable the                     
 Division to monitor the quality and content of its transmissions and to                   
 make improvements on the basis of suggestions from the Missions both in                   
 regard to content and quality of reception.                                               
                                                                                           
 (4) The proposal to open new publicity Wings in 25 Indian Missions                        
 located in the developing countries of Asia, Africa and Latin America,                    
 which has been under process, is still under active consideration and                     
 it is expected that it will materialise in the coming financial year by                   
 setting up new publicity wings in nine Missions in the first phase.                       
                                                                                           
 Printing                                                                                  
 The External publicity Division continued to bring out its regular                        
 publications, which are:                                                                  
                                                                                           
 (1) Indian and Foreign Review-English fortnightly.                                        
                                                                                           
 (2) Courrier de l'Inde-French fortnightly.                                                
                                                                                           
 (3) Foreign Affairs Record-English monthly.                                               
 During the year under review, the production values of Indian and                         
 Foreign Review were considerably improved by the entire publication                       
 being printed on art paper with an increased number of colour                             
 photographs including a centre spread.                                                    
                                                                                           
 A record number of 76 pamphlets and booklets was brought out during the                   
 year under review. The folder "A New India Emerges" was brought out in                    
 English, Spanish, Portuguese, Arabic and Hindi; the publication                           
 "India-A Democracy on the Move" was brought out in Arabic, Russian,                       
 Japanese and Chinese. Several additional titles of books were supplied                    
 to Missions for their libraries and for presentation to dignitaries.                      
                                                                                           
 Transmission                                                                              
                                                                                           
 Efforts were made to improve the reception of the daily XP transmission                   
 by Indian Missions abroad by progressively switching over to satellite                    
 links from the existing radio links. PTI carried XP transmission to 27                    
 Missions on satellite link through the national news agencies in the                      
 countries covered. Eight Missions in North America are being covered                      
 through satellite channel by RCA, other Missions are being covered                        
                                                                                           
 -53>                                                                                      
 through radio signals, bi-weekly telexes, twice-weekly press cables and                   
 two-way teleprinter links.                                                                
                                                                                           
 Visiting Journalists                                                                      
                                                                                           
 The Division continued to look after and organised visits of                              
 journalists from abroad with a view to projecting developments in India                   
 in the correct perspective. During the nine-month period ending 30                        
 December, 55 foreign journalists visited India as guests of the                           
 Government. Another 240 journalists who visited India on their own or                     
 accompanied foreign VVIPs on State visits to India, were accorded                         
 necessary assistance during their stay here. Over 700 journalists are                     
 likely to visit India by the end of March 1983, to cover the Seventh                      
 Non-Aligned Summit, to whom necessary assistance and logistical                           
 facilities are being provided.                                                            
                                                                                           
 Seventy Indian journalists who visited foreign countries upto the end                     
 of December, were provided with necessary facilities. Another 30 are                      
 expected to visit abroad by the end of March 1983. Communication and                      
 Press facilities were extended on ten occasions during visits of                          
 foreign Heads of State or Government. Eighty one                                          
 television/photographic teams visited India for making documentary                        
 films until December; 34 teams more are expected to visit by March                        
 1983.                                                                                     
                                                                                           
 Audio-Visual Publicity                                                                    
                                                                                           
 During the year under review, 1550 prints of a number of documentary                      
 films produced by the Films Division were sent to Missions abroad.                        
 These depicted items such as various aspects of India's industrial                        
 development, cultural heritage and places of tourist interest, and were                   
 dubbed in the Arabic, French and Spanish languages, in addition to                        
 English. Seven documentary films were commissioned/purchased from                         
 private producers and have been circulated to the Missions.                               
                                                                                           
 Twenty five prints of 5 feature films are under circulation among                         
 Indian Missions for non-commercial publicity. Fifty eight prints of 8                     
 more feature films, purchased during the year for the same purpose, are                   
 being sub-titled in various foreign languages for circulation among                       
 Indian Missions abroad.                                                                   
                                                                                           
 About 50,000 photographs were despatched on a fortnightly basis to                        
 Indian Missions abroad on matters of topical interest, such as visits                     
 of foreign dignitaries and the Ninth ASIAD. In addition, a large number                   
 of coloured transparencies and exhibition-size black and white                            
 photographs were sent to Missions.                                                        
                                                                                           
 Two major photographic exhibitions-"India Today" and "Jawaharlal Nehru"                   
 are being circulated to various Missions abroad. These exhibitions have                   
 already been held in over 30 Indian Missions.                                             
                                                                                           
 -54>                                                                                      
 News Agencies and Feature Agencies                                                        
                                                                                           
 The Division has subsidised the location of Indian correspondents                         
 belonging to the four Indian News Agencies in different countries since                   
 January 1980. During the year under review, a decision was taken to                       
 increase the number of AIR correspondents posted abroad from 4 to 8,                      
 mostly in the developing countries of the Non-Aligned world.                              
                                                                                           
 The Division continued to subscribe to special feature news services of                   
 news agencies and commissioned special feature articles on various                        
 aspects of development in India. During the year, to keep Indian                          
 Missions abreast of developments and to project them in the countries                     
 of their accreditation, 2 new feature services were added to the list.                    
 The publication of special supplements on India on national occasions,                    
 such as Republic Day and Independence Day, as also on the occasion of                     
 the visits of the Prime Minister to various countries abroad, was                         
 encouraged with the cooperation of the Trade Fair Authority of India.                     
                                                                                           
 A news service to Indian Missions was started in December, by supplying                   
 them a daily press round-up covering reports and comments on foreign                      
 affairs in the Indian Press.                                                              
                                                                                           
 Reporting on India in the Foreign Media                                                   
 The nature of reporting by foreign media is kept under constant review                    
 by Indian Missions and by this Division. Whenever there has been a                        
 deliberate slant, it has been brought to the notice of the                                
 Correspondent in New Delhi by the Division and to the notice of the                       
 concerned publication through the Indian Diplomatic Mission and the                       
 correct factual position given.                                                           
                                                                                           
 Special Enquiries                                                                         
                                                                                           
 Special enquiries received through Indian Missions on various aspects                     
 are handled by this Division and necessary responses/information                          
 conveyed to the Missions. A large number of Press releases are issued                     
 by this Division on events of interest to India. The World Press Review                   
 containing comments, summaries and analyses of foreign Press comment on                   
 India or of interest to India in foreign newspapers and periodicals,                      
 continued to be brought out in cyclostyled form. Till the end of                          
 December, 304 issues were brought out as against 194 in 1981-82. The                      
 Review has been revamped and made more comprehensive to include a                         
 country- wise round-up of foreign media.                                                  
                                                                                           
 -55>                                                                                      
 CULTURAL RELATIONS                                                                        
                                                                     Top                   
 The Indian Council for Cultural Relations continued to function as the                    
 main agency for promoting India's cultural relations with foreign                         
 countries.                                                                                
                                                                                           
 During the period under review, the Council received nearly 100                           
 distinguished visitors from fields such as fine arts and literature,                      
 education, musicology and science. They came from Australia, Bangladesh                   
 Brazil, Bhutan, China, Czechoslovakia, Cuba, Denmark, Egypt, France,                      
 Ghana, Hong Kong, Japan, Madagascar, Mauritius, Portugal, Peru,                           
 Pakistan, Sri Lanka, Sweden, UK, USSR and Yugoslavia.                                     
                                                                                           
 Under the programme of incoming performing arts delegations, more than                    
 40 groups visited India from Australia, Algeria, Austria, Bangladesh,                     
 Bulgaria, Czecho slovakia, Cuba, Egypt, GDR, Kenya, Japan, FRG,                           
 Morocco, Portugal, Spain, Tunisia UK, USA, USSR, Turkey, Yugoslavia and                   
 Zambia.                                                                                   
                                                                                           
 The highlight of the year in the field of incoming performing arts was                    
 the Festival of Asiad Performing Arts which was organised by the                          
 Council in New Delhi from 14 November to 5 December, and ran                              
 concurrently with the Asian Games. Sixteen prestigious troupes from                       
 Bangladesh, China, the Democratic People's Republic of Korea,                             
 Indonesia, Japan, Malaysia, Mongolia, Nepal, Pakistan, Qatar, Republic                    
 of Korea, Sri Lanka, Thailand, YAR and PDRY participated. While the                       
 main festival was held in Delhi, mini-festivals were organised in                         
 association with the State and local authorities in Chandigarh, Jaipur,                   
 Gurgaon, Calcutta, Madras, Hyderabad, Bombay and Bangalore.                               
                                                                                           
 In pursuance of the policy of promoting close and friendly relations,                     
 particularly with neighbouring countries, the Council received a number                   
 of delegations from Bhutan. Of special importance were the visits paid                    
 by the religious leader of Bhutan, the Je Khenpo, in January and                          
 November/December. His Holiness was accompanied by Lamas and Budhist                      
 scholars who visited places of Budhist importance in India. The other                     
 delegations that visited included Bhutanese scholars, students, judges,                   
 teachers and members of the Bhutan-India Friendship Association. During                   
 the visit of the King of Bhutan in March, a Chair of Budhist studies                      
 was set up at the Nagarjuna University in Guntur, named after His                         
 Majesty the King of Bhutan.                                                               
                                                                                           
 As part of the cultural projection effort abroad, 62 visitors and 73                      
 performing delegations were sent out to various countries. The                            
 individual visitors who were academicians, educationists, writers,                        
 artists and critics, participated in conferences                                          
                                                                                           
 -56>                                                                                      
 and seminars, delivered lectures and held exhibitions. The performing                     
 delegations visited Austria, Australia, Bulgaria, Cyprus, France, FRG,                    
 GDR, Hungary, Indonesia, Japan, Afghanistan, Malaysia, Norway, Nepal,                     
 Netherlands, Singapore, Switzerland, UK, USA, and the USSR. Some of                       
 them performed in important international festivals such as the Vienna                    
 Dance Festival, Commonwealth Arts Festival at Brisbane, and the                           
 Edinburgh festival in the UK.                                                             
                                                                                           
 As part of the Festival of India in the UK, a series of events of                         
 Indian performing arts were held from March to November in London and                     
 the provinces. Eminent dancers, vocalists and instrumentalists like                       
 Birju Maharaj, Yamini Krishnamurty, Bhimsen Joshi, Lalgudi Jayaraman,                     
 Amjad Ali Khan and others performed in the Festival.                                      
                                                                                           
 Arts exhibitions were received from abroad and Indian exhibitions were                    
 sent out. Among the exhibitions received were photographs from Finland,                   
 graphic art from Czechoslovakia and contemporary paintings from Spain                     
 and Turkey. Among the Indian exhibitions sent out were a representative                   
 collection of modern Indian paintings to the Festival of India in                         
 London and to the Smithsonian Institute in Washington, and a sculpture                    
 exhibition by Amarnath Sehgal, to Switzerland.                                            
                                                                                           
 Under the Council's publication activity, volume IV of 'Indian Poetry                     
 Today, and 'The Changing Language of Theatre' (Azad Memorial                              
 Lecture-1982 by Badal Sircar) were brought out. 'Vision of India' was                     
 formally released by the Vice-President, Shri M. Hidayatullah, on 5                       
 February, 1982. The Thai translation of Mahatma Gandhi's autobiography,                   
 "My Experiments with Truth", which was brought out with financial                         
 assistance from the Council, was formally released by India's                             
 Ambassador in Bangkok, on the eve of the Republic Day. Besides,                           
 Panchatantra III and Jataka Tales were translated into French; Jataka                     
 Tales into Spanish and Panchatantra II in the Wolof language of                           
 Senegal, Mali and Gambia, and were brought out in the form of                             
 illustrated classics.                                                                     
                                                                                           
 In connection with the centenary celebrations of poet Subramania                          
 Bharati, the Council brought out in French, Spanish and Arabic, a                         
 demisized non-priced monograph on the life and work of the poet, for                      
 distribution abroad.                                                                      
                                                                                           
 Besides these, the Council's quarterly journals namely, Indian                            
 Horizons, Cultural News from India, Papeles de la India, Rencontre Avec                   
 l'Inde, Gagnanchal and Africa Quarterly, were regularly published.                        
                                                                                           
 Within the framework of the existing Cultural protocol, 75 Bangladesh                     
 scholars availed themselves of scholarships offered by the Government                     
 of India during 1982-83 for pursuing higher studies in India.                             
                                                                                           
 The Council performs an important function by way of looking after the                    
 welfare of foreign students studying in India. It has appointed foreign                   
 students advisers in                                                                      
                                                                                           
 -57>                                                                                      
 various universities to assist in this regard. Financial assistance was                   
 given to various foreign students associations for holding their                          
 National Day and other function. ICCR and the Government of India                         
 scholars were regularly paid their allowances and other dues.                             
                                                                                           
 Five Summer Camps were organised in Srinagar, Pahalgam, Tanmar,                           
 Bangalore and Ootacamund during the period under review. About 225                        
 foreign students participated. Seven foreign students-2 from Italy and                    
 1 each from the USA, West Germany, France, Iran and Peru were awarded                     
 ICCR scholarships for learning Indian music and dance, for a period of                    
 2 years.                                                                                  
                                                                                           
 During the period under review, the Council launched two important new                    
 initiatives. One was the organisation of regular Saturday evening                         
 cultural performances at Azad Bhawan, with the objective of providing                     
 the Diplomatic Community in New Delhi and foreign students with an                        
 opportunity to familiarise themselves with and appreciate Indian                          
 culture, through programmes of instrumental and vocal music, dance,                       
 drama and films. So far, 17 performances have been held in this series                    
 which started on 15 August. The second initiative was to celebrate                        
 Foreign Students Day all over the country on 11 November (Maulana                         
 Azad's birthday) so as to focus attention on the presence of foreign                      
 students in India, and to motivate the Indian public to be kind and                       
 considerate to them.                                                                      
                                                                                           
 In its programme of orientation course, the Council organised an                          
 evening of Indian Songs and Dances for the benefit of 40 professors of                    
 performing art and teachers from the USA.                                                 
                                                                                           
 Under the Presentation Programme, books and art objects were sent to                      
 universities, institutions and cultural organisations in Australia,                       
 Afghanistan, Brazil, Bulgaria, Bhutan, China, Cuba, Colombia, Denmark,                    
 FRG, Ghana, Indonesia, Kuwait, Mexico, Mauritius, Malaysia, Norway,                       
 Nepal, Pakistan, Qatar, Sudan, USA, Venezuela and Zambia. The art                         
 objects included musical instruments, puppets and dolls. These were                       
 also sent to Indian Missions abroad for essay competitions organised by                   
 them.                                                                                     
                                                                                           
 The library and reading room in Azad Bhawan has been attracting                           
 scholars, research students and readers in large numbers. During the                      
 period under review, about 2800 persons used the library. Five hundred                    
 and thirty five books were accessioned and subscriptions were made for                    
 86 periodicals. Besides this, the library also received books sent as                     
 gifts from various institutions and organisations. Over 75 new members                    
 were enrolled. The African Section of the library maintained 117 files                    
 of clippings on current events and happenings in Africa.                                  
                                                                                           
 The Azad Memorial lecture was instituted in 1958, to honour and                           
 commemorate the memory of the late Maulana Abul Kalam Azad, the                           
 Founder-President of ICCR, and held regularly thereafter. In 1982, it                     
 was delivered by the expert on theatre, Shri Badal Sircar, the theme                      
 being 'The Changing Language of Theatre'.                                                 
                                                                                           
 -58>                                                                                      
 An Afro-Asian writers workshop on short story-writing was held in March                   
 1982, in collaboration with the India International Centre.                               
 Representatives from 19 Afro-Asian countries participated.                                
                                                                                           
 As a mark of solidarity with the freedom fighters in South Africa, 26                     
 June was observed as South Africa Freedom Day. Africa (OAU) Day, PLO                      
 Day and UN Day were also observed.                                                        
                                                                                           
 Under the scheme of maintenance of Chairs/Centres of Indian Studies                       
 abroad, the Council deputed Indian professors and lecturers of Indian                     
 Studies, Sanskrit, Hindi and Tamil to EL Colegio de Mexico and to the                     
 Universities of Guyana, Sofia, Bucharest, Havana, Humboldt, Berlin,                       
 West Indies, St. Augustine, and Trinidad. Besides, two other Hindi                        
 lecturers have been deputed, one to the Indian Cultural Centre in                         
 Suriname and the other to the ICC, Guyana.                                                
                                                                                           
 For prompting greater awareness and appreciation of the Indian Cultural                   
 heritage, the Council has been maintaining Cultural Centres in Fiji,                      
 Guyana and Suriname. The Council continued to maintain one dance                          
 teacher and one tabla teacher in Trinidad and one teacher of                              
 instrumental music at the Mahatma Gandhi Institute in Mauritius. The                      
 Centres have libraries of basic books on India in English and Hindi,                      
 and also reading rooms where Indian periodicals and newspapers are                        
 available. The Centres also maintain a collection of films, slides,                       
 records and tapes of Indian music. The other main activities of the                       
 Centres include teaching of Indian dance and music, organisation of                       
 lectures, symposia, exhibitions and essay competitions, staging of                        
 Hindi plays, screening of films and organising cultural evenings of                       
 Indian dance and music. Distribution of books and other material on                       
 India, publication of news bulletins and developing contacts with a                       
 wide spectrum of local citizens including students, teachers, scholars                    
 and leaders of opinion are also undertaken.                                               
                                                                                           
 The Council continued to oversee the activities of the foreign cultural                   
 centres in India by administering the British libraries at Bangalore,                     
 Bhopal, Lucknow, Patna, Pune, Ranchi, Trivandrum, Hyderabad and                           
 Ahmedabad, and the House of Soviet Culture in Trivandrum, and by                          
 maintaining liaison with the Max Mueller Bhavans and the Alliances                        
 Francaise in India.                                                                       
                                                                                           
 -59>                                                                                      
 PROTOCOL                                                                                  
                                                                     Top                   
 During 1982, Heads of Mission of the following 19 countries left India                    
 on the completion of their assignment: Iraq, Ghana, Norway, Portugal,                     
 New Zealand, Malaysia, Bangladesh, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, Britain, Oman,                    
 Kenya, Mauritius, Nepal, Peru, Czechoslovakia, Kampuchea, Sudan and                       
 Algeria.                                                                                  
                                                                                           
 In the same period, Heads of Mission of the following 20 countries                        
 presented their credentials to the President of India: Hungary, Upper                     
 Volta, Syria, Greece, Guinea, Norway, Indonesia, Iran, Malaysia, Iraq,                    
 Portugal, Pakistan, UK, Bangladesh, Sri Lanka, Kenya, Oman, Algeria,                      
 Mauritius and Czechoslovakia.                                                             
                                                                                           
 The Republic of Rwanda appointed its first Ambassador to India with                       
 residence in Nairobi. The Ambassador of Rwanda presented his                              
 credentials to the President of India on 27 December.                                     
                                                                                           
 Letters from the President were sent to all Heads of State on the                         
 assumption of charge by Giani Zail Singh of the office of the President                   
 of India.                                                                                 
                                                                                           
 -60>                                                                                      
 PASSPORT, EMIGRATION AND CONSULAR SERVICES                                                
                                                                     Top                   
 Requests for issue of fresh passports and other related services in                       
 1982 exceeded the all-time high figure reached in 1981. There was also                    
 an appreciable increase in the quantum of consular services rendered by                   
 Indian Missions abroad and the Ministry. During the year, the main                        
 emphasis was on the expeditious disposal of passport applications as                      
 weIl as improvement in the quality and services rendered to passport                      
 applicants.                                                                               
                                                                                           
 As many as 15.34 lakh applications for the issue of fresh passports                       
 were received in Passport Offices in India during 1982 the highest                        
 figure recorded for any single year. This was marginally higher than                      
 the 14.73 lakh applications received in 1981. Likewise, there was a                       
 substantial increase in the number of applications received for                           
 miscellaneous services which also touched an all-time high figure of                      
 7.60 lakhs as compared to 6.22 lakhs in 1981, representing an increase                    
 of over 20%. Continuous efforts were made to increase output in 1982                      
 and the Passport Offices issued 15.49 lakh passports and rendered                         
 miscellaneous passport services to 7.71 lakh applicants as the issuance                   
 of passport is a continuing exercise, with passport applications having                   
 to go through various stages of process. The Passport Office in Bombay                    
 received the maximum number of applications, followed by Madras,                          
 Cochin, Jullundur and Hyderabad. A statement showing the services                         
 rendered by each Passport Office in India is given at Appendix V.                         
                                                                                           
 At the commencement of 1982, the Passport Offices were faced with two                     
 main constraints in the issue of passports, shortage of passport                          
 booklets and insufficient staff. The shortage of passport booklets was                    
 met through an increase in production, which gradually rose from 3000                     
 to 8000 booklets per day. Similarly, efforts were made through the                        
 Railways and postal authorities for timely supply of booklets to                          
 various Passport Offices. At times, passport booklets were also                           
 airfreighted to meet sudden and unforeseen requirements. Besides the                      
 India Security Press, Nasik, the Passport Offices at Bombay and Delhi                     
 served as Passport Booklet Banks to meet the unforeseen demands for                       
 Passport booklets in Passport Offices in India and Missions abroad. The                   
 shortage of staff was met through streamlining procedures and the                         
 Passport Offices were provided with adequate staff to cope with the                       
 increase in workload. During the year under review, 248 additional                        
 posts were created and distributed among various offices. Furthermore,                    
 Passport Clearance Cells were established in Passport Offices at                          
 Bombay, Cochin, Delhi, Chandigarh, Lucknow, Madras and Calcutta with a                    
 view to assisting in the clearance of arrears in those offices, where                     
 they get periodically accumulated                                                         
                                                                                           
 -61>                                                                                      
 owing to the fluctuating nature of receipt of passport applications.                      
 These steps helped in the expeditious clearance of passport                               
 applications and the arrears at the end of 1982 stood at around 2.88                      
 lakhs, which is the normal pendency.                                                      
                                                                                           
 With a view to improving the quality of passport services rendered, a                     
 number of steps were taken. A new passport booklet, smaller in size                       
 with a flexible rexin cover in keeping with international standards,                      
 was introduced with effect from 1 June. Another innovation was the                        
 introduction of the Passport Fee Stamp with effect from 1 July in about                   
 800 to 1000 Post Offices all over India, by way of an additional                          
 facility to passport applicants for depositing passport fees. This is                     
 also expected to facilitate existing accounting procedures and lead to                    
 speedier issue of passports. During the year 1982, extension counters                     
 of the State Bank of India were opened in five Passport Offices :                         
 Jullundur, Chandigarh, Kozhikode, Lucknow and Jaipur. This facility now                   
 exists in eight Passport Offices including Bombay, Ahmedabad and                          
 Hyderabad.                                                                                
                                                                                           
 Several steps were taken to minimise the delay and harassment caused to                   
 the public in obtaining passports. One was to reach passport applicants                   
 directly, who were acquainted with the procedures for the issue of                        
 passports by the Passport Offices, through local media. All Passport                      
 Offices are now required to display, prominently, information regarding                   
 the dates of passport applications being currently processed by them.                     
 Similarly, existing rules regarding recognition of travel agencies were                   
 streamlined with a view to making them more responsive to public                          
 requirements. Necessary steps have been taken to minimise forgeries on                    
 passports. Continuous efforts were also made to enhance coordination                      
 with State authorities.                                                                   
                                                                                           
 During the year under review, a Passport Liaison Office was opened at                     
 Simla. It is proposed to open new Passport Offices at Trichy, Bareilly                    
 and Goa during 1983. Computerised methods in respect of                                   
 storage/retrieval of information relating to passport work would also                     
 be gradually introduced.                                                                  
                                                                                           
 In view of the keen interest taken by members of Parliament in passport                   
 work, a special session of the Parliamentary Consultative Committee                       
 attached to this Ministry was held on 28 April, exclusively devoted to                    
 passport work. The members of the Consultative Committee appreciated                      
 the various steps being taken by the Ministry to expeditiously issue                      
 passports and made further suggestions. Practically all the                               
 recommendations of the Consultative Committee have been implemented.                      
 Prior to the holding of this meeting, an All-India Passport Officers                      
 Conference was held from 14 to 16 April. A number of important                            
 recommendations were made at the Conference, which are being                              
 implemented.                                                                              
                                                                                           
 With a view to removing inconvenience to Indian passengers going                          
 abroad, the Passport Offices continued to grant endorsements such as                      
 "Emigration Check Required" and "Emigration Clearance Not Required"                       
 depending upon the category of the applicants at the time of issue of                     
 the pasport Itself. Pasport offices were also authorised                                  
                                                                                           
 -62>                                                                                      
 to grant suspension endorsements in order to assist persons who are                       
 required to go abroad for short visits. Furthermore, Indian Missions                      
 abroad were authorised to grant "Emigration Clearance Not Required"                       
 endorsement on passports of those Indian nationals who are normally                       
 resident abroad, with a view to minimising harassment at immigrant                        
 check points whenever they return abroad after visiting India.                            
                                                                                           
 Government suspended the Landing Permit System for foreign tourists                       
 during the earlier part of November and December, keeping in view                         
 security considerations for the 9th Asian Games. The suspension of the                    
 Landing Permit System has been extended till end March 1983 in view of                    
 the Non-Aligned Summit to be held in New Delhi. The Missions have been                    
 provided with additional local staff on a temporary basis to assist                       
 them in expeditious issue of visas to foreign visitors who may wish to                    
 come to India during this period. However, the Immigration Check Points                   
 in India have been given authority to allow entry of persons of Indian                    
 origin visiting India on pressing grounds who are unable to obtain                        
 visas prior to their arrival.                                                             
                                                                                           
 During the period under review, Indian Missions/Posts abroad extended                     
 financial assistance to 22 Indian nationals and repatriated 519 persons                   
 who were in distress in foreign countries. The question of settlement                     
 of claims/death compensation was taken up with the concerned foreign                      
 authorities on behalf of the next of kin of the deceased. During the                      
 same period, 140 cases of death of foreign nationals in India were also                   
 handled by the Ministry.                                                                  
                                                                                           
 The number of documents requiring attestation/authentication by the                       
 Ministry before submission to the Foreign Governments/Embassies                           
 continued to increase each year. The number of such documents rose to                     
 1,32,034 from 1,10,008 in 1981.                                                           
                                                                                           
 Cases of 341 Indian nationals arrested in various countries were                          
 reported to the Government. All possible consular assistance was given                    
 to them and, where possible, their release and return to India were                       
 arranged by the Missions concerned.                                                       
                                                                                           
 During the period under review, efforts were made to streamline the                       
 working of Indian Consular Sections abroad. A detailed survey of their                    
 working was undertaken and fresh guidelines have been issued to                           
 Missions abroad, aimed at further improving consular assistance                           
 rendered by the Missions to Indian nationals abroad. Separate steps                       
 have also been initiated to meet the particular requirements of the                       
 Gulf area, where there has been a sudden increase in the number of                        
 Indian nationals.                                                                         
                                                                                           
 -63>                                                                                      
 ADMINISTRATION AND ORGANISATION                                                           
                                                                     Top                   
 Shri P.V. Narasimha Rao continued as the Minister of External Affairs.                    
 Shri A.A. Rahim took over as Minister of State in the Ministry of                         
 External Affairs from 3 September. Shri M. Rasgotra took over as                          
 Foreign Secretary from Shri R.D. Sathe in April 1982. Shri K. Natwar                      
 Singh, former Ambassador to Pakistan, took over as Secretary                              
 (Pak-Iraf/NAM/CHOGM) on 1 April 1982, against an ex-cadre post, and                       
 Shri K.S. Bajpai assumed charge as Secretary (East) in place of Shri                      
 Eric Gonsalves during July. At the level of Additional Secretaries,                       
 Shri J.R. Hiremath continued as Additional Secretary (AD) and Dr. J.S.                    
 Teja as Additional Secretary (UN&PPE).                                                    
                                                                                           
 The total strength of the IFS(A) and IFS(B) cadres both at Headquarters                   
 and abroad including locally recruited staff in Missions, was 5,170 out                   
 of which locally recruited staff were 1,430 and diplomatic officers                       
 1,076. The total staff strength is given at Appendix-VI.                                  
                                                                                           
 For projecting the image of India abroad in the external domain,                          
 safeguarding its national interests and ensuring the implementation of                    
 its national schemes and policies within the purview of the field of                      
 international politics, there are 134 Missions and Posts abroad manned                    
 by 629 officers, 1,337 non- diplomatic officials and 1,430 locally                        
 appointed staff.                                                                          
                                                                                           
 A list detailing the number of officers who have qualified in various                     
 foreign languages is given at Appendix VII.                                               
                                                                                           
 The recessionary trends combined with inflation evident in the world                      
 economy were reflected, as in the past in the administrative                              
 expenditure on account of increased service costs in all Indian                           
 Missions, and showed no signs of abating during the year. It was,                         
 therefore, essential to implement further administrative and financial                    
 reforms to make the Indian Missions' work more cost-effective. Schemes                    
 relating to the home leave fares and emergency passage facility and the                   
 transportation of baggage between stations of posting were streamlined.                   
 Action on the removal of transferable items of work from the Indian                       
 Embassy in Washington and Indian Consulates General in New York,                          
 Chicago and San Francisco, has been undertaken along the lines of work                    
 transferred from London, to effect economy, reduce duplication of work                    
 and make available manpower and posts for deployment in heavily                           
 over-worked Missions in areas such as the Gulf and West Asia which also                   
 happen to be India's priority-interest areas.                                             
                                                                                           
 The Cadre Review for IFS(A) was completed and is awaiting finalisation                    
 by the Ministry of Finance and the Department of Personnel and                            
 Administrative Reforms.                                                                   
                                                                                           
 -64>                                                                                      
 Work on the Cadre Review of the IFS(B) Cadre is continuing. The latter                    
 can be finalised only after the former has been finally accepted, since                   
 the numerical strength of the supporting staff depends on the strength                    
 of officers finally fixed for this Ministry.                                              
                                                                                           
 During the financial year 1982-83, the Foreign Service Inspectors                         
 conducted inspections of a large number of Missions including some in                     
 Latin America which had, because of their great distance, been                            
 neglected for quite some time.                                                            
                                                                                           
 The rationalisation of the Daily Allowance formula, which was under                       
 consideration of the Ministry for the last three years, has been                          
 finalised, and the revised scheme has been introduced with effect from                    
 19 May 1982. Under the new scheme, a uniform rate of cash allowance has                   
 been prescribed for a country as against different rates fixed earlier                    
 for different cities within a country. All-inclusive rates of daily                       
 allowance outside India have been abolished. In addition, the Approved                    
 Panel of Hotels Scheme has also been brought into force which would                       
 enable the delegates/Government officials visiting foreign countries on                   
 official duty to stay in any of the approved hotels and claim the                         
 reimbursement of actual room charges in such hotels. This would                           
 eliminate the need for frequent revision of the prescribed hotel                          
 ceilings.                                                                                 
                                                                                           
 The Welfare Unit of the Ministry continued to look after the general                      
 welfare of all officials serving at Headquarters and in the Missions                      
 abroad. Grants-in-aid on an ad hoc basis for the provision of                             
 recreational facilities to officers and staff in Missions and Passport                    
 Offices was arranged in consultation with the Department of Personnel                     
 and Administrative Reforms. Financial aid under the Staff Benefit Fund                    
 was provided to bereaved families and help was extended in other                          
 deserving cases. Employment was provided to deserving dependents of                       
 deceased officials and suitable assistance was extended to the                            
 physically handicapped. Canteen facilities at South Block, Patiala                        
 House and the External Affairs Hostel were improved. Action on the                        
 property acquisition plan was taken to the extent of Rs. 12.00 crores                     
 during the current financial year. Further, a grant-in-aid for Rs. 84                     
 lakhs has been accorded in principle to the Indian Society of                             
 International Law for the construction of their building on Bhagwandas                    
 Road. Suitable terms and conditions for the grant of this money have                      
 been evolved; Rs. 21 lakhs of this amount will be an outright grant by                    
 this Ministry to the I.S.I.L. and the remaining Rs. 63 lakhs will be a                    
 long-term loan. The total establishment expenditure of all Missions                       
 abroad has, due to the world's inflationary trends, risen to Rs. 53.45                    
 crores. The expenditure at Headquarters is about Rs. 10.08 crores.                        
 Details are given in Appendices VIII and IX.                                              
                                                                                           
 India's contribution to the various international organisations is of                     
 the order of Rs. 4.42 crores while technical and economic assistance                      
 extended to various Third World countries is of the order of Rs. 76.90                    
 crores. A special cell continues to function to watch and monitor the                     
 progress of implementation of the reservation order in respect of the                     
 Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. During the current year, 15                        
 officers have been appointed as direct recruits in the Indian Foreign                     
 Service(A) out of which                                                                   
                                                                                           
 -65>                                                                                      
 2 belong to the Scheduled Caste and one to a Scheduled Tribe. The                         
 details are given at Appendices X and XI.                                                 
                                                                                           
 A Conference Cell was set up in the Ministry of External Affairs in                       
 June, to look after the logistical arrangements to be made for                            
 organising international Conferences/Meetings hosted by                                   
 Ministries/Departments of the Government of India, including this                         
 Ministry. The various Conferences/Meetings for which the Conference                       
 Cell made logistical arrangements during 1982-83 are given at Appendix                    
 XII.                                                                                      
                                                                                           
 -66>                                                                                      
 USE OF HINDI IN OFFICIAL WORK                                                             
                                                                     Top                   
 During the year under review, there was a notable increase in the                         
 implementation of official language rules and progressive use of Hindi                    
 in official work, both at Headquarters and in Missions abroad. Several                    
 steps were taken to implement the suggestions made by the Parliamentary                   
 Committee on Official Language during its inspection visits at                            
 Headquarters and in the Missions, which included the fixing of                            
 check-points for the compliance of the official language rules,                           
 provision of Hindi typewriters to Regional Passport Offices, and action                   
 for the creation of posts of Hindi Officers and translators in the                        
 Missions and in the Regional Passport Offices. Particular efforts were                    
 made for the propagation of Hindi in Missions located in countries                        
 where there are large numbers of people of Indian origin.                                 
                                                                                           
 During the year, the Official Language Committee, headed by the                           
 Additional Secretary (Administration), met regularly. At these                            
 meetings, besides reviewing the progressive use of Hindi in the                           
 Ministry, necessary instructions were issued for the implementation of                    
 the Official Language Rules. As a result, there was considerable                          
 improvement in regard to the issuance of Office Orders in bilingual                       
 form and correspondence in Hindi with the States in Regions 'A' and                       
 'B'. The check-points fixed for the implementation of Official Language                   
 Rules are being further tightened.                                                        
                                                                                           
 The sub-committee of the Central Hindi Committee was reconstituted in                     
 the Ministry. The Minister of External Affairs, Shri P.V. Narasimha                       
 Rao, is the Chairman of this sub-committee and the Foreign Secretary,                     
 Shri M. Rasgotra, its ex-officio Secretary.                                               
                                                                                           
 During the year under report, a Hindi workshop was organised for the                      
 benefit of IFS probationers at Headquarters. The officials of the                         
 Ministry were also sent for Hindi training at the various Hindi courses                   
 organised by the Official Language Department. Indian Missions abroad                     
 were once again requested to organise Hindi classes for the wards of                      
 their employees and the response has been quite encouraging.                              
                                                                                           
 The target of equipping all Indian Missions abroad with a Hindi                           
 typewriter each has nearly been achieved. The Ministry is considering                     
 the proposal for sending Hindi typists to the Missions. Apart from                        
 equipping the Missions with Hindi typewriters, Hindi typewriters have                     
 also been gifted through Indian Missions to voluntary organisations in                    
 London, Rangoon, Sri Lanka and Suva. At the Ministry's request, the                       
                                                                                           
 -67>                                                                                      
 Ministry of Education and Culture have recently sanctioned a Hindi                        
 typewriter for the Government of Fiji.                                                    
                                                                                           
 Under the Ministry's scheme of equipping the libraries of the Indian                      
 Missions with standard Hindi books, an additional consignment of Hindi                    
 books of a total cost of Rs. 3 lakhs is being despatched. Besides, the                    
 Ministry of Education and Culture have also allocated over Rs. 2 lakhs                    
 for sending Hindi books to Indian Missions abroad.                                        
                                                                                           
 Gifts of text books, dictionaries and reference books were made through                   
 Indian Missions to voluntary Hindi Organisations working for the                          
 propagation of Hindi in foreign countries. Over 700 copies each of the                    
 Gita and the Ramayana were sent to the Embassy of India, Rangoon, for                     
 the people of Burma. Additionally, another consignment of Hindi books                     
 worth Rs. 15,000/- is being despatched in the current financial year.                     
 Text books, dictionaries and books for children in Hindi, sent to                         
 Indian Missions in Trinidad, Kabul, Guyana, Suriname and Warsaw for                       
 Hindi students in these countries, were appreciated.                                      
                                                                                           
 Applications have been invited for filling the vacant posts of Hindi                      
 Officers at Fiji, Mauritius and Trinidad, and active efforts are being                    
 made for the creation of the posts of Hindi Officers in certain other                     
 important Missions. Hindi lecturers have been appointed in Guyana and                     
 Suriname.                                                                                 
                                                                                           
 During the year under review, the Second International Hindi Conference                   
 was organised in Paramaribo, the Capital of Suriname. The Ambassador of                   
 India to Suriname was the chief guest at the Conference. The renowned                     
 Hindi journalist and writer, Shri Manohar Shyam Joshi, represented                        
 India as a special invitee.                                                               
                                                                                           
 Under the programme to bring out certain important publications of the                    
 External Publicity Division in Hindi, two booklets entitled 'Bharat-Ek                    
 Jhalak' and 'Ek Naye Bharat Ka Uday' were published at the time of the                    
 Prime Minister's visit to Mauritius. Efforts are afoot to publish some                    
 more booklets in Hindi.                                                                   
                                                                                           
 The programme of Hindi Newspaper Exchange continued as in the previous                    
 years. The Ministry organised a reception in honour of the Deputy                         
 General Manager of the Fiji Broadcasting Corporation, Shri Diwakar                        
 Prasad, which was attended by a large number of writers and                               
 journalists.                                                                              
                                                                                           
 Apart from preparing the Hindi text of treaties and agreements                            
 concluded by this Ministry, the Hindi Section also vetted the Hindi                       
 texts of the treaties and agreements prepared by the other Ministries                     
 of the Government of India. OSD (Hindi) accompanied the official                          
 delegation to the USSR (to participate in the Indo- USSR Joint                            
 Commission's Meeting) for Preparing the Hindi text of the Protocol and                    
 the IndoSoviet Joint Declaration.                                                         
                                                                                           
 -68>                                                                                      
 For implementing the Official Language Rules and for the progressive                      
 use of Hindi in official work in Passport Offices, a proposal is at an                    
 advanced stage of action for the creation of posts of Hindi officers                      
 and staff in some Regional Passport Offices. Instructions have been                       
 issued for constituting official language implementation committees in                    
 various Regional Passport Offices. The Regional Passport Offices at                       
 Jaipur and Madras were inspected and suggestions made to them for the                     
 implementation of the Official Language Rules.                                            
                                                                                           
 The Third World Hindi Conference has been announced for the third week                    
 of March 1983, in Delhi. The Ministry and the Indian Missions abroad                      
 are extending their full cooperation to its organisers. A list of                         
 foreign scholars has been prepared and forwarded to the organisers and                    
 formal invitations have been extended to the participants. The Ministry                   
 is also participating in an exhibition being organised on this                            
 occasion, with special emphasis on Hindi in foreign countries.                            
                                                                                           
 -71>                                                                                      
 APPENDIX I Treaties/Conventions/Agreements                                                
                                                                     Top                   
 concluded or renewed by India reaties/Conventions/Agreements concluded                    
 or renewed by India with other countries in 1982*                                         
 Sl.Title of Convention/Date of Date of Date on Remarks                                    
 No.Treaty/Agreement  Signature ratification which                                         
                              accession/   entered                                         
                           acceptance   into force                                         
                                                                                           
 1         2    3      4        5       6                                                  
                                                                                           
 MULTILATERAL                                                                              
                                                                                           
 Asian-Pacific Postal Union                                                                
                                                                                           
 1. Asian-Pacific Postal                                                                   
    Convention. Done at                                                                    
    Yogyakarta (Indonesia)                                                                 
    on 27-3-1981        .           27-3-1981                                              
    1-7-1982                                                                               
                                                                                           
 Hague Convention against Unlawful                                                         
 Seizure of Aircraft.                                                                      
                                                                                           
 2. Convention for the                                                                     
    Suppression of Unlawful                                                                
    Seizure of Aircraft.                                                                   
    Done at the Hague on                                                                   
    16-12-1970 . . . . . .           14-7-1971                                             
   12-11-1982  13-12-1982                                                                  
                                                                                           
 Montreal Convention for Safety of                                                         
 Civil Aviation                                                                            
                                                                                           
 3. Convention for the                                                                     
    Suppression of Unlawful                                                                
    Acts against the Safety                                                                
    of Civil Aviation. Done                                                                
    at Montreal on                                                                         
    23-9-1971  .   .                11-12-1972                                             
   12-11-1982  13-12-1982                                                                  
                                                                                           
 Wetlands of International Importance                                                      
 as Waterfowl Habitat.                                                                     
                                                                                           
 4. Convention on Wetlands                                                                 
    of International                                                                       
    Importance Especilly as                                                                
    as Waterfowl Habitat.                                                                  
    Done at Ramsar (Iran)                                                                  
    on 2-2-1971  29-9-1981          29-1-1982                                              
                                                                                           
 Principles Governing the Exploration                                                      
 and Use of Outer Space, including the                                                     
 Moon and Other Celestial Bodies.                                                          
                                                                                           
 5. Treaty on Principles                                                                   
    Governing the Activities                                                               
    of States in the                                                                       
    Exploration and Use of                                                                 
    Outer Space, including                                                                 
    the Moon and Other                                                                     
    Celestial Bodies. Opened                                                               
    for signature at London,                                                               
    Moscow and Washington on                                                               
    27-1-1967 . . . . . .             3-3-1967                                             
    18-1-1982   18-1-1982                                                                  
                                                                                           
 Registration of Objects Launched into                                                     
 Outer Space.                                                                              
                                                                                           
 6. Convention on Registration                                                             
    of Objects Launched into                                                               
    Outer Space adopted by the                                                             
    General Assembly of the                                                                
    United Nations on                                                                      
    12-11-1974 18-1-1982           18-1-1982                                               
                                                                                           
 *This list is not exhausitve.                                                             
 -72>                                                                                      
                                                                                           
 World Administrative Radio Conference,                                                    
 Geneva, 1979 I.T.U.                                                                       
                                                                                           
 7. Radio Regulation, Geneva,                                                              
    1979 as contained in the                                                               
    Final Acts of World                                                                    
    Administrative Radio                                                                   
    Conference, Geneva,                                                                    
    1979              .             6-12-1979                                              
     8-1-1982    1-1-1982                                                                  
                                                                                           
 Saudi Fund for Development                                                                
                                                                                           
 8. Loan Agreement No.2/134                                                                
    between the Government of                                                              
    the Republic of India and                                                              
    the Saudi Fund for                                                                     
    Development regarding                                                                  
    Keel-Kare Hydro-Electric                                                               
    Power Project                . 14-4-1980                                               
    19-3-1982                                                                              
                                                                                           
 United Nations Development Programme                                                      
 (UNDP)                                                                                    
                                                                                           
 9. Agreement between India                                                                
    and the United Nations                                                                 
    Development Programme                                                                  
    (UNDP) regrding Project                                                                
    No.IND/82/036/A/01/13-                                                                 
    Water and Power Infor-                                                                 
    mation system                11-7-1980                                                 
    28-5-1982                                                                              
                                                                                           
 10. Agreement between India                                                               
     and the United Nations                                                                
     Development Programme                                                                 
     (UNDP) regarding Project                                                              
     No.IND/80/052/A/01/01-                                                                
     Extension of Laboratory                                                               
     Facilities in CMP-DIL                                                                 
     for application of                                                                    
     advanced techniques in                                                                
     Coal Mines Operations       28-11-1980                                                
     28-7-1982                                                                             
                                                                                           
 11. Agreement between India                                                               
     and the United Nations                                                                
     Development Programme                                                                 
     (UNDP) regarding Project                                                              
     No.IND/82/034/A/01/37-                                                                
     Appropriate Automation                                                                
     Promotion Programme          18-12-1980                                               
     3-5-1982                                                                              
                                                                                           
 12. Agreement between India                                                               
     and the United Nations                                                                
     Development Programme                                                                 
     (UNDP) regarding                                                                      
     Project No.IND/82/033/                                                                
     A/01/37-Computer Aided                                                                
     Design Programme             18-12-1980                                               
      4-6-1982                                                                             
                                                                                           
 13. Agreement between India                                                               
     and the United Nations                                                                
     Development Programme                                                                 
     (UNDP) regarding Project                                                              
     No.IND/82/049/A/01/01-                                                                
     Behviour of Concrete                                                                  
     under High Triaxial                                                                   
     Stresses  17-7-1981          11-8-1982                                                
                                                                                           
 14. Agreement between India                                                               
     and the United Nations                                                                
     Development Programme                                                                 
     (UNDP) regarding Project                                                              
     No.IND/80/016/A/01/11-                                                                
     Model Centre for                                                                      
     Occupational Health                                                                   
     Services in places of                                                                 
     Employment (BHEL                                                                      
     Tiruchi)   8-12-1981        14-5-1982                                                 
                                                                                           
 15. Agreement between India                                                               
     and the United Nations                                                                
     Development Programme                                                                 
     (UNDP) regarding Project                                                              
     No.IND/81/003/A/01/37-                                                                
     Development of Resins,                                                                
     Moulding Compounds                                                                    
     Curing Agents etc. for                                                                
     use in Composite                                                                      
     Industry   8-12-1981         4-5-1982                                                 
                                                                                           
 16. Agreement between India                                                               
     and the United Nations                                                                
     Development Programme                                                                 
     (UNDP) regarding Project                                                              
     No.IND/81/025/A/01/37-                                                                
     Development of                                                                        
     Microprocessor Based                                                                  
     Agro-Dairy Instruments       14-12-1981                                               
     5-1-1982                                                                              
 -73>                                                                                      
                                                                                           
 17. Agreement between India                                                               
     and the United Nations                                                                
     Development Programme                                                                 
     (UNDP) regarding Project                                                              
     No.IND/82/006/A/01/37-                                                                
     Development of Hosiery                                                                
     and Knitwear Industry,                                                                
     Ludhiana, Punjab-Phase                                                                
     II  30-12-1981                6-4-1982                                                
                                                                                           
 18. Agreement between India                                                               
     and the United Nations                                                                
     Development Programme                                                                 
     (UNDP) regarding Project                                                              
     No.IND/81/021/A/01/19-                                                                
     Advisory Services in                                                                  
     Ship-building and                                                                     
     Ship-repair   2-1-1982        12-2-1982                                               
                                                                                           
 19. Agreement between India                                                               
     and the United Nations                                                                
     Development Programme                                                                 
     (UNDP) regarding Project                                                              
     No.IND/81/018/A/01/37-                                                                
     Investigations to                                                                     
     produce Sulphur and                                                                   
     Sulphuric Acid from                                                                   
     Amjhore Pyrite deposit.        4-1-1982                                               
     3-2-1982                                                                              
                                                                                           
 20. Agreement between India                                                               
     and the United Nations                                                                
     Development Programme                                                                 
     (UNDP) regarding Project                                                              
     No.IND/81/019/A/01/37-                                                                
     Investigations to use                                                                 
     low grde Rock                                                                         
     Phosphates from                                                                       
     Mussoorie Deposit   4-1-1982  16-4-1982                                               
                                                                                           
 21. Agreement between India                                                               
     and the United Nations                                                                
     Development Programme                                                                 
     (UNDP) regarding Project                                                              
     No.IND/82/007/A/01/37-                                                                
     Improvement of Testing                                                                
     and Evaluation Facilities,                                                            
     National Test House,                                                                  
     Calcutta-Phase II      18-1-1982   8-9-1982                                           
                                                                                           
 22. Agreement between India                                                               
     and the United Nations                                                                
     Development Programme                                                                 
     (UNDP) regarding Project                                                              
     No.IND/81/041/A/01/40-                                                                
     Development of Port                                                                   
     Management Training    23-1-1982 18-3-1982                                            
                                                                                           
 23. Agreement between India                                                               
     and the United Nations                                                                
     Development Programme                                                                 
     (UNDP) regarding Project                                                              
     No.IND/81/035/A/01/37-                                                                
     Design Development for                                                                
     an Experimental Blast                                                                 
     Furnace                         2-2-1982                                              
     15-2-1982                                                                             
                                                                                           
 24. Agreement between India                                                               
     and the United Nations                                                                
     Development Programme                                                                 
     (UNDP) regarding Project                                                              
     No.IND/81/036/A/01/37-                                                                
     Design Development of                                                                 
     Concurent Top and Bottom                                                              
     Blowing in Converter                                                                  
     Steelmaking Opertion    2-2-1982 15-2-1982                                            
                                                                                           
 25. Agreement between India                                                               
     and the United Nations                                                                
     Development Programme                                                                 
     (UNDP) regarding Project                                                              
     No.IND/82/048/A/01/37-                                                                
     Strengthening of                                                                      
     Industrial Design Services                                                            
     at National Institute                                                                 
     of Design, Ahmedabad    3-2-1982  11-8-1982                                           
                                                                                           
 26. Agreement between India                                                               
     and the United Nations                                                                
     Development Programme                                                                 
     (UNDP) regarding Project                                                              
     No.IND/82/001/A/37-                                                                   
     Application of Alternative                                                            
     Fuels for Internal                                                                    
     Combustion Engines, IIP,                                                              
     Dehra Dun    11-2-1982        22-4-1982                                               
 -74>                                                                                      
                                                                                           
 27. Agreement between India                                                               
     and the United Development                                                            
     Programme (UNDP) regarding                                                            
     Project No.IND/81/010/                                                                
     A/01/12 Studies for                                                                   
     the Use of Saline Water                                                               
     in the Command Areas of                                                               
     Irrigation Project,                                                                   
     Haryana         18-1-1982    20-5-1982                                                
                                                                                           
 28. Agreement between India                                                               
     and the United Nations                                                                
     Development Programme                                                                 
     (UNDP) regarding Project                                                              
     No.IND/80/027/A/01/42-                                                                
     Improved Training for                                                                 
     Agricultural Extension                                                                
     Services        7-4-1982      9-6-1982                                                
                                                                                           
 29. Agreement between India                                                               
     and the United Nations                                                                
     Development Programme                                                                 
     (UNDP) regarding Project                                                              
     No.IND/82/002/A/01/37-                                                                
     Evalution and Product-                                                                
     cum-Process Development                                                               
     Centre at Institute for                                                               
     Designs of Electrical                                                                 
     Mesuring Instruments                                                                  
     (IDEMI), Bombay    7-6-1982    11-8-1982                                              
                                                                                           
 30. Agreement between India                                                               
     and the United Nations                                                                
     Development Programme                                                                 
     (UNDP) regarding Project                                                              
     No.IND/82/042/A/01/37-                                                                
     Consultancy Services for                                                              
     Revamping Vitamin C                                                                   
     Plant    10-6-1982        16-6-1982                                                   
                                                                                           
 31. Agreement between India                                                               
     and the United Nations                                                                
     Development Programme                                                                 
     (UNDP) regarding Project                                                              
     No.IND/82/043/A/01/37-                                                                
     Assistance in the                                                                     
     Manufacture of Dapsone.         10-6-1982                                             
     25-8-1982                                                                             
                                                                                           
 32. Agreement between India                                                               
     and the United Nations                                                                
     Development Programme                                                                 
     (UNDP) regarding Project                                                              
     No.IND/82/008/A/01/15-                                                                
     Advanced Training for                                                                 
     Department of Civil                                                                   
     Aviation Personnel             22-6-1982                                              
     29-9-1982                                                                             
                                                                                           
 33. Agreement between India                                                               
     and the United Nations                                                                
     Development Programme                                                                 
     (UNDP) regarding Project                                                              
     No.IND/78/055/A/01/20-                                                                
     Expansion and                                                                         
     Modernization of Tele-                                                                
     communication Services,                                                               
     Phase II                        1-7-1982                                              
      3-8-1982                                                                             
                                                                                           
 34. Agreement between India                                                               
     and the United Nations                                                                
     Development Programme                                                                 
     (UNDP) regarding Project                                                              
     No.IND/82/032/A/01/37-                                                                
     Assistance in the setting                                                             
     up of the Central                                                                     
     Institute of Hand Tools,                                                              
     Jullundur     3-7-1982          14-7-1982                                             
                                                                                           
 35. Agreement between India                                                               
     and the United Nations                                                                
     Development Programme                                                                 
     (UNDP) regarding Project                                                              
     No.IND/82/044/A/01/37-                                                                
     Plastics Materials and                                                                
     Product Testing Programme                                                             
     in India         27-8-1982       6-12-1982                                            
                                                                                           
 36. Agreement between India                                                               
     and the United Nations                                                                
     Development Programme                                                                 
     (UNDP) regarding Project                                                              
     No.IND/82/011/A/01/37-                                                                
     Application of Research                                                               
     Results in Easycare                                                                   
     Cotton Fabrics in the                                                                 
     Textile Industry    18-11-1982   30-11-1982                                           
 -75>                                                                                      
                                                                                           
 37. Agreement between India                                                               
     and the United Nations                                                                
     Development Programme                                                                 
     (UNDP) regarding Project                                                              
     No.IND/82/003/A/01/12-                                                                
     Assistance for the                                                                    
     Establishment of the                                                                  
     Wild-life Institute of                                                                
     India       2-12-1982     17-12-1982                                                  
                                                                                           
 38. Agreement between India                                                               
     and the United Nations                                                                
     Development Programme                                                                 
     (UNDP) regarding Project                                                              
     No.IND/82/028/A/01/20-                                                                
     Follow-up Support to                                                                  
     Advanced Level Telecom                                                                
     Training Centre (ALTTC) 16-12-1982                                                    
     21-12-1982                                                                            
                                                                                           
 BILATERAL                                                                                 
                                                                                           
     ARGENTINA                                                                             
                                                                                           
 39. Trade Agreement between                                                               
     the Government of the                                                                 
     Republic of India and                                                                 
     the Government of the                                                                 
     Republic of Argentina       28-7-1981                                                 
     21-11-1982    5-8-1982                                                                
                                                                                           
     BANGLADESH                                                                            
                                                                                           
 40. Protocol on Inland                                                                    
     Water Transit and                                                                     
     Trade between India and                                                               
     Bangladesh                   1-8-1982                                                 
     1-8-1982                                                                              
                                                                                           
 41. Memorandum of Understanding                                                           
     between the Government                                                                
     of the Republic of                                                                    
     India and the Government                                                              
     of the People's Republic                                                              
     of Bangladesh concerning                                                              
     Ganga Waters   7-10-1982      7-10-1982                                               
                                                                                           
 42. Agreement between the                                                                 
     Government of the                                                                     
     Republic of India and                                                                 
     the Government of the                                                                 
     People's Republic of                                                                  
     Bangladesh on the                                                                     
     Establishment of a                                                                    
     Joint Economic                                                                        
     Commission   7-10-1982   7-10-1982                                                    
                                                                                           
     DENMARK                                                                               
                                                                                           
 43. Agreement between the                                                                 
     Government of India and                                                               
     the Government of                                                                     
     Denmark regarding an                                                                  
     Agricultural Extension                                                                
     Project in Eleven                                                                     
     Districts of Karnataka   24-9-1982  24-9-1982                                         
                                                                                           
 44. Agreement between the                                                                 
     Government of India and                                                               
     the Government of                                                                     
     Denmark on a Danish                                                                   
     Government Loan to                                                                    
     India   11-11-1982      11-11-1982                                                    
                                                                                           
     FRANCE                                                                                
                                                                                           
 45. Indo-French Convention                                                                
     relating to Special                                                                   
     French Credits meant to                                                               
     finance the development                                                               
     of Indian Telecommuni-                                                                
     cation Industry   29-7-1982  29-7-1982                                                
                                                                                           
     GERMANY, FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF                                                          
                                                                                           
 46. Agreement between the                                                                 
     Government of the                                                                     
     Republic of India and                                                                 
     the Government of the                                                                 
     Federal Republic of                                                                   
     Germany concerning                                                                    
     Financial Cooperation    12-1-1982  12-1-1982                                         
                                                                                           
 47. Loan Agreement between                                                                
     India and Kreditanstalt                                                               
     Fur Wierderaufbau for                                                                 
     twenty million Deutsche                                                               
     Mark (DM 20,000,000)                                                                  
     for Purchase of                                                                       
     Components of 210 MW-                                                                 
     Sets       10-2-1982        10-2-1982                                                 
 -76>                                                                                      
                                                                                           
 48. Loan Agreement between                                                                
     India and Kreditanstalt                                                               
     Fur Wiederaufbau for                                                                  
     fifteen million nine                                                                  
     hundred thousand                                                                      
     Deutsche Mark (DM                                                                     
     15,900,000) for Large                                                                 
     Capacity Hydraulic                                                                    
     Press/Tiruchy     9-3-1982     9-3-1982                                               
                                                                                           
 49. Financing Agreement                                                                   
     between India and                                                                     
     Kreditnstalt Fur                                                                      
     Wiederaufbau for two                                                                  
     million Deutsche Mark                                                                 
     (DM 2,000,000) for                                                                    
     Studies and Exports                                                                   
     Fund       30-4-1982     30-4-1982                                                    
                                                                                           
 50. Agreement between the                                                                 
     Government of the                                                                     
     Republic of India and                                                                 
     the Government of the                                                                 
     Federal Republic of                                                                   
     Germany concerning                                                                    
     Financial Cooperation                                                                 
     in 1982   7-5-1982        7-5-1982                                                    
                                                                                           
     GAUTEMALA                                                                             
                                                                                           
 51. Trade Agreement between                                                               
     the Government of the                                                                 
     Republic of India and                                                                 
     the Government of the                                                                 
     Republic of Gautemala          23-4-1981                                              
      27-7-1981    8-7-1982                                                                
                                                                                           
     IRAN                                                                                  
                                                                                           
 52. Memorandum of Understa-                                                               
     nding between the                                                                     
     delegation of the                                                                     
     Republic of India and                                                                 
     the Islamic Republic of                                                               
     Iran    26-8-1982          26-8-1982                                                  
                                                                                           
     JAPAN                                                                                 
                                                                                           
 53. Exchange of Notes                                                                     
     between the Government                                                                
     of India and the                                                                      
     Government of Japan                                                                   
     regarding Japanese                                                                    
     Project Aid of Yen ten                                                                
     billion four hundred                                                                  
     and eighty million                                                                    
     (Yen 10,480,000,000)                                                                  
     for the following                                                                     
     projects:-     13-1-1982      13-1-1982                                               
                                                                                           
     (i) Telecommunication                                                                 
         Expansion Project                                                                 
         (II)-6.0 billion                                                                  
         Yen                                                                               
                                                                                           
    (ii) Indian Railways                                                                   
         Development Project                                                               
         2.68 billion Yen                                                                  
                                                                                           
   (iii) Bombay Suburban                                                                   
         Railways                                                                          
         Modernisation                                                                     
         Project-1.8 billion                                                               
         Yen                                                                               
                                                                                           
 54. Exchange of Notes                                                                     
     between the Government                                                                
     of India and the                                                                      
     Government of Japan                                                                   
     concerning Japanese                                                                   
     Grant of Yen three                                                                    
     hundred million                                                                       
     (Yen 300,000,000) for                                                                 
     the execution of the                                                                  
     project for                                                                           
     manufacturing the                                                                     
     Japanese Encephalitis                                                                 
     Vaccine        6-2-1982    6-2-1982                                                   
                                                                                           
 55. Exchange of Notes                                                                     
     between the Government                                                                
     of India and the                                                                      
     Government of Japan                                                                   
     regarding Japanese                                                                    
     Grant of Yen one billion                                                              
     five hundred million                                                                  
     (1,500,000,000) for the                                                               
     execution of the Social                                                               
     Enviornment Improvement                                                               
     Project     6-2-1982       6-2-1982                                                   
                                                                                           
 56. Exchange of Notes                                                                     
     between the Government                                                                
     of India and the                                                                      
     Government of Japan                                                                   
 -77>                                                                                      
                                                                                           
     regarding Japanese Grant                                                              
     of Yen one billion one                                                                
     hundred and thirty four                                                               
     million six hundred and                                                               
     ninety six thousand                                                                   
     (Yen 1,134,696,000) for                                                               
     Debt Relief   6-2-1982           6-2-1982                                             
                                                                                           
 57. Loan Agreement No.ID-P.                                                               
     17 for Indian Railways                                                                
     Development Project                                                                   
     between India and the                                                                 
     Overseas Economic                                                                     
     Coopertion Fund (OECF)                                                                
     of Japan      14-5-1982         11-6-1982                                             
                                                                                           
 58. Loan Agreement No.ID-P.                                                               
     18 for Bombay Suburban                                                                
     Railways Modernisation                                                                
     Project between India                                                                 
     and the Overseas                                                                      
     Economic Cooperation                                                                  
     Fund (OECF) of Japan   14-5-1982   11-6-1982                                          
                                                                                           
 59. Loan Agreement No.ID-P.                                                               
     19 for Telecommunications                                                             
     Project (V) between                                                                   
     India and the Overseas                                                                
     Economic Cooperation                                                                  
     Fund (OECF) of Japan   14-5-1982  11-6-1982                                           
                                                                                           
 60. Exchange of Notes                                                                     
     between the Government                                                                
     of India and the                                                                      
     Government of Japan                                                                   
     concerning loan of Yen                                                                
     thirty three billion                                                                  
     (Yen 33,000,000,000)                                                                  
     for the following                                                                     
     projects :-     28-8-1982     28-8-1982                                               
                                                                                           
     (i) Anpara 'B' Thermal                                                                
         Power Station                                                                     
         Construction                                                                      
         Project-24.100                                                                    
         million Yen                                                                       
                                                                                           
    (ii) Oil and Natural Gas                                                               
         Commission Offshore                                                               
         Supply Vessel                                                                     
         Project-2,100                                                                     
         million Yen                                                                       
                                                                                           
   (iii) Calcutta Metro                                                                    
         Railways (Phase II)                                                               
         Construction                                                                      
         Project-4,800                                                                     
         million Yen                                                                       
                                                                                           
    (iv) Tamil Nadu State                                                                  
         Micro Hydro Power                                                                 
         Stations Construc-                                                                
         tion Project-2,000                                                                
         million Yen                                                                       
                                                                                           
 61. Exchange of Notes                                                                     
     between the Government                                                                
     of India and the                                                                      
     Government of Japan                                                                   
     regarding the Grant                                                                   
     of Yen Forty six million                                                              
     (Yen 46,000,000) for the                                                              
     purchse of Audio-Visual                                                               
     and Photographic                                                                      
     Equipment from Japan     28-8-1982                                                    
      28-8-1982                                                                            
                                                                                           
     KENYA                                                                                 
                                                                                           
 62. Cultural Agreement                                                                    
     between the Government                                                                
     of the Republic of                                                                    
     India and the Government                                                              
     of the Republic of                                                                    
     Kenya   24-2-1981   18-7-1981   9-11-1982                                             
                                                                                           
     SOCIALIST PEOPLE'S LIBYAN ARAB                                                        
     JAMAHIRIYA                                                                            
                                                                                           
 63. Convention between the                                                                
     Government of the                                                                     
     Republic of India and                                                                 
     the Socialist People's                                                                
     Libyan Arab Jamahiriya                                                                
     for the Avoidance of                                                                  
     Double Taxation and the                                                               
     Prevention of Fiscal                                                                  
     Evasion with respect to                                                               
     Taxes on Income           2-3-1981                                                    
    5-1-1982   29-5-1982                                                                   
 -78>                                                                                      
                                                                                           
     MONGOLIA                                                                              
                                                                                           
 64. Protocol between the                                                                  
     Government of the India                                                               
     and the Government of                                                                 
     the Mongolian People's                                                                
     Republic in the field of                                                              
     Agricultural Research                                                                 
     and Education                  14-8-1982                                              
      14-8-1982                                                                            
                                                                                           
     PAKISTAN                                                                              
                                                                                           
 65. Protocol on Consular                                                                  
     Access between the                                                                    
     Government of the                                                                     
     Republic of India and                                                                 
     the Government of the                                                                 
     Islamic Republic of                                                                   
     Pakistan  2-11-1982       2-11-1982                                                   
                                                                                           
     QATAR                                                                                 
                                                                                           
 66. Agreement of Cultural                                                                 
     and Technical Co-                                                                     
     operation between the                                                                 
     Government of the                                                                     
     Republic of India and                                                                 
     the Government of The                                                                 
     State of Qatar   4-6-1980                                                             
     11-3-1981   18-4-1982                                                                 
                                                                                           
     SWEDEN                                                                                
                                                                                           
 67. Agreement between the                                                                 
     Government of India and                                                               
     the Government of                                                                     
     Sweden concerning                                                                     
     Swedish support to                                                                    
     Social Foresty Project                                                                
     in Tamil Nadu to an                                                                   
     amount not exceeding                                                                  
     one hundred and ninety                                                                
     five million Swedish                                                                  
     kroner                                                                                
     (SEK 195,000,000)               11-2-1982                                             
     11-2-1982                                                                             
                                                                                           
     UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST RE-                                                         
     PUBLICS                                                                               
                                                                                           
 68. Protocol of the                                                                       
     Negotiations between                                                                  
     the representatives of                                                                
     the Ministry of                                                                       
     Petroleum, Chemicals                                                                  
     and Fertilizers of India                                                              
     and the USSR Ministry                                                                 
     of the Oil Industry on                                                                
     further development of                                                                
     the India-Soviet                                                                      
     Cooperation in the                                                                    
     oil Industry    6-6-1982           6-6-1982                                           
                                                                                           
     UNITED STATES OF AMERICA                                                              
                                                                                           
 69. Project Loan and Grant                                                                
     Agreement between India                                                               
     and the United States of                                                              
     America acting through                                                                
     the Agency for                                                                        
     International Develop-                                                                
     ment (AID) for                                                                        
     Maharashtra Social                                                                    
     Forestry-Aid Loan No.                                                                 
     386-T-231. Aid project                                                                
     No. 386-0478   31-8-1982       31-8-1982                                              
                                                                                           
 70. Project Loan and Grant                                                                
     Agreement between India                                                               
     and the United States                                                                 
     of America acting                                                                     
     through the Agency for                                                                
     International                                                                         
     Development (AID) for                                                                 
     Maharashtra Irrigation                                                                
     Technology and                                                                        
     Management-Aid Loan No.                                                               
     386-T-232. Aid Project                                                                
     No. 386-0481  31-8-1982        31-8-1982                                              
                                                                                           
 71. Second Amendment to the                                                               
     Grant Agreement between                                                               
     India and the United                                                                  
     States of America                                                                     
     acting through the                                                                    
     Agency for Internationl                                                               
     Development (AID) for                                                                 
     Integrated Rural Health                                                               
     and Population-Aid                                                                    
     Project No.386-0468              31-8-1982                                            
     31-8-1982                                                                             
 -79>                                                                                      
                                                                                           
 72. Grant Project Agreement                                                               
     between India and the                                                                 
     United States of America                                                              
     acting through the                                                                    
     Agency for International                                                              
     Development (AID) for                                                                 
     two million four hundred                                                              
     thousand US dollars                                                                   
     ($2,400,000) for                                                                      
     Development and                                                                       
     Management Training-Aid                                                               
     Project No. 386-0487            30-9-1982                                             
     30-9-1982                                                                             
                                                                                           
     VIETNAM                                                                               
                                                                                           
 73. Agreement between the                                                                 
     Government of the                                                                     
     Republic of India and                                                                 
     the Government of the                                                                 
     Socialist Republic of                                                                 
     Vietnam on Economic,                                                                  
     Scientific and Technical                                                              
     Cooperation, and on                                                                   
     Setting up of a Joint                                                                 
     Economic, Scientific and                                                              
     Technical Commission           18-12-1982                                             
     18-12-1982                                                                            
                                                                                           
                                                                                           
 -80>                                                                                      
 APPENDIX II Major International Conferences/Meetings/Seminars                             
 Major International Conferences/Meetings/Seminars etc. organized by                       
 Inter- Governmental Organizations (Such as and its specialised Agencies                   
 like WHO, ILO, ICAO, FAO,UNDP UNIDO, IMCO etc.)at whic h GOVERNMENT OF                    
 INDIA was represented in 1982-83.                                                         
 SI.    Title of Conference etc.       Foreign Exchange                                    
 No.    (with venue and date)          component of ex-                                    
                                       penditure in                                        
                                        rupees                                             
                                                                                           
 1                     2                     3                                             
                                                                                           
 1.  Second Conference of Ministers responsible        Expenditure is                      
     for the application of Science & Technology       debitable to                        
     to development in Asia and Pacific viz.           Cabinet Grant                       
     CASTASIA-II Manila (from 3 to 6 March 1982).      of the Ministry                     
                                                       of Home                             
                                                       Affairs.                            
                                                                                           
 2.  First Regional consultation on the Agricultural                                       
     Machinery Industry in Africa held in Addis Ababa                                      
     from 5 to 9 April, 1982.  .   .  .  .  .  .       (Borne by DCTD)                     
                                                                                           
 3.  Eleventh Session of the Coal Mines Committee of                                       
     ILO at Geneva from 20 to 29 April, 1982 . . . .          Nil                          
                                                                                           
 4.  ILO/ARPLA Regional Seminar on Practices and                                           
     Procedures in formulating Labour Standards at                                         
     Bangkok from 26 to 30 April, 1982 . . . . . . .          Nil                          
                                                                                           
 5.  Fourth Joint meeting for support to special                                           
     works Programme at Geneva from 27 to 29 April,                                        
     1982                                                     Nil                          
                                                                                           
 6.  ICCROM Committee Meetings and delivery of                                             
     lectures to trainees from 30 April to 16 May,                                         
     at Rome . . . . . . . .                                   6,015.00                    
                                                                                           
 7.  CIRDAP Workshop on Block Level Planning held at                                       
     Comilla from 4 to 10 May, 1982 . . . . . . . . . (Borne by CIRDAP)                    
                                                                                           
 8.  17th Session of the Permanent Committee and 16th                                      
     Session of the Industrial Development Board (IDB)                                     
     of UNIDO held in Vienna from 10 to 28 May, 1982          19,293.12                    
                                                                                           
 9.  Second Meeting of Coordinating Countries of the                                       
     Non-Aligned Movement in the Sphere of                                                 
     Standardization, Meteorology and Quality Control                                      
     New Delhi, 19 to 21 May, 1982 . . . . . . . . .          Nil                          
                                                                                           
 10. International Law Commission meeting held in                                          
     Geneva from 17 May to 30 June 1982 . . . . . . . . .     Nil                          
                                                                                           
 11. 68th Session of the International Labour Conference   (Borne by                       
     Convened by the Governing body of the International   Ministry of                     
     Labour Office at ILO Geneva from 2-6-1982             Finance                         
                                                                                           
 12. UNIDO Solidarity Meeting for Industrial Development                                   
     of Lesotho held at Maseru from 7 June, 1982              Nil                          
                                                                                           
 13. Workshop of Latin-American Countries organized by   Expenditure                       
     UNIDO, Mexico from 7 to 11 June, 1982               borne by UNIDO                    
                                                         (Airport tax                      
                                                         and con-                          
                                                         tingencies                        
                                                         Rs. 350/-)                        
                                                                                           
 14. Meeting of the Licensing Executives Society (LES)        Nil                          
     with Heads of Technology Transfer Registries                                          
     held in Vienna on 22 June, 1982                                                       
 -81>                                                                                      
                                                                                           
 15. Joint UNESCO and WIPO Meeting of the Committee of         7,000.00                    
     Governmental Experts on the Intellectual property                                     
     aspects of Folklore protection, Geneva, from June                                     
     28 to 2 July, 1982.                                                                   
 16. Working Group on the New International Economic          37,803.30                    
     Order held in New York from 12 to 23 July, 1982                                       
 17. UNIDO/ESCAP Expert Group Meeting on creation of   (Borne by Deptt.                    
     an ESCAP Regional Network System on Mini-Small    of Power)                           
     Hydro Power Generation held at Hangzhou, China                                        
     from 12 to 16 July, 1982.                                                             
 18. Fifteenth Session of the United Nations Commission             Nil                    
     on International Trade Law held in New York from                                      
     26 July to 21 September, 1982.                                                        
 19. CIRDAP Technical Committee meeting held at Dhaka   Borne by CIRDAP                    
     in July, 1982, for reviwing CIRDAP Programmes                                         
     for 1983-84.                                                                          
 20. Second United Nations Conference on the Exploration      11,383.70                    
     and peaceful Uses of Outer Space held in Vienna from                                  
     9 August to 21 September, 1982.                                                       
 21. ILO/DANDA - Asian Regional Seminar on the Role of              Nil                    
     Govenment. Employers and Workers Organisations in                                     
     the Vocational Rehabilitation of Disabled workers                                     
     of ILO at Bangkok from 16 to 28 August, 1982.                                         
 22. Fifth Session of the Liaison Committee of Afro-   (Borne by AARRO)                    
     Asian Rural Reconstruction Organisation (AARRO)                                       
     held at New Delhi on 24 August, 1982.                                                 
 23. INELSAT Assembly Meeting of Experts held in Rome               Nil                    
     on 29 and 30 November, 1982.                                                          
 24. Seminar on Integrated Rural Development at       (Borne by CIRDAP)                    
     Comilla in August, 1982.                                                              
 25. UNIDO Third Consultation on the Iron and      (Borne by the Deptt.                    
     Steel Industry held in Caracas from 13 to      of Steel)                              
     17 September, 1982.                                                                   
 26. International Conference on Nuclear Power                                             
     Experience at Vienna from 13 to 17 September,1982.     1,02,887.05                    
 27. IAEA-26th General Confernce from 20 to 24                                             
     September, 1982 at Vienna, Austria                                                    
 28. Asian Regional Workshop on the Role and Potential              Nil                    
     of Ergonemics for Improvement of Working Conditions                                   
     and Environment of ILO at Singapore from 13 to 16                                     
     September, 1982.                                                                      
 29. Held at Asia Pacific Institute for Broadcasting             500.00                    
     Development, Kuala Lumpur from 20 September to                                        
     9 October, 1982.                                                                      
 30. 9th Session of the Chemical Industries Committee          1,660.00                    
     of ILO at Geneva from 21 to 30 September, 1982.                                       
 31. Management of Labour Intensive Project Training                Nil                    
     Course of ILO at Jakarta from 13 to 26 September,                                     
     1982.                                                                                 
 32. APRLA/DSE Regional Training Course on Employment               Nil                    
     services of ILO at Bangkok from 29 September to                                       
     15 October, 1982.                                                                     
 33. Inter-Country Seminar on incentives for Family                 Nil                    
     Welfare/Family Planning in Industrial Sector of                                       
     ILO at Puncak, Indonesia from 5 to 9 October                                          
     1982                                                                                  
 34. UNIDO First Consultation on Industrial        (Borne by the Deptt.                    
     Financing held at Madrid, Spain from 18 to    of Banking)                             
     22 October, 1982.                                                                     
 35. Planning Meeting for Exploratory study on Monitoring        375.00                    
     and Evaluation of Literacy Programmes organised by                                    
     UNESCO Institute of Education, held at the UNESCO                                     
     Institute of Education, Hamburg (West Germany) from                                   
     11 to 15 October, 1982.                                                               
 -82>                                                                                      
                                                                                           
 36. Meeting of the Committee on Conservation and                   Nil                    
     Restoration of International Council of                                               
     Archives, Brussels from 11  to 13            (Rs. 100/- on airport                    
     October, 1982.                               tax)                                     
                                                  Attended the Con-                        
                                                  ference in the per-                      
                                                  sonal capacity.                          
                                                  Hospitality was                          
                                                  provided by Belgian                      
                                                  Govt. and travel was                     
                                                  paid by International                    
                                                  Council of Archives.                     
 37. 13th International Conference of Labour                        Nil                    
     Statisticians of ILO, Geneva, from 18 to                                              
     29 October, 1982.                                                                     
 38. RBTC-Study of the Working of the Regional                      Nil                    
     Office of ILO at Bangkok from 25 to 29                                                
     October, 1982.                                                                        
 39. Seminar on 'The Silk Routes and Diamond                        Nil                    
     Path Esoteric Buddhist Art on the Trade                                               
     Routes of the Trans-Himalayan Region'                                                 
     held at Los Angeles and Berkeley and ICCROM                                           
     Council's meeting held at London for a                                                
     period of 24 days w.e.f. 28 October 1982.                                             
 40. 221st Session of the Governing Body of ILO                1,860.00                    
     and its coming meetings of ILO at Geneva                                              
     from 4 to 19 November, 1982.                                                          
 41. Meeting of Expert Group on International         Expenditure borne                    
     Forum on Technical Advances for Development      to by UNIDO.                         
     organized by UNIDO, Moscow from 29 November                                           
     3 December, 1982.                                                                     
 42. 18th Session of the Permanent Committee in                   2,110                    
     Vienna from 15 to 19 November, 1982.                                                  
 43. UNIDO First Consultation on the Training of    Borne by the Deptt.                    
     Industrial Manpower held in Stuttgart (FRG)    of Science & Tech-                     
     from 22 to 26 November, 1982                   nology.                                
 44. UNIDO Solidarity Meeting for Industrial        Details not yet                        
     Development of Nepal held in Kathmandu from    available.                             
     29 November to 3 December, 1982.                                                      
 45. Meeting of the WIPO Coordination Committee,               7,000.00                    
     the Paris Union Executive Committee and the                                           
     Berne Union Executive Committee, from 22 to                                           
     26 November, 1982 at Geneva.                                                          
 46. ILO/DAN/IDA Sub-Regional Tripartite Symposium                  Nil                    
     on Dispute settlement and Promotion of                                                
     Industrial Peace of ILO, Colombo, from 29                                             
     September to 3 December, 1982.                                                        
 47. The Hague Conference of Private International             3,152.00                    
     Law held at the Hague from 6 to 15 December,    exclusive of hotel                    
     1982.                                           accommodation.                        
 48. International Literacy Workshop on the                         Nil                    
     Planning and Implementation of Literacy and                                           
     Post-literacy Strategies, Organized by IIEP/                                          
     UNESCO, held at Madras from 14 to 21 December,                                        
     1982.                                                                                 
 49. 8th Session of the Committee on work on                     830.00                    
     Plantation of ILO, Geneva, from 7 to 16 December,                                     
     1982.                                                                                 
 -83>                                                                                      
                                                                                           
 50. 24th Session of the Executive Committee of AARRO    Borne by AARRO                    
     held at New Delhi from 20 to 22 December, 1982.                                       
 51. Consultation on Improving Nutrition of Rural        Borne by FAO                      
     Poor held at NIRD in collaboration with GAO                                           
     from 20 to 22 December, 1982.                                                         
 52. Meetings of CIRDAP Executive Committee and         Borne by CIRDAP                    
     Governing Council held at Kuala Lumpur in                                             
     December, 1982.                                                                       
 53. Diplomatic Conference on the Draft Convention    14,264.00 (Exclu-                    
     drafting a Uniform Law on Agency of an           ding accommoda-                      
     International Character in the sale and          tion).                               
     Purchase of Goods held in Geneva from 31                                              
     January to 17 February, 1983.                                                         
                                                                                           
                                                                                           
 -84>                                                                                      
 APPENDIX III Major International Conferences/Meetings/Seminars                            
 Major International Conferences/Meetings/Seminars Organised by non-                       
 Governmental Organizations (Such as Asian Productivity Organization,                      
 International Cooperative Alliance, International Organization for                        
 Standardization, etc.) in which Indian experts participated in their                      
 personal capacity with Government assistance in 1982-83.                                  
 Sl.       Title of Conference etc.          Foreign Exchange Component                    
 No.       (with venue and date)                of Expenditure Rs.                         
                                                                                           
 1. Meeting of National Bureau of Standards   Expanditure borne by IEEE                    
    at Washington, USA from 21 to 22                                                       
    February, 1982.                                                                        
 2. Meeting of IEEE Board of Directors at          -Do-                                    
    Washington, USA from 23 February to 4                                                  
    March, 1982.                                                                           
 3. ISO Development Committee (DEVCO)             7,136.00                                 
    (Geneva, 10 to 11 May, 1982).                                                          
 4. ISO Development Committee (CERTICO)            -Do-                                    
    (Geneva, 13 to 14 May, 1982).                                                          
 5. Meeting of IEEE Board of Directors at     Expenditure borne by IEEE                    
    Boston, USA from 17 to 23 May, 1982.                                                   
 6. Archival Reprography Committee of               Nil                                    
    International Council on Archives held                                                 
    at The Hague from 26 to 29 May, 1982.                                                  
 7. General Meeting of International             17,181.00                                 
    Electrotechnical Commission (Rio de                                                    
    Janeiro, from 31 May to 11 June, 1982).                                                
 8. International Electrotechnical Commission       -Do-                                   
    Committee of Action Meeting (Rio de                                                    
    Janeiro 3 and 11 June, 1982).                                                          
 9. Meeting of IEEE Board of Directors at     Expenditure borne by IEEE                    
    San Francisco, USA from 14 to 20 July,                                                 
    1982.                                                                                  
 10. ISO Council (Toronto from 8 to 10            35,342.00                                
     September, 1982).                                                                     
 11. ISO General Assembly (Toronto from 13         -Do-                                    
     to 17 September, 1982).                                                               
 12. (i) Planning and Development Meeting         790.00                                   
         of English-speaking African                                                       
         Countries organised by German                                                     
         Foundation for International                                                      
         Development, held at West Berlin          -Do-                                    
         (FRG-West Germany) from 18 to 22                                                  
         October, 1982.                                                                    
    (ii) Conference and General Assembly      Amount in Rs. not known.                     
         Meeting of International Council     US $ 455 released of                         
         of Adult Education, held at UNESCO   ICSSR Ford Fund on grant.                    
         Office Paris (France) from 24 to 31                                               
         October, 1982.                                                                    
 13. Meeting of IEEE Board of Directors at    Expenditure borne by IEEE                    
     New Orleans, USA, from 17 to 22                                                       
     November, 1982.                                                                       
 14. ISO/TC 104 Freight Containers (Bombay,              Nil                               
     from 6 to 10 December 1982)                                                           
 15. ISL/TC 45 Rubber Products (New Delhi,               Nil                               
     from 11 to 21 December 1982)                                                          
 -85>                                                                                      
 APPENDIX IV Miscellaneous major International Conferences                                 
 Miscellaneous major International Conferences etc. in 1982-83 at which                    
 Government of India was represented or in which Indian experts                            
 participated with Government of India's assistance in their personal                      
 capacity.                                                                                 
 S.No. Title of Conference etc.  Foreign Exchange component                                
   (with venue and date)      of expenditure in Rs.                                        
                                                                                           
 1. Expert Consultation on Socio-Economic      Nil                                         
    Indicators at Bangkok under auspices of                                                
    FAO from 19 to 24 April, 1982.                                                         
 2. CIRDAP Workshop on Block Level Planning  Expenses borne by CIRDAP                      
    held at Comilla (Bangladesh) from 4 to 10                                              
    May, 1982.                                                                             
 3. Institute of Electronics and Electrical                                                
    Engineers-Electro-Exhibition, Boston,      Rs. 9532.65                                 
    USA, from 24 to 26 May,1982.                                                           
 4. Second Convention of Asian-Indians in                                                  
    North America, at Chicago (USA) from 28                                                
    to 31 May, 1982.                                                                       
 5. ESCAP Meeting on Transport Infrastructure  Expenses borne by ESCAP                     
    Development and Communication in Rural                                                 
    and Isolated Communities at Bangkok from                                               
    1 to 4 June, 1982 (Thailand)                                                           
 6. FAO Regional Conference at Jakarta from    Rs. 3309.00                                 
    1 to 12 June, 1982.                                                                    
 7. EUROCON-82 Conference at Copenhagen from   Rs. 9728.60                                 
    14 to 18 June, 1982.                                                                   
 8. CIRDAP Technical Committee Meeting held    Expenses borne by CIRDAP                    
    at Dhaka (Bangladesh) from 26 to 28 July,                                              
    1982 from reveiwing of CIRDAP Programme                                                
    for 1983-84.                                                                           
 9. CIRDAP Seminar on Integrated Rural         Expenses borne by CIRDAP                    
    Development held at Comilla (Bangladesh)                                               
    from 23 to 28 August, 1982.                                                            
 10. OCEANS'82 Conference at Washington (USA)  Rs. 49120.25                                
     from 19 September to 12 October, 1982.                                                
 11. International Symposium on problems of             Nil                                
     Development of the under privileged                                                   
     communities in the Third World Countries                                              
     at New Delhi from 2 to 8 October, 1982.                                               
 12. Military Microwave Conference and         Rs. 29301.34                                
     International Radar Conference in UK                                                  
     from 17 to 27 October, 1982.                                                          
 13. ELECTRONICA-82 at Munich, (West Germany)  Rs. 31548.00                                
     from 1 to 13 November, 1982.                                                          
 -86>                                                                                      
                                                                                           
 14. Meeting of the Working Group on Rural     Rs. 1362.50                                 
     Development under the programme of                                                    
     Regional Cooperation in South Asian                                                   
     Countries held at Colombo from 2 to 5                                                 
     November, 1982.                                                                       
 15. Meeting of the Working Group set up      Expenses borne by UNESCO,                    
     jointly by UNESCO and WIPO held at Paris                                              
     from 6 to 10 December, 1982.                                                          
 16. Seminar on 'Promotion of Youth                     Nil                                
     Activities : Concepts, Models and                                                     
     Experiences in South and South-East                                                   
     Asia' held at Pattaya (Thailand)                                                      
     from 20 to 26 December, 1982.                                                         
 17. Consultation on Improving Nutrition of    Expenses borne by FAO                       
     Rural Poor held at the National                                                       
     Institute of Rural Development, Hyderabad                                             
     in collaboration with FAO from 20 to 22                                               
     December, 1982.                                                                       
 -87>                                                                                      
 APPENDIX V Statement showing number of Passport/Miscellaneous services                    
 Statement showing number of Passport/Miscellaneous services                               
 applications received and number of Passports issued/Miscellaneous                        
 services rendered during the period January to December, 1982.                            
 Sl.  Station             No. of       No. of     No. of       No. of                      
 No.                      Passport     Passports  applications Misc.                       
                          applications issued     for Misc.    services                    
                          received                services     rendered                    
                                                  received                                 
                                                                                           
 1. Ahmedabad  .  .  .  .  .  .   79,168    74,915    38,525     37,168                    
 2. Bangalore  .  .  .  .  .  .   63,177    64,559    12,682     12,765                    
 3. Bhopal  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   17,047    15,826     5,068      5,337                    
 4. Bhubaneswar.  .  .  .  .  .    6,756     6,299      8,76       8,83                    
 5. Bombay     .  .  .  .  .  . 2,79,868  2,71,211  2,79,729   2,97,102                    
 6. Calcutta   .  .  .  .  .  .   36,058    31,549    16,489     15,974                    
 7. Chandigarh .  .  .  .  .  .   88,785    86,286    19,964     19,264                    
 8. Cochin  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 1,47,165  1,49,043  1,57,902   1,56,388                    
 9. Delhi   .  .  .  .  .  .  .   92,420    93,484    47,898     48,475                    
 10. Gauhati   .  .  .  .  .  .    2,295     2,237      5,39       5,31                    
 11. Hyderabad .  .  .  .  .  . 1,06,911  1,11,755    21,730     21,145                    
 12. Jaipur    .  .  .  .  .  .   70,744    78,018    11,154     10,967                    
 13. Jullundur .  .  .  .  .  . 1,08,575  1,17,006    21,011     20,595                    
 14. Kozhikode .  .  .  .  .  .   84,588    96,754    62,543     60,580                    
 15. Lucknow   .  .  .  .  .  .   82,927    77,761    13,321     14,602                    
 16. Madras .  .  .  .  .  .  . 2,35,519  2,38,730    46,983     45,602                    
 17. Patna  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   23,897    25,057     2,866      2,913                    
 18. Srinagar  .  .  .  .  .  .    8,624     8,641     1,254      1,254                    
                                                                                           
     TOTAL     .  .  .  .  .  .15,34,524 1,549,131  7,60,534   7,71,545                    
 -88>                                                                                      
 APPENDIX VI Cadre Strength at Headquarters and 134 Missions and Posts                     
 Cadre Strength at Headquarters and 134 Missions and Posts Abroad during                   
 1982-83                                                                                   
 Cadre/Post                           Total No.   Posts at     Posts at                    
                                      of Posts    Head-        Missions                    
                                                  quarters     abroad                      
                                                                                           
 1                                           2           3            4                    
                                                                                           
 IFS(A)                                                                                    
                                                                                           
 Grade I        .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .    18           3          15                    
 Grade II       .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .    20           3          17                    
 Grade III      .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .    80          16          64                    
 Grade IV       .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .    80          16          64                    
 Sr. Scale      .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   221          59         162                    
 Jr. Scale      .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   104           9          95                    
 Training Reserve  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .    50          50          ..                    
 (Jr. Scale)Leave Reserve     .  ..  .  .    19          19          ..                    
 Training Reserve  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .    19          19          ..                    
 Deputation Reserve   .  .  .  .  .  .  .    20          20          ..                    
                                                                                           
 IFS(B)                                                                                    
                                                                                           
 Grade I        .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   120          61          59                    
 Grade II/III   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   325         172         153                    
 Grade IV       .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   917         416         501                    
 Grade V & VI   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   690         493         197                    
 Grade II of Cypher   .  .  .  .  .  .  .   195          81         114                    
   sub-Cadre                                                                               
 Selection Grade of Stenographer's sub-Cadre 50          16          34                    
 Grade I of SSC    .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .    75          23          52                    
 Grade II of SSC   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   539         209         330                    
 Grade III of SSC  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   120          42          78                    
 Combined Research Cadre .  .  .  .  .  .    45          39           6                    
   (including isolated Research Posts)                                                     
 Interpreter's Cadre  .  .  .  .  .  .  .    33           8          25                    
                                          ------   --------       -----                    
                                          3,740       1,774       1,966                    
                                          ------   --------       -----                    
 TOTAL No. of Local Posts in Missions abroad                      1,430                    
 -89>                                                                                      
 APPENDIX VII Foreign Language Chart                                                       
 Foreign Language Chart                                                                    
 Sl.  Language                   Total No. of officers                                     
 No.                              Passed/Knows the                                         
                                  Language                                                 
                                                                                           
 1. Arabic     .   .   .   .   .   65                                                      
 2. Burmese    .   .   .   .   .   .2                                                      
 3. Chinese    .   .   .   .   .   38                                                      
 4. Czech      .   .   .   .   .   .1                                                      
 5. Dutch      .   .   .   .   .    2                                                      
 6. French     .   .   .   .   .  140                                                      
 7. German     .   .   .   .   .   72                                                      
 8. Gorkhali   .   .   .   .   .   10                                                      
 9. Hungarian  .   .   .   .   .   .1                                                      
 10. Bahasa-Indonesia  .   .   .   14                                                      
 11. Italian   .   .   .   .   .   .8                                                      
 12. Japanese  .   .   .   .   .   25                                                      
 13. Kiswahili .   .   .   .   .   13                                                      
 14. Malay-Bahasa  .   .   .   .   .3                                                      
 15. Persian   .   .   .   .   .   27                                                      
 16. Polish    .   .   .   .   .   .3                                                      
 17. Portuguese    .   .   .   .   17                                                      
 18. Pushtu    .   .   .   .   .   .1                                                      
 19. Romanian  .   .   .   .   .   .1                                                      
 20. Russian   .   .   .   .   .   71                                                      
 21. Serbo-Croatian.   .   .   .   .6                                                      
 22. Spanish   .   .   .   .   .   61                                                      
 23. Swedish   .   .   .   .   .   .3                                                      
 24. Thai      .   .   .   .   .   .4                                                      
 25. Tibetan   .   .   .   .   .   .3                                                      
 26. Turkish   .   .   .   .   .   .3                                                      
 27. Vietnamese.   .   .   .   .   .3                                                      
 -90>                                                                                      
 APPENDIX VIII Revenue Expenditure of the Ministry                                         
 Revenue Expenditure of the Ministry during the financial year 1982-83.                    
 Revised Estimate                                                                          
                                                1982-83                                    
                                                                                           
                                           (Rs.in lakhs)                                   
                                                                                           
 Headquarters  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 9,08,22                                       
 Missions/Posts abroad .   .   .   .   .   . 49,32,15                                      
 Supply Wings, London & Washington .   .   .  2,12,92                                      
 Other Items                                                                               
 Contribution to UN, Commonwealth Secretariat and other                                    
 International                                                                             
  Institutions .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 4,39,80                                       
 Central Passport & Emigration Organisation. 3,64,92                                       
 Other Misc. Items .   .   .   .   .   .    36,85,05                                       
 Aid                                                                                       
 Aid to Bangladesh .   .   .   .   .   .   .1,65,91                                        
 Aid to Bhutan .   .   .   .   .   .   .   48,41,45                                        
 Aid to Nepal  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .22,22,00                                       
 Aid to other developing countries under ITEC Programme                                    
                                    .   .    4,61,05                                       
 Social Security and Welfare   .   .   .   .   45,00                                       
                                                                                           
                    TOTAL: .   .   .   .  182,78,47                                        
                                                                                           
                                                                                           
 -91>                                                                                      
 APPENDIX IX Expenditure on Headquarters and Missions/Posts abroad                         
 Expenditure on Headquarters and Missions/Posts abroad during 1982 -83                     
 The Expenditure during 1982-83 on the Headquarters of this Ministry is                    
 expected to be of the order of Rs. 9,08,22 lakhs, a sum of Rs.140.00                      
 lakhs on publicity, Rs. 170.36 lakhs for travel expenses, Rs.326.86                       
 lakhs for Establishment charges Rs. 2,49 lakhs for the Departmental                       
 Canteen and the sum of Rs. 248.51 for Misc. expenses. The expenditure                     
 on Missions and Posts abroad including Supply Wings, London and                           
 Washington is Rs. 5145.07 lakhs. Out of this Rs.706.08 lakhs for                          
 passage for transfers and local tours and Rs. 1223.40 lakhs for                           
 official and residential accommodation and Rs. 1136.11 lakhs for Misc.                    
 expenses. The annual average expenditure per mission comes to Rs. 39.27                   
 lakhs. The expenditure mentioned above on Headquartersand Missions and                    
 Posts abroad including expenditure on external publicity programmes and                   
 activities works out to approximately 33.11% of the total expenditure                     
 of this Ministry.                                                                         
                                                                                           
 -92>                                                                                      
 APPENDIX X Statement showing the total number of employees                                
 Statement showing the total number of employees (both permanent and                       
 temporary) in the Ministry of External Affairs under various groups and                   
 representation of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes therein                           
 (Position as on 31-12-1982)                                                               
 Group Total Scheduled Percentage Scheduled Percentage                                     
       number of Castes  of total   Tribes  of total                                       
                 employees  employees    employees                                         
                                                                                           
 Group 'A'  .696    73      10.49%     32    4.60%                                         
 Group 'B'. .1644   135       8.21%    15    0.91%                                         
 Group 'C'. .770    81      10.52%     35    4.55%                                         
 Group 'D'   495   136      27.47%      3    0.61%                                         
 (excluding Sweepers).                                                                     
 Group 'D' (Sweepers).   46    46       100%                                               
 -93>                                                                                      
 APPENDIX XI Statement showing the number of appointments                                  
 Statement showing the number of appointments (both by direct                              
 recruitment and by promotion) made to various groups of posts and                         
 reserved vacancies filled by Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes                        
 during the year 1982                                                                      
 Group Total Number of vacancies Number of reserved Number of vacancies                    
       number     reserved       candidates appoin- de-reserved due to                     
       of vac-                   ted                non-availability of                    
       ancies Scheduled Schedl-  Scheduled Schedul- reserved candidates                    
       filled Castes    ed Tribes Castes   ed Tribes                                       
                                                    Scheduled Scheduled                    
                                                      Castes    Tribes                     
                                                                                           
 Group 'A'   21       6         3           7         2    --   --                         
 Group 'B'   331     74        55          28         6    45   44                         
 Group 'C'   253     45        20           5         2     7    3                         
 Group 'D'    31      5         2           4         3     --  --                         
 -94>                                                                                      
                                                                                           
  USA                                                                                      
 APPENDIX XII List of International Conferences/Meetings                                   
 List of International Conferences/Meetings hosted by the                                  
 Ministries/Departments of the Government of India during 1982-83 for                      
 which logistical arrangements were made by the Conference Cell                            
 Sl.   Title of Conference/Meeting                 Date                                    
 No.                                                                                       
                                                                                           
 1. Meeting of Experts Group on Multilateral                                               
    Financing facilities, hosted by Ministry                                               
    of External Affairs  .  .  .      1 to 3 July, 1982.                                   
 2. UNI-TIES Conference, hosted by the                                                     
    Department of Industrial Development      7 to 11                                      
    December, 1982                                                                         
 3. Working Group on Family and Fertility                                                  
    Session for the International Conference                                               
    on Population-1984-Department of Family                                                
    Welfare  .  .  .  .  .  .  5 to 12 January, 1983.                                      
 4. Techinical Consultation on Wood-Based                                                  
    Panels, hosted by the Department of                                                    
    Agriculture and Cooperation  13 to 17 January, 1983.                                   
 5. Subramania Bharati Centenary Celebrations                                              
    held by the Department of Culture.         1 to 3                                      
    February, 1983.                                                                        
 6. Population Growth in South Region, hosted                                              
    by the Registrar-General of India.         2 to 8                                      
    February, 1983.                                                                        
 7. Seventh Non-Aligned Summit Conference,                                                 
    hosted by the Ministry of External Affaris  7 to                                       
    11 March, 1983.                                                                        
 -95>                                                                                      
 APPENDIX XIII Total Number of ITEC experts                                                
 Total Number of ITEC experts deputed to various foreign countries since                   
 the inception of the programme                                                            
 Doctors .    .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  .  .  67                          
 Nurses and other para medical staff  .   .   .   .   .  .  .  31                          
 Professors/teachers  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  .  . 162                          
 Engineers/architects/geologists/mining and other experts.  . 225                          
 Financial experts/finance, audit & accounts officers .  .  .  30                          
 Economists/statisticians .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  .  .  15                          
 Yoga/music teachers      .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  .  .   2                          
 Agricultural experts/animal husbandry experts.   .   .  .  .   8                          
 Small scale industry .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  .  .  16                          
 Other misc. experts  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  .  . 173                          
                                                             ----                          
              TOTAL   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  .  . 729                          
 -96>                                                                                      
 APPENDIX XIV No. of experts deputed to various foreign countries                          
 No. of experts deputed to various foreign countries during 1982-83                        
 Vietnam     .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .     8                                           
 Kampuchea   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 3                                           
 Indonesia   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 4                                           
 PDRY    .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 8                                           
 Zanzibar (Tanzania) .   .   .   .   .   .   . 1                                           
 Mauritius   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .46                                           
 Lesotho .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 1                                           
 Guyana  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 2                                           
 Fiji.   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 9                                           
 Tonga   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .10                                           
 Bahrain .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 2                                           
 YAR     .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 2                                           
 Paraguay.   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 1                                           
 Seychelles  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 1                                           
 Ethiopia    .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 1                                           
 Somalia .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 2                                           
 Senegal .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 1                                           
 Sri Lanka   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 5                                           
 Maldives.   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   . 8                                           
 Afghanistan .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .31                                           
                                             ----                                          
              TOTAL  .   .   .   .   .   .   146                                           
 -1>                                                                                       
 SUPPLEMENT TO THE ANNUAL REPORT OF THE MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS                       
 1982-83                                                                                   
 Seventh Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned                         
 Countries, New Delhi, 7-12 March, 1983 :                                                  
                                                                                           
 The Seventh Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non- Aligned                    
 Countries was held at New Delhi from 7 to 12 March 1983. It was                           
 preceded by a Preparatory Meeting at the level of Senior Officials,                       
 held on 1 and 2 March 1983 under the Chairmanship of the representative                   
 of Cuba and a Conference of Foreign Ministers of Non-Aligned Countries,                   
 held from 3 to 5 March 1983 under the Chairmanship of Shri P. V.                          
 Narasimha Rao, Minister of External Affairs of India. The Indian                          
 delegation to the Summit Conference was headed by Shrimati Indira                         
 Gandhi, Prime Minister.                                                                   
                                                                                           
 The Senior Officials made recommendations to the Conference of Foreign                    
 Ministers about agenda, the Bureau of Ministerial Conference, the                         
 composition of the Co-ordinating Bureau and the admission of new                          
 members to the Movement of the Non-Aligned Countries. The meeting of                      
 the Senior Officials also recommended that the Conference of Foreign                      
 Ministers work in plenary sessions and in two committees, a Political                     
 Committee and an Economic Committee, which would begin work ad                            
 referendum on 3 March 1983, and consider the question of the                              
 representation of Kampuchea in the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.                     
                                                                                           
 The Conference of Foreign Ministers of Non-Aligned Countries adopted                      
 the proposed agenda of the Conference and decided that its Bureau would                   
 consist of India as Chairman, 22 Vice-Chairmen (8 from Africa, 8 from                     
 Asia, 4 from Latin America and 2 from Europe), Rapporteur-General                         
 (Benin), Chairman of the Political Committee (Yugoslavia), and Chairman                   
 of the Economic Committee (Nicaragua), with Cuba as Ex-officio member.                    
 In accordance with established practice, the Conference of Foreign                        
 Ministers recommended that the Bureau of the Conference of Heads of                       
 State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries should be the same as that                   
 of the Ministerial Conference. Mr. K. Natwar Singh of India was                           
 appointed Secretary-General of the Summit Conference.                                     
                                                                                           
 On the question of representation of Kampuchea, Chairman Narasimha Rao                    
 referred to the report of the Chairman of the Co- ordinating Bureau                       
 which spoke of continuning divergence of opinion in the Movement on the                   
 issue, and stated that in the circumstances it was not possible to                        
 arrive at a consensus on the seating of either Democratic Kampuchea or                    
 the People's Republic of Kampuchea. On the basis of informal                              
 consultations held with the parties concerned and other interested                        
 delegations, he proposed that the Ministerial Conference should                           
 recommend to the                                                                          
                                                                                           
 -2>                                                                                       
                                                                                           
 Heads of State Government that (i) the Co-ordinating Bureau, acting in                    
 the capacity of an ad-hoc committee, be charged to examine the question                   
 further, taking into account suggestions made during the debate, and to                   
 make a recommendation thereon to the Meeting of Foreign Ministers to be                   
 held in 1985; (ii) they take note of the report of the Conference which                   
 will include Chairman's summing up as he has just made it; and (iii) no                   
 further consideration be given to the question at the Seventh Summit.                     
 It was his understanding, on the basis of the assurances received from                    
 the parties concerned that the question of representation of Kampuchea                    
 in the Movement would hereafter be considered only as provided in (i)                     
 above.                                                                                    
                                                                                           
 Other recommendations of the Conference of Foreign Ministers concerned                    
 with the admission of Bahamas, Barbados, Columbia and Vanuatu as full                     
 members to the Movement, participation of Antigua and Barbuda as an                       
 Observer and the invitation to the Dominican Republic as a Guest, and                     
 about continuing further consultations on the composition of the                          
 Co-ordinating Bureau.                                                                     
                                                                                           
 The Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned                             
 Countries, attended by 99 members, 16 Observers and 26 Guests, was                        
 declared open on 7 March 1983 by President Fidel Castro Ruz of Cuba,                      
 Shrimati Indira Gandhi Prime Minister of India, delivered the inaugural                   
 address which was widely acclaimed as a significant contribution to the                   
 deliberations and the successful outcome of the Conference. It was                        
 unanimously adopted as a Conference Document. In her keynote address,                     
 the Prime Minister emphasised the continuing relevance of the                             
 principles and objectives of the Non-Aligned Movement in contemporary                     
 international politics. Shrimati Gandhi reiterated the deep and abiding                   
 commitment of member states to the principles of non- alignment                           
 directed towards the consolidation of peace, justice and progress in                      
 the world, the attainment of disarmament and the establishment of the                     
 New International Economic Order based on justice and equity. The Prime                   
 Minister called for the convening of an international conference on                       
 money and finance for development, which will devise methods to                           
 mobilize finance for investments in critical areas. She emphasized the                    
 inter- relationship between peace, independence, disarmament and                          
 development and made a strong plea for unity, harmony and collective                      
 selfreliance amongst non-aligned countries.                                               
                                                                                           
 Shrimati Indira Gandhi was elected Chairperson of the Conference on the                   
 proposal of the President of Cuba, which was supported by several                         
 representatives speaking on behalf of the Asian, African and Latin                        
 American countries and the national liberation movements. The Summit                      
 Conference then proceeded, with Shrimati Indira Gandhi in the chair, to                   
 adopt the recommendations of the Conference of Foreign Ministers on the                   
 composition of the Bureau of the Summit Conference, the admission of                      
 new members and participation by observers and guests and the agenda.                     
 President Fidel Castro Ruz, Chairman of the Sixth                                         
                                                                                           
 -3>                                                                                       
 Conference, presented a report on developments in the Movement and in                     
 the international scene since the Havana Summit of 1979. As many as 79                    
 Heads of State Government or leaders of delegations made statements in                    
 the general debate, while the statements of seven countries, who waived                   
 their right to speak, were circulated. The conference also heard                          
 statements from six observers. The Secretary-General of the United                        
 Nations was invited to address the Conference.                                            
                                                                                           
 The main documents adopted by the Conference of the Heads of State or                     
 Government were Political Declaration, Economic Declaration, Action                       
 Programme for Economic Cooperation, Declaration on Collective                             
 Self-reliance among NonAligned and other developing countries, and New                    
 Delhi Message.                                                                            
                                                                                           
 Political Declaration :                                                                   
                                                                                           
 In the Political Declaration, the Heads of State or Government of                         
 NonAligned Countries focussed attention on the struggle for peace and                     
 development. The Declaration underlined the need for urgent practical                     
 measures to prevent nuclear annihilation and curb the armaments race.                     
 It also emphasised the need for observing the principle of peaceful                       
 settlement by the Non-aligned countries amongst themselves.                               
                                                                                           
 The Heads of State or Government renewing their commitment to the                         
 principles and objectives of the Movement of Non-Aligned countries,                       
 recalled that the Movement, which has been conceived in the context of                    
 the struggle against colonialism and the growing polarisation of                          
 international relations resulting from military blocs, military                           
 alliances and the cold war, has consistently struggled for the                            
 all-round emancipation of the peoples of Asia, Africa, Latin America                      
 and the Caribbean and other parts of the world. The struggle against                      
 imperialism, colonialism, neo-colonialism, apartheid and all forms of                     
 foreign intervention, interference, aggression, occupation, domination                    
 or hegemony, and total detachment from power blocs and alliances and                      
 their confrontations, remained fundamental elements in the policy of                      
 non-alignment. The non-aligned countries renewed their pledge to strive                   
 unceasingly to eliminate these policies in international behaviour and                    
 to build a new pattern of international relations in which the                            
 inalienable rights of peoples under alien and colonial domination to                      
 self-determination and independence and the right to equality of all                      
 states, big or small, are fully secured. The very essence of the                          
 Movement, the Declaration stated, involves keeping away from power                        
 blocs aligned against one another, promotion of their dissolution and                     
 rejection of narrow, outmoded doctrines of deterrence, balance of power                   
 and spheres of influence which give rise to tensions and polarisiation,                   
 division and conflict among nations.                                                      
                                                                                           
 The Political Declaration laid full emphasis on disarmament, in                           
 particular nuclear disarmament, considering it as an issue of human                       
 survival. Pending the achievement of nuclear disarmament, the Heads of                    
 State or Government demanded an immediate prohibition of the use or                       
 threat of use of nuclear weapons by all nuclear weapon States and                         
 called for a freeze on the development, production,                                       
                                                                                           
 -4>                                                                                       
 stock-piling and deployment of nuclear weapons and the speedy                             
 finalization of a comprehensive treaty banning the testing of nuclear                     
 weapons. The Summit Conference also expressed deep disappointment at                      
 the failure of the Second Special Session of the United Nations General                   
 Assembly devoted to disarmament to achieve meaningful results and                         
 re-affirmed that the principles and priorities contained in the Final                     
 Document of the First Special Session of the United Nations General                       
 Assembly devoted to disarmament retained all their validity and that                      
 the objectives and measures contained therein still represented a goal                    
 to be achieved.                                                                           
 On the Indian Ocean issue, the Summit Conference of Non- Aligned                          
 countries re-affirmed the determination of Non-Aligned States towards                     
 the attainment of the objectives embodied in the 1971 U.N. Declaration                    
 of the Indian Ocean as a Zone of Peace. The Heads of State/Government                     
 were convinced that any manifestation of great power military presence,                   
 foreign bases, military installations and logistical supply facilities,                   
 nuclear weapons and weapons of mass destruction in the Indian Ocean                       
 constitute a flagrant violation of that Declaration. The Conference                       
 also expressed full support for Mauritian sovereignty over the Chagos                     
 archipelago including Diego Garcia and declared that the establishment                    
 and strengthening of the military base at Diego Garcia has endangered                     
 the sovereignty, territorial integrity and peaceful development of                        
 Mauritius and other states.                                                               
                                                                                           
 The Political Declaration reiterated the support of the Non- Aligned                      
 Movement for the heroic peoples of Palestine, Namibia and South Africa                    
 and all the victims of the aggressive policies and actions of Israel                      
 and South Africa. It condemned all forms of racism including zionism                      
 and apartheid and the policies of countries which support them. The                       
 Summit Conference re-affirmed its support to the Palestinian people for                   
 the liberation of their homeland and the recovery of their inalienable                    
 national rights and urged the withdrawal of Israel from Jerusalem,                        
 occupied Palestine, Arab territories and from Lebanon. The Heads of                       
 State or Government welcomed the steps taken to seek negotiated                           
 political solutions to conflicts in Central America and in other parts                    
 of the world.                                                                             
                                                                                           
 Reviewing the situation in South-East Asia, the Heads of State or                         
 Government expressed grave concern over the continuing conflicts and                      
 tensions in the region, particularly as many of the States are members                    
 of the Movement of NonAligned Countries. They reaffirmed, their support                   
 for the principles of non-interference in the affairs of sovereign                        
 States and the inadmissibility of the use of force against sovereign                      
 States. They warned that there was a real danger of the tensions in and                   
 around Kampuchea escalating over a wider area. They were convinced of                     
 the urgent need to de- escalate these tensions through a comprehensive                    
 political solution which would provide for the withdrawal of all                          
 foreign forces, thus ensuring full respect for the sovereignty,                           
 independence and territorial integrity of all States in the region,                       
 including Kampuchea. They reaffirmed the right of the people of                           
 Kampuchea to determine their own destiny free from foreign                                
 interference, subversion and coercion and expressed the hope that                         
 through                                                                                   
                                                                                           
 -5>                                                                                       
 a process of negotiations and mutual understinding a climated conducive                   
 to the exercise of that right would be created.                                           
                                                                                           
 The Heads of State or Government noted with great concern the situation                   
 in South-West Asia and agreed that it carries dangerous consquences for                   
 the peace and stability of the region. Viewing the situation in the                       
 Afghanistan with particular concern, they reiterated the urgent call                      
 made at the New Delhi Ministerial Conference held in February 1981 for                    
 a political settlement on the basis of the withdrwal of foreign troops                    
 and full respect for the indepences, sovereignty territorial integrity                    
 and non-alinged status of Afghnaistan and strict observance of the                        
 principle of non-intervention and non-interference. They also                             
 reaffirmed the right of the Afghan refuggees to return to their homes                     
 in safety and honour and called for a speedy solution to this vast                        
 humanitarian problem. To this end, they urged all concerned to work                       
 towards such a settlement which would ensure that the Afghan people                       
 would enable the Afghan refugees to return to their homes. They                           
 expressed their appreciation for sincer efforts made in the search for                    
 a political settlement of the situation in Afghanistan and extended                       
 their support to the constructive steps taken in this regard by the                       
 United Nations Secretary-General.                                                         
                                                                                           
 On Korea, the Heads of State or Government re affirmed their support                      
 for the Korean people's desire to reunify their homeland peacefully,                      
 free of all foreign interfernce.                                                          
                                                                                           
 The Heads of States of Government expressed their concern over the                        
 intensification of tension in Europe, and the dangers of growing                          
 stockpiling of weapons in the Continent which further aggraveted bloc                     
 conferontations and endangered international peace and security. They                     
 reaffirmed the close inter-connection between the security problems of                    
 Europe and the Mediterrnean and in this context called for a meeting of                   
 the Non-aligned Mediterranean Members in order to concert views and                       
 devise initiative for cooperation and strengthening security in the                       
 Mediterranean region. The Conference also reiterated its full                             
 solidarity and support for the people and Government of the Republic of                   
 Cyprus and reaffirmed its respect for that country's independence,                        
 sovereignty and territorial integrity, unity and non-alignement.                          
                                                                                           
 The Heads of State or Government noted with satisfaction the                              
 determination of the people of Latin American to pursue a non- aligned                    
 policy and to struggle against colonialism, neo- colonialism and all                      
 forms of domination, hegemony and interference in the internal affairs                    
 of states. The Conference considered the right of any state to freely                     
 choose its own political, social and cultural system as of paramount                      
 importance, in the context of the contiunig tension in Central America,                   
 the Caribbean and the South Atlantic. The Heads of State or Government                    
 also recalled the decsions adopoted by previous Conference to the                         
 effect that the establishment of foreign military bases against the                       
 will of the countries                                                                     
                                                                                           
 -6>                                                                                       
 in which they are installed, constituted a violation of their national                    
 sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity and pointed out                       
 dangres represented by the existnce of military bases and the conduct                     
 of military manoeuvers directed against the countries of the region.                      
 The Heads of State or Government also expressed their concern for the                     
 continuing colonialist policies and the increasing economic pressures,                    
 threats and aggressions in the Caribbean region and supported the                         
 efforts to declare Central American and the Caribbean a Zone of Peace.                    
 The Conference reiterated its supports to Afgentina to secure the                         
 restitution of Malvinas Islands to its sovereignty through negotiations                   
 and urged that the negoatiations between the Governments of Argentina                     
 and the United Kingdom be reopend with the participation and good                         
 offices of the Secretary-General of the United Nations.                                   
                                                                                           
 On the question of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, the Heads of                      
 State or Government reiterated that full and unrestricted access to                       
 nuclear technology for peaceful purpose, under non-discriminatory                         
 conditons, is an inalieable right of every state and observed that                        
 non-proliferation should not be made a pretext for preventing states                      
 from exerciseing their full right to acquire and develop nuclear energy                   
 for peaceful purposes geared to economic and social development, in                       
 accordance with their priorities, interests and needs.                                    
                                                                                           
 The Heads of State or Government expressed concern about the disputes                     
 and conflicts among non-aligned countries which were not only causing                     
 serious human and material loss to the economies of the countries                         
 concerned and posing threat to the peace and progress of their peoples,                   
 but also affecting the conhesion and solidarity of the Movement of                        
 Non-Aligned Countries.                                                                    
                                                                                           
 The Heads of State or Government also noted with satisfaction the                         
 growing role of the non-aligned countries in the United Nations and the                   
 progress made in promoting cooperation among non- aligned countries in                    
 the field of information and mass media.                                                  
                                                                                           
 The Heads of State or Government reaffirmed their firm adherence to the                   
 purposes and principles of the UN Charter and fully recongnised the                       
 need to support and strenghten the World Organisation in order to make                    
 it an effective instrument for the fulfilment of its central role in                      
 maintenance of international peace and security, in developing and                        
 strengthening cooperation among nations, in establishing equatble                         
 economic relations between states and in promoting fundamental rights                     
 and freedoms in the world. The Conference urged Heads of States or                        
 Government of the members States of the UN to undertake, during the                       
 38th regular Session of the General Assembly, a Collective appraisal                      
 with a view to finding speedy and just solutions to some of the major                     
 problems of the world and called on the international community to                        
 observer 1985 as the year of the United Nations.                                          
                                                                                           
 -7>                                                                                       
 In conclusion, the Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned                            
 Countries expressed their determination to strengthen the unity and                       
 cohesion of the Movement and to enhance its capacity for action in                        
 support of peace and cooperation. They expressed concern over conflicts                   
 between Members and urged peaceful resoulution of differnces. They                        
 demanded that, in the interest of world harmony and peace, other powers                   
 also respect the independence of the Movement and the intergrity of its                   
 Members.                                                                                  
                                                                                           
 Economic Declaration :                                                                    
                                                                                           
 In the comprehensive Economic Declaration, the New Delhi Message, a                       
 Declaration on "collective action for global prosperity", and a                           
 Declaration on "collective self-reliance among developing countries",                     
 the Seventh Non-Aligned Summit re- emphasized the need for establishing                   
 the New International Economic Order; called for Global Negotiations to                   
 be launched through a Conference within the UN systemed in early 1984;                    
 proposed the convening of an International Conferece on Money and                         
 Finance for Development with universal participation for comprehensive                    
 restructiuring of the international monetary and financial system;                        
 stressed that immediate measures were necessary to stimulate the                          
 economies of developing countries with mechanism readily available                        
 through a Programme of Immediate Measures in critical areas such as                       
 food, energy, financial flows, trade and raw materials and provided a                     
 political impetus to strengthening and intensifyg co-operation among                      
 developing countries.                                                                     
                                                                                           
 The Decelaration set 1985 as the target year when Official Development                    
 Assistance (ODA) should reach a level of 0.7 per cent of the GNP of the                   
 developed countries. It advocated a comprehensive multi-lateral                           
 framework for restructring the debt burden of developing countries and                    
 the conversion of all outstanding bilateral ODA loans into grants for                     
 the Least- Developed Countries (LDCs).                                                    
                                                                                           
 The Economic Declaration urged rasing the quota of the International                      
 Monetary Fund (IMF) to 125 billion SDRs and, inter alia, called for an                    
 immediated review of IMF conditionality and liberalisation of its                         
 compenstary financing facility in the light of the decline in commodity                   
 prices. The Economic Declaration also advocated a substantial expansion                   
 of the World Bank's current lending programme and further augmentation                    
 of its capital resources through an additional capital increase in the                    
 Seventh International Development Association replenishment. Immediate                    
 measures in the areas of Trade and Commodities implementation at UNCTAD                   
 and other relevant meetings of the UN organisations.                                      
 The Declaration also expressed concern about the inadequate                               
 implementation of the UN Charter on Economic Rights and Duties and                        
 called upon developed countries which had not accepted it so far to                       
 abide by it. Likewise, the effective implementation of the                                
 International Development Strategy for the 3rd UN                                         
                                                                                           
 -8>                                                                                       
 Development Decade has been stressed. It appealed to all countries to                     
 participate in the forthcoming UNCTAD-VI in a constructive manner so                      
 that meaningful reasults could be achieved in all areas of concern to                     
 the international community.                                                              
                                                                                           
 The Declaration regretted that control over the current international                     
 monetary and financial system continued to be the preserve of a few                       
 dominant developed countries and stressed the need to create a new                        
 equitable and universal international monetary system which would put                     
 an end to the dominace of certain reserve currencies, guarantee                           
 developing countries a role in decisionmaking while ensuring monetary                     
 and financial discipline in the developed countries and preferential                      
 treatment for developing countries.                                                       
                                                                                           
 On trade and raw materials, the Declaration demanded substantial                          
 increased market access in developed countries for exports from                           
 developing countries. The developed countries should refrain from                         
 imposing new restrictions on trade in commodities including                               
 agricultural commodities and manufactured and semi- finished products                     
 originating from the developing countries. They should also eliminate                     
 forthwith, restrictive measures incompatible with their international                     
 commitments and draw up a programme for the elimination of                                
 protectionist measures including subsidies on uncompetive products                        
 which adverserly affect the trade prospects of the developing                             
 countries.                                                                                
                                                                                           
 The Declaration called for structural adjustment measures in the                          
 policies of the developed countries with a view to increasing imports                     
 from developing countries and the strengthening of the relevant                           
 mechanism in UNCTAD for consultation and coordination on trade and                        
 adjustment policies so as to ensure inter alia the transparency of                        
 national actions and multilateral surveillance.                                           
                                                                                           
 On energy, the Declaration advocated a net expansion in World Bank                        
 lending in the energy sector, the early establishment of an appropirate                   
 multilateral financing facility for the developing countries within the                   
 existing international institutions such as an Energy Affilate of the                     
 World Bank and the transfer of energy- related technology by the                          
 developed to the developing countries on terms suited to their needs.                     
                                                                                           
 As regards food and agriculture, the Declaration called for the                           
 expansion and enlargement of the food financing facility of IMF to                        
 cover other essential food items; increase in the targets of the                          
 international emergency food reserve from 500,000 to 750,000 to tonnes                    
 and of the food aid convention from 10 to 13 million tonnes and the                       
 setting up of a food security system inter alia through a system of                       
 developing country-owned food reserves. On science and technology, it                     
 urged the industrialised countries as well as developing country-owned                    
 food reserves. On science and technology, it urged the industrialised                     
 countries as well as developing countries to contribute to the United                     
 Nations financing system for science and technology for development.                      
                                                                                           
 -9>                                                                                       
 A code of conduct for transfer of technology should be finalised early.                   
 Developing countries themselves should cooperate in science and                           
 technology and the non-aligned centre for science and technology in New                   
 Delhi should be set up early.                                                             
                                                                                           
 On industrialisation, the Summit urged the developed countries to                         
 augment their financial flows to developing countries for their                           
 industrialisation on favourable terms. UNIDC should be converted into a                   
 specialised agency. The resources of the UN development system like the                   
 UNDP should be augmented.                                                                 
                                                                                           
 The Heads of State/Government re-affirmed the inalienable right of all                    
 countries to exercise full sovereignty and control over their natural                     
 resources and economic activities. It also urged the developing                           
 countries to abide by the UN convention on the Law of the Sea.                            
                                                                                           
 The Declaration made a special reference to Antarctica and said that                      
 not only this area should be used for peaceful purposes but also                          
 exploitation of its resources should be for all mankind. It also noted                    
 that a code of conduct for the operation of the trans-national                            
 corporations was essential.                                                               
                                                                                           
 The Economic Declaration stressed the need to foster human resources                      
 development and programme for women; protection of the environment and                    
 the termination of the arms race in outer space. It stressed the right                    
 of all countries for denying supplies for the nuclear programme of                        
 developing countries. The Economic Declaration also called for special                    
 measures to assist the LDCs, the land-locked countries, island                            
 developing countries and the most seriously affected countries. It also                   
 stressed the need for greater South-South cooperation.                                    
                                                                                           
 The Declaration laid considerable stress on economic cooperation among                    
 developing countries. The Heads of State or Government decided to                         
 consult one another informally from time to time to intensify                             
 South-South cooperation. With regard to institutional infrastructure                      
 for future cooperation among developing countries, they recommended                       
 early completion of major projects like setting up of the Centre for                      
 Information on Transnational Corporations in Havana and the Centre for                    
 Science and Technology in New Delhi.                                                      
                                                                                           
 Action Programme for Economic Cooperation                                                 
                                                                                           
 An Action Programme for Economic Cooperation adopted by the Seventh                       
 Non-algined Conference emphasised the need for the full implementation                    
 of the decisions of the fifth and sixth summit conference on monetary                     
 and financial cooperation and stressed, in particular, the need to                        
 organise a meeting of representatives of central banks and finance                        
 ministries in order to promote                                                            
                                                                                           
 -10>                                                                                      
 financial cooperation among the non-aligned and other developing                          
 countries. It called upon member countries to ensure greater awarness                     
 of the investment opportunities and to study ways and means of                            
 promoting investment flows between themselves by maintaining a                            
 favourable economic environment in conformity with their national                         
 legislations, policies and economic systems. It called upon member                        
 states to coordinate their efforts at the United Nations Conference to                    
 promote International cooperation in the Use of Nuclear Energy for                        
 Peaceful Purpose, in accordance with UN General Assembly resolution                       
 32/50. It emphasised the important role of public enterprises in the                      
 industrialisation and overall development of developing countries. It                     
 stressed the need for maintaining unity and solidarity of the                             
 non-aligned contries in international negotiations in order to                            
 strengthen their bargaining position vis-a-vis the developed countries.                   
 The Conference recommended that the proposals regarding the creation of                   
 any other fund under the Action Programme should be considered in the                     
 light of the failure so far to put into effect the Fund for Economic                      
 and Social Development. It urged non-aligned and other developing                         
 countries to expedite the consideration of the proposal for                               
 establishing "Project Development Mechanism for Techno-Economic                           
 Corporation" with a view to its finalization by the Group of 77. It                       
 recommended the implementation of measures aimed at collective                            
 self-reliance in the field of food and agriculture and urged continued                    
 consultations and examination of the proposals amongst member states                      
 regarding food security issues. It also decided to urgently convene a                     
 meeting of experts in irrigation to promote technical cooperation in                      
 the design, construction and management of large, medium and                              
 small-scale project as well as to consider the possibilities of                           
 establishing joint ventures for the production of a complete range of                     
 irrigation equipment. The Action Programme for Economic Cooperation                       
 also covered various other aspects, including the availability of raw                     
 materials, trade, transport, industry, scientific and technological                       
 development, fisheries, health, employment, tourism and transnational                     
 corporations, sports, telecommunications, housing, education and                          
 culture.                                                                                  
                                                                                           
 The Declaration calls for an effective coordination and harmonisation                     
 of the programme of action of the movement of Non- aligned countries                      
 and those of the Group of 77, providing for appropriate modalities to                     
 enable the same.                                                                          
                                                                                           
 Declaration on Collective Self-reliance                                                   
                                                                                           
 The Declaration on Collective Self-reliance adopted at the Seventh                        
 Non-aligned Summit recognised the imperative need to promote                              
 self-reliant development of the economics of member states and                            
 retierated the role of collective self-reliance in harmonising the                        
 diversity of interests and achieving unfied position and in enhancing                     
 the negotiating strength and countervailing                                               
                                                                                           
 -11>                                                                                      
                                                                                           
 power of the developing countries in their efforts to establish a New                     
 International Economic order. It pledged to impart fresh impetus to                       
 collective self-reliance based on the principles of equality, justice,                    
 mutual benefit and full respect for each other's independence and                         
 sovereignty. To that end, the Declaration urged increasing reliance on                    
 indigenous resources, capital, skills, technologies, capacities and                       
 strategies of development and the mobilisation of all necessary                           
 resources in support of sub-aligned and other developing countries for                    
 strenthening indigenous capacities and for mutual benefit as well as                      
 providing financial, technical and other neccessary help to each other.                   
 The Declaration pleaded for according preferential treatment to each                      
 other in trade, technology, supply of commodities, raw materials,                         
 investments and provision of financial and technical support and                          
 effective mechanism for giving ECDC programme and projects a concrete                     
 shape; harmonization of ECDC programme in national policies and                           
 programmes and emphasized collective support to each nation's                             
 sovereignty over its natural resources and collective solidarity in the                   
 face of external pressure.                                                                
                                                                                           
 New Delhi Message                                                                         
                                                                                           
 The New Delhi Message described peace and peaceful co- existence,                         
 independence, disarmament and development as "the central issues of our                   
 time". It expressed deep concern about the tensions and confrontations                    
 between the great powers and their distrurbing effects on Non-algined                     
 countries. It affirmed the Non-aligned countries determination to                         
 resist economic and political pressures that might be exerted by any                      
 great power against small and vulnerable states. It appealed to the                       
 great powers to give up mistrust, engage in sincere forward-looking                       
 negotiations in a spirit of shared good faith to reach agreement on                       
 various disarmament measures and to find a way out of the deepening                       
 economic crisis that was threatening all. Drawing attention to the                        
 ever-increasing rate at which the arms race was consuming the scarece                     
 material and human resources of the world, destroying the ecological                      
 balance and wasting much of the finest scientific talent in sterile and                   
 destructive pursuit, the New Delhi Message urged that these elements be                   
 used instead to re- vitalise and re-structure the world economy and                       
 that the resources released by measures of disarmament should be                          
 diverted to promote the development of developing countries. It called                    
 for an immediate halt to the drift towards nuclear conflict and                           
 described 1983 "a crucial year for nuclear disarmament". The New Delhi                    
 Message pointed out that instead of enlightened multilateralism, many                     
 rich nations were turning in the midst of the world economic crisis to                    
 the catastrophic bilaterlism of the 1920s and 1930s and still refuse to                   
 recognise that the economic revival of the North was simply not                           
 possible without the economic survival of the south. Solutions to these                   
 problems must necessarily be global. Underlining the urgent                               
                                                                                           
 -12>                                                                                      
                                                                                           
 necessity of a thorough-going re-structuring of the existing                              
 international economic order, that had proved inadequate, the Message                     
 urged a process of global negotiations. This had to be launched without                   
 delay, overcoming all hurdles. It urged the undertaking of immediate                      
 measures in areas of critical importance to developing countries such                     
 as financial flows, trade and commodities, energy and food and                            
 agricultural. It also demanded immediate attention to the tragic                          
 situation of many developing countries which were unable to meet their                    
 debt obligations and proposed the immediate convening of an                               
 international conference on money and finance for development. The New                    
 Delhi Message urged the withdrawal of Israel from Jerusalem, occupied                     
 Palestine and Arab territories and from Lebanon and supported the                         
 independence of Namibia. It re-affirmed the Non-aligned countries                         
 solidarity with the African people and their noblecause-the struggle                      
 against apartheid. It affirmed the commitment of the Non-algined States                   
 to press these and other critical issues at the 38th Session of the                       
 United Nations General Assembly and urged the Heads of State or                           
 Government of all countries of the world to join the effort there.                        
                                                                                           
 Iran-Iraq Conflict                                                                        
                                                                                           
 As no consensus could be reached on the two issues of Iran- Iraq                          
 conflict and the venue of the next Summit, the Conference decided that                    
 Shrimati Indira Gandhi, in her capacity as the Chairman, should make an                   
 appeal to the two countries on behalf of the entire Non-Aligned                           
 community. In her statement, Shrimati Indira Gandhi expressed profound                    
 regret at the 30-month old Iran- Iraq conflict and made an appeal to                      
 both the countries to bring an immediate end to the war and to come to                    
 an honourable, just and enduring peace through negotiations and                           
 peaceful means. The overwhelming view expressed by many Heads of State                    
 was that the Non-Aligned Movement should exert every effort to bring                      
 about a speedy and peaceful termination of this tragic conflict. India                    
 has, therefore, pledged to continue consultations and take all possible                   
 and appropriate measures towards this objective.                                          
                                                                                           
 Venue for 8th Summit                                                                      
                                                                                           
 As regards the venue of the next Non-Aligned Summit, it was stated that                   
 although an overwhelming majority of the member countries had expressed                   
 their opinion favouring Iraq as venue of the next Summit, a final                         
 decision in the matter would be taken by a meeting of the Foreign                         
 Ministers to be held not later than 1985.                                                 
                                                                                           
 Composition of the Co-ordinating Bureau                                                   
                                                                                           
 On the composition of the Co-ordinating Bureau, the Conference decided                    
 that it should comprise all those members who had communicated a formal                   
 request to serve on the Bureau.                                                           
                                                                                           
 -13> Resolution of Thanks :                                                               
                                                                                           
 The Conference also adopted a resolution expressing the gratitude of                      
 the Seventh Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned                     
 Countries to the Government and people of India as well as to Shrimati                    
 Indira Gandhi for their warm and friendly welcome and commended the                       
 Government of India for the excellent facilities which were made                          
 available, at short notice, to the participants in the Conference and                     
 the efficiency of the Organisation and quality of the services placed                     
 at the disposal of the Conference. The resolution emphasized its high                     
 appreciation for the contribution of India, the land of Mahatma Gandhi                    
 and Jawaharlal Nehru, and a founding member of the Movement, in                           
 promoting the role of non-alignment in strengthening peace, equitable                     
 international relations, co-operation and friendship among nations; and                   
 affirmed its optimism and confidence that the Conference will                             
 strengthen the unity and solidarity of the Movement, thus enhancing the                   
 important and dynamic role that the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries                     
 is destined to play in the solution of major international problems.                      
                                                                                           
 Closing Address:                                                                          
                                                                                           
 At the closing session of the Conference, Prime Minister Shrimati                         
 Indira Gandhi delivered her closing address. In that address, the Prime                   
 Minister stated that the Seventh Non-Aligned Summit of Heads of State                     
 or Government considered in depth many problems which beset the world                     
 and resulted in certain accords. Shrimati Gandhi reiterated the call                      
 for a New International Economic Order and reaffirmed solidarity with                     
 liberation movement and opposition to all forms of interference and                       
 intervention. The Non-Aligned Movement, she declared, was not a mere or                   
 casual collection of individual states but a vital historical process.                    
 It represented a comingling of many historical, spiritual and cultural                    
 streams. The Non-Aligned Movement, she asserted, was a major Movement                     
 attempting basic changes. It was a Movement which challenged the                          
 doctrine and practice of racism and advocated the right of economic                       
 equality. The Movement did not set its sights on short-term and limited                   
 benefits, but on broader principles to transform the political and                        
 economic organisation of the world. The solution of the two dominating                    
 issues of the day, viz. disarmament and development required persistent                   
 efforts. The Prime Minister appealed to the member states of the                          
 Non-Aligned Movement to extend their cooperation so that India could                      
 shoulder her responsibility as the Chairman of the Movement for the                       
 next three years.                                                                         
                                                                                           
 -14>                                                                                      
                                                                                           
External website that  External website External website External website External website 
opens in a new window  that opens in a  that opens in a  that opens in a  that opens in a  
                       new window       new window       new window       new window       

    Address : Patiala House, Annexe - BNew Delhi                              
   -110001                                           Page last updated on: 09 
    Telephone: 23389073, 23382694, 23073685;                  December, 2013  
   Fax: 23386340, 23387700;Feedback :            Site designed and maintained 
   dirlibmea.gov.in                                  by: National Informatics 
    Officer In-charge:-                                         Centre (NIC), 
    (c)Content Owned by MEA Library Ministry of   DeitY, MoCIT, Government of 
   External Affairs, Government of India                               India. 
   Terms & Conditions | Privacy Policy |         Visitors:                    
   Copyright Policy | Hyperlinking Policy |      
   Accessibility Statement | Help                

   java script is required for this page
   MEAs App twitter Facebook Google plus YouTube flickr
   loading
