CONTENTS
S No. Chapters
1. India's Neighbours
2. South-East Asia and the Pacific
3. East Asia
4. Central Asia
5. The Gulf, West Asia & North Africa
6. Africa(South Of Sahara)
7. Europe
Eastern Europe
Western Europe
8. The Americas
North America
Central and South America and the Caribbean
9.United Nations and international Organisations
Political Issues
Disarmament and International Security
Economic, Social and Humanitarian Issues
Human Rights
Administrative Financial and Budgetary Issues
Elections and Appointments
Special Agencies
Non-Aligned Movement
Commonwealth
International Law: Developments and Activities
10. Foreign Economic Relations
11.Trade and Investment Promotion
External Economic Publicity
12. Policy Planning and Research
13. External Publicity
14. Protocol
15. Passport and Consular Services and Indians Overseas
16. Administration and Organisation
17. Foreign Service Institute
18. Implementation of Official Language Policy and Propagation of Hindi
Abroad
19. Cultural Relations

PAGE
No.
1
19
27
30
35
49
55
55
61
67
67
71
76
77
79
82
87
88
89
90
91
91
92
98
107
109
112
115
120
122
125
128
132
133

APPENDICES

139-231

INTRODUCTION
The external relations of the country continued to be guided by the well established
principles which have characterised the foreign policy. in a period of constant change in
the global political, economic and security environment there was need for constant
monitoring and assessment of the emerging situation, with a view to protecting India's
vital national interests. The changing scenario also offered many opportunities. It has
been the Government's endeavour to fully utilise these opportunities to promote and
safeguard our interests. Changes in the global economic situation necessitated a
reassessment and strengthening of our economic diplomacy.
In the international fora, the Government continued to project India's principled stand on
various issues. We worked closely with Non-Aligned countries and G-77 to ensure that
the views of the developing world were fully taken into account on all major political and
economic issues. India contributed effectively to mobilising support for its views and in
building consensus among the countries of the South on major economic issues.
Among the most important of the Government's priorities during the year was to
strengthen relations with neighbouring countries so as to provide a stable and peaceful
environment for the socioeconomic progress of the people. Particular attention was paid
to regional cooperation which would bring economic benefits to the population of the
entire region. As Chairman of SAARC, India initiated a number of moves in this
direction.
-v>
India continued to maintain traditionally warm and friendly relations with the Royal
Government of Bhutan. Our commitment to deepening our close links with Bhutan was
underlined through decisions on expanding economic cooperation during Bhutan's Eighth
Five Year Plan period (1997-2002).
The conclusion of the "Treaty between His Majesty's Government of Nepal and the
Government of India concerning the integrated development of the Mahakali River
including Sarda Barrage, Tanakpul Barrage and Pancheshwar Project" envisages joint
exploitation of the water resources and has the potential to open up tremendous
possibilities for economic cooperation between the two countries. The bilateral Trade
Treaty was modified and renewed for a further period of five years. Nepalese
manufactured goods can now enter India free of customs duty and quantitative
restrictions. These developments symbolise the commitment of India and Nepal to
strengthen economic cooperation.
(India's relations with Bangladesh were significantly enhanced. During the visit to India
by Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina in December 1996, the long outstanding issue relating
to the sharing of water resources was resolved through the signing of a landmark Treaty
on Sharing of the Ganga Waters at Farakka. The Treaty will run for thirty years and will
meet minimum needs of both sides. The visit by the Prime Minister to Bangladesh in
January 1997 consolidated the enhanced bilateral relationship between India and

Bangladesh. Fresh impetus has been given to economic and commercial cooperation
between the two countries. The Government of India decided to extend tariff concessions
and remove quantitative restrictions on the import of goods in 14 sectors of interest to
Bangladesh.
Relations with Sri Lanka continued to be close and cooperative and there were conscious
efforts to strengthen cooperation in diverse fields. President Chandrika Kumaratunga
came to India on a private visit when she met the Prime Minister. India extended food
assistance for rehabilitation of the civilian population of Jaffna.
Regular and cordial interaction was kept up with Maldives during the year. The Maldives
Institute of Technical Education, a project established with Indian assistance, was
successfully completed and handed over to the Government of Maldives.
-vi>
India's relations with Myanmar remained friendly. A regular and constructive interaction
was maintained with the Myanmar authorities in areas relevant to India's security
interests, such as improved border management, security dialogue and checking of
trafficking in drugs and arms. in order to improve communications and to facilitate
border trade, the Government of India finalised plans for construction and development
of a border road to Myanmar.
The adversarial and confrontationist approach of Pakistan towards India continued during
the year, thus impeding the ,normalisation of relations. Pakistan's support and promotion
of crossborder terrorism continued unabated. Pakistan persisted with efforts to acquire
sophisticated arms and technology in excess of its legitimate requirement, and with
clandestine acquisitions for its weapon-oriented nuclear and missile programmes.
Government closely monitors these developments and their bearing on the security
environment in the subcontinent. All measures were taken to safeguard national interest
and security. India remains committed to building a relationship of trust, friendship and
cooperation with Pakistan and seeks to resolve all outstanding issues through bilateral
negotiations, as envisaged in the Simla Agreement. To create a positive atmosphere and
promote people-to- people relations, government took a number of unilateral steps,
including issuing greater number of visas to nationals of Pakistan and enhancing
interaction between intellectuals, scholars, journalists and academicians. We believe that
development of people-to-people contacts and enhancement of trade and commercial ties
would contribute to laying the foundation on which constructive relations between the
two could be built and which remains our objective.
India attaches highest importance to strengthening economic cooperation among South
Asian countries under the SAARC framework. As Chairman of SAARC during the year,
India played an active role in strengthening the Association and enlarging its activities to
collective benefit and enrichment of the work of the Association. India believes in the
centrality of SAARC in advancing collective regional effort, as envisaged in the
Association's Charter, to enable the South Asian region to assume its rightful place in the
world. The December 1996 SAARC Council of Ministers meeting in New Delhi gave

significant impetus to growing cooperation amongst South Asian countries in economic,
social, technical and cultural areas. Particularly.
-vii>
noteworthy were advances within the SAARC Preferential Trading Arrangement
(SAPTA).
India's relations with China showed steady improvement. The visit of President Jiang
Zemin to India was an important milestone in bilateral relations. A significant outcome of
the visit was the signing of an Agreement on Confidence Building Measures in the
military field along the Line of Actual Control. During the discussions, the importance of
paying adequate attention to each other's concerns on vital issues affecting unity,
territorial integrity and security were underlined. The two sides agreed to work towards a
cooperative and constructive relationship into the 21st century.
We are saddened at the continuance of the fratricidal conflict in Afghanistan. We have
called for the cessation of foreign interference in Afghanistan and for peaceful
discussions and negotiations between Afghan parties. India supports the efforts of the UN
Secretary General and his Special Representative to bring peace to Afghanistan. India
continued her traditional policy of cooperation and friendship with the Afghan people.
India's contacts with the Government of Professor Rabbani, whom it continues to
recognise as the legitimate Government of Afghanistan, have continued.
The close contacts with Iran were further strengthened by exchange of high level visits.
The year witnessed growth in bilateral economic and commercial interactions.
Central Asian Republics occupy an important place in our foreign policy. The proximity
of India and Central Asia, shared history and sentiments of deep friendship on both sides,
create a common stake in the furtherance of peace, stability and security in the region.
India's relations with these Republics, which have just marked the fifth anniversary of
their independence, are based on long-standing historical contacts, people-to-people
empathy and a high degree of political understanding. Economic contacts and exchanges
in science and technology and technical cooperation have been growing. Regular
exchange of high level visits with the countries of the region provided the catalyst for
revitalised and expanded relations in all fields.
The growth of friendly and mutually beneficial relationship with ASEAN countries in
economic, political and security related areas has been striking. Consequent to becoming
a Full Dialogue Partner
-viii>
of ASEAN, India for the first time participated in the Post Ministerial Conference (PMC)
of ASEAN in Jakarta and also in the meeting of the ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF). The
Prime Minister of Malaysia Dr Mahathir bin Mohammad, visited India in December 1996
to accept the prestigious Jawaharlal Nehru Award for International Understanding. The
Government of Singapore took the initiative in holding the first ever Global Indian

Entrepreneurs Conference in June, bringing together businessmen from India and of
Indian origin from around the globe. Ways to build and expand bilateral relations
between India and Indonesia were discussed during the meeting of the Prime Minister
with President Soeharto in Rome. Both Indonesia and Brunei have agreed to India's
proposal for setting up a Telemetry and Tracking ground station for continuous
monitoring of ISRO's Geosynchronous Satellite Launch Vehicle. Two Royal visits from
Thailand also took place during this period. India's relations with Vietnam continue to be
marked with traditional friendship and warmth.
Exchange of visits including those of business delegations consolidated relations with
other countries in the region namely Laos, Cambodia, Philippines, New Zealand and
Australia. Five Cabinet Ministers including the Deputy Prime Minister and the Foreign
Minister of Australia, visited India in connection with a major business and cultural
promotion initiative, the 'New Horizons'.
India continued efforts to forge closer ties with countries of East Asia. The exchange of
high level visits made a significant contribution to development of our relations with
these countries. Humanitarian relief assistance was extended to the Democratic Peoples
Republic of Korea, with which we have friendly relations, to tide over the adverse effect
of floods.
Relations with Japan continued to be characterised by friendship and understanding. We
greatly value Japan's continued support for our economic development, both as the
leading partner in development cooperation and as the major investor in India. Japan was
the Partner Country in the India Engineering Trade Fair organised by the Confederation
of Indian Industry in February 1997.
We have close historical association with the Arab countries and our relations with them
continue to be marked by traditional friendship, mutual understanding and growing
cooperation. The
-ix
President was extended a warm welcome when he visited the Sultanate of Oman. India
has supported the peace process to bring to an end the conflict situation in the Middle
East. India shared the widely-felt concern at the developments affecting the peace
process. We urged all parties to intensify efforts to build upon the interim agreements
towards a speedy conclusion of the process, and later welcomed the Hebron accords.
India remained committed to build upon its close and friendly relations with Africa,
which has deep roots in history. The Government's approach has been to consolidate the
gains of almost five decades of close ties of friendship with States of Africa; to intensify
bilateral economic and commercial linkages for mutual benefit; to share developmental
experience and promote technical cooperation as part of India's commitment to SouthSouth cooperation; and to foster institutional linkages with regional and sub-regional
groups in Africa. Several high level exchanges during the year served to reinforce the
traditional bonds of friendship and cooperation between India and the countries of Africa.

During the visit of the Prime Minister to Harare in November 1996 to attend the G_ 15
Summit the focus on regional cooperation with Africa was enhanced. At the Summit, the
Prime Minister announced the creation of a revolving fund of Rs 100 crores towards such
cooperation with Africa.
Based on continuity, trust and confidence, relations with the Russian Federation have
traditionally been warm and friendly and are an important foreign policy priority for
India. Indo-Russian relations are progressing well in all areas of bilateral cooperation,
including trade and economy, science and technology, culture and defence. Prime
Minister's visit to the Russian Federation contributed to a further intensification of the
close and friendly ties between India and Russia.
India continues to maintain close ties with countries of East and Central Europe.
Particular impetus was given to ties with Poland and the Slovak and Czech Republics as a
result of the State visits of the President of India to these countries. These visits were
marked by great warmth and goodwill for India at all levels.
India's relations with countries of Western Europe expanded on the basis of
complementarity of interests and mutual benefit.
-x>
Exchange of visits helped to enhance the level and content of India's relations with these
countries. With the expansion of the European Union (EU) and its move towards a
common foreign and security policy, India's political dialogue with countries of EU has
assumed added significance. Sustained efforts were made to strengthen EU's
understanding on issues of importance to India. The EU, en bloc, is our largest trading
partner and is the largest foreign investor in India.
We look forward to the continued growth of Indo-US relations ,during the second term of
the Administration of President Clinton. As two mature and friendly democracies, both
India and the US recognise the importance of developing and expanding the base for
mutually beneficial relations. Regular consultations were held with the US on bilateral,
regional and international issues. While India and the US do not share a common
approach to all issues, both are interested in not allowing differences in perspectives on
some issues to stand. in the way of working together in the many areas where our
approaches converge and which are mutually beneficial.
A number of high level exchanges with Canada have laid the ground for revitalised and
expanded relations with Canada. During the visit of the Foreign Minister of Canada in
January 1997, it was decided to establish a joint Ministerial Committee to promote
cooperation in diverse areas.
The thrust of India's policy towards Central and South America and the Caribbean is to
strengthen and widen existing relations and to give it more economic content. Major
Indian exhibitions were organised in Argentina and Brazil and visits of trade delegations
were promoted. India sought to promote institutional relations with the Rio Group and the

Central American States and to develop similar arrangements with the regional groupings
MERCOSUR, CARICOM, ACS and the Andean Community.
Fundamental changes in international relations following the end of bloc confrontation
have contributed to increased focus on the role of international organisations, particularly
the United Nations. India strongly believes that multilateral cooperation needs to be
strengthened in order to face the common global challenges of the present and the future.
We, therefore, played an active and participative role in the debates and activities shaping
the global .
-xi>
agenda and in articulating the concerns of the developing countries, with a view to
developing a constructive and equitable global consensus. India continued to support the
reform and restructuring of the United Nations, including the expansion of both
permanent and non-permanent membership of the Security Council. We actively worked
as co-Chairman of the Open Ended High Level Group on the strengthening of the UN
and as participant in other Working Groups. India maintains that the reforms of the
United Nations must take into account the legitimate concerns of the developing
countries, in all its organs and activities. As in the past, India extended steadfast support
to UN Peace-Keeping Operations and contributed actively to the debate and decisions of
the Special Committee on Peace-Keeping Operations.
India remains strongly committed to the Non-Aligned Movement and its objectives and
principles, which continue to have relevance in a world marked by unequal powers and
privileges. The offer of India to host the next Ministerial Conference of Non-Aligned
countries in New Delhi in April 1997, was welcomed by Member States of NAM.
India played a prominent role in various multilateral disarmament fora. In the First
Committee of the United Nations, the Indian resolution on Convention on Prohibition of
Use of Nuclear Weapons was adopted. India participated actively in the negotiations on
the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty (CTBT) in a positive and constructive manner. The
linkage of the CTBT to the goal of complete elimination of all nuclear weapons within a
time bound framework was a central requirement for us, in keeping with our consistent
and principled stand in support of global nuclear disarmament and opposition to unequal
treaties. In keeping with its commitment to the elimination of all chemical weapons, India
deposited the instruments of ratification of the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC) on
3 September 1996. It is a matter of concern that despite the overwhelming support for the
CWC, a large number of countries from our region and other CW possessor states have
yet to complete their ratification. India supported moves towards the objective of
complete ban on anti-personnel land mines.
India played an active role in multilateral economic fora. This included initiatives on
South-South cooperation in the G-77 as well as in the G-15. The Prime Minister
participated in the 6th G-15
-xii>

Summit in Harare. Trade and investment promotion and giving practical content to
South-South cooperation was pursued, including through our participation in G-77. India
will coordinate the business component of G-77 programmes. The identification by
OECD of India as a Dynamic Non-Member Economy, with whom a policy dialogue was
commenced, led to deepened interaction and the formulation of a plan for dialogue and
cooperation between the two. Preparations were made for India joining the Development
Centre of the OECD. India joined the Working Group on Regional Energy Cooperation
of APEC.
India participated actively in the launching of the Indian Ocean Rim Association for
Regional Cooperation (IOR-ARC) in March 1997 and was closely involved in the
formulation of its Charter and the work to give the Association substantive content and
practical effect through specific projects. This marks a new era in realising the objectives
of Afro-Asian solidarity and cooperation set by our leaders, in the 50th year of India's
independence.
Technical cooperation offered by India is our primary contribution to South-South
cooperation. During the year, more than 600 trainees utilised courses in civilian
institutions under the Indian Technical and Economic Cooperation (ITEC) programme
and Special Commonwealth African Assistance Programme (SCAAP). Additionally,
training was provided to more than 200 personnel in defence institutions. Under the ITEC
programme, three major projects were executed and feasibility studies for several projects
were prepared. Presently 25 Indian experts are deployed abroad in a broad range of
technical and development sectors. Relief supplies were sent to sixteen countries.
India participated in the Fifth World Hindi Conference held in Trinidad and Tobago. To
mark this occasion, the government brought out a souvenir containing the works of
eminent scholars and writers in Hindi.
In the sphere of external publicity, new initiatives were taken to explain and project
India's foreign policy objectives. These included the setting up of the Ministry's home
page on the Internet, use of modern publicity techniques and augmentation of channels of
communication. Audio-visual and printed material was commissioned or procured to
cater to the publicity requirements of
-xiii>
our Missions abroad. The effective and forceful projection of government's programme
and policies enhanced India's image in the media and amongst the public abroad.
The Indian Council of Cultural Relations (ICCR) continued its activities effectively under
the guidance of the Vice President of India, Shri K R Narayanan, who took over as
President of the Council. The Council offered over 1000 new scholarships to students
from 60 countries. The major cultural programmes organised abroad by the Council
during the year were 'The Days of India Culture' in Russia and Vietnam and 'Utsav-The
Indian Festival' in Bangladesh. Among cultural delegations hosted by the Council were
the visit of eminent American folk singer Pete Seeger and renowned Spanish flamenco

dancer Blanca del Rey. The ICCR actively encouraged exchange of artists, writers and
eminent intellectuals and published material of contemporary importance.
The Ministry's efforts have been directed at simplification of passport procedures and
streamlining of the working of Passport Offices to ensure that pendency does not build
up. During 1996 a number of changes were introduced to provide prompt and efficient
passport services to the public. Steps were initiated to open four new Passport Offices. A
monitoring cell has been established in the Central Passport Organisation at headquarters
for speedy redressal of complaints. Visa stickers are being introduced to ensure greater
security. Ultimately, machine printing of visas is foreseen.
The government remained fully alive to the problems of Indian nationals living and
working abroad and took speedy steps to settle their grievances. The Ministry made
arrangements for the safe repatriation of about 60,000 Indian nationals from UAE.
The Ministry continued to make arrangements for the Haj pilgrimage and the Kailash
Mansarovar Yatra.
The Policy Planning Division completed the compilation of the compendium of India's
bilateral treaties for the period 1971-1980 and 1991 and commenced work on the
compendium for the period 1981-1990 and 1992. The documentation Services of the
library are now available on-line to users in the Ministry's headquarters in South Block.
The Foreign Service institute held 15 courses during the year,
-xiv>
the most important of which was the year long professional course in Diplomacy and
International Relations for Indian Foreign Service probationers. Five of the courses were
for foreign diplomats, in which 108 were trained in diplomatic theory and practice. Two
of these courses were devoted solely to South African diplomats. In tune with its
evolving role as a think tank on important issues, the Institute is also planning a number
of activities relating to 'India's Foreign Policy Agenda for the 21st Century'.
New Missions were opened in Croatia and Papua New Guinea and a Post in Sao Paulo,
Brazil. The Mission in Kabul was temporarily closed in September 1996 due to the
disturbed security environment.
During the year a major construction project in Riyadh was successfully completed.
Properties were purchased in Johannesburg, Brussels, Houston and Bangkok. These
measures will save the Ministry considerable rental on offices and residences in these
expensive cities. A plot of land was also purchased in Berlin for construction of the
Chancery complex.
-xv>

To facilitate speedy communications, E-mail connectivity was provided to individual
officers in Ministry's headquarters at South Block and to a large number of Missions and
Posts abroad.
1. India's Neighbours
Relations between India and Nepal have been traditionally close e reflected the links of
history, culture, language and n. During the year under review, these relations continued
to strengthen, symbolised by exchange of high-level official visits.
A 11 -member delegation from the Nepalese Election Commission visited India from 511 May 1996, aimed at acquiring first-hand knowledge of the election process in the
world's largest democracy. This was followed by the visit of Nepalese Foreign Secretary
Kedar Bhakta Shrestha from 17-19 June 1996 for Foreign Secretary level talks.
Commerce Secretary level talks were held at Kathmandu from 4-7 July 1996 and on 3
December 1996 letters were exchanged between the Government of India and the
Government of Nepal for renewing the India-Nepal Trade Treaty for a period of five
years upto 5 December 2001. Articles of Nepalese manufacture can now enter the Indian
market free of customs duty and quantity restrictions. it has also been agreed to accord
parity to Nepalese products in the levy of countervailing duty, which would be equal to
the treatment provided to Indian products, on the basis of a certificate issued by the
Government of Nepal.
The Third Session of the High Level Task Force (HLTF) was held in New Delhi on 9
August 1996, co-chaired by the Chief Secretary (Cabinet Secretary) from the Nepalese
side and the Principal Secretary to the Prime Minister from the Indian side. During this
meeting,
-1>
progress achieved in projects of Indo-Nepal cooperation was reviewed. This was
followed by the official visit of Nepalese Foreign Minister Dr Prakash Chander Lohani
from 12-14 August 1996 at the invitation of the Minister of External Affairs. During the
course of his stay, apart from official talks with the Minister of External Affairs, he called
on the Prime Minister, the Home Minister and Leader of the Opposition Shri Atal Behari
Vajpayee. During this visit, all major aspects of bilateral relations were comprehensively
reviewed.
Minister of Water Resources of the Government of Nepal ,Pashupati Rana paid an
official visit to India from 18-20 November 1996. During the visit, the status of various
water resources and power projects of bilateral cooperation was reviewed. A detailed
exchange of views was held on the follow-up steps to he implemented on the Mahakali
Treaty.
The Foreign Minister of Nepal visited India in December 1996 to attend the SAARC
Ministerial Meeting.
India accounts for almost 40 per cent of the total investments in Nepal. During 1995-96,

Indian imports from Nepal were IRs 166.95 crores while Indian exports to Nepal were at
IRs 536.45 crores. From April till September 1996, exports to Nepal were IRs 305-33
crores while imports from Nepal were IRs 92.57 crores.
As in earlier years, India continued to play an active role in Nepal's developmental
efforts. Work is proceeding apace on the setting up of a medical college and an institute
at Dharan. Another major project for the construction of 22 bridges on the East-West
highway in Western Nepal has commenced. Additional rail coaches have been supplied
to strengthen the service on the Jayanagar-Janakpur railway sector. Work on the outer
ring road project at Janakpur, construction of broad gauge rail links between Raxaul and
Sirsa, as well as other projects, were initiated.
A large number of Nepalese students study in India, many of whom are being offered
scholarships by the Government of India. On the auspicious occasion of the Silver jubilee
of the accession to the throne of King Birendra Bir Bikram Shah Dev in 1996, the
Government of India announced a Silver jubilee Scholarship Scheme. Under this scheme,
25 Nepalese students were selected for award of scholarships for pursuing post graduate
studies in professional courses at Indian colleges/universities. Some other sports and
cultural
-2>
projects are under active consideration of the Government of India.
India and Bhutan have traditionally enjoyed a warm and cordial relationship marked by a
strong resolve to ensure welfare of people of both the countries by extensive economic
cooperation.
The existing friendly relationship between the two countries was further nurtured by
significant exchange of views at various levels. During the year, the Minister of External
Affairs visited Bhutan from 10-12 August 1996 and the Cabinet Secretary from 21- 25
May 1996. From the Bhutanese side, His Majesty the King came on a private visit from
6-9 January 1997. The Foreign Minister of Bhutan visited India in December 1996 to
attend the SAARC Ministerial Meeting. The Minister for Planning and the Minister for
Trade and industry of Bhutan also visited India.
Bilateral Plan Talks between the two countries were held from 26- 30 August 1996 to
review the on-going projects in Bhutan undertaken with Indian assistance during Bhutan's
VII Five Year Plan (1992-97). Major infrastructure' and welfare related projects such as
hospitals, schools, roads, bridges, transmission lines, rural electrification and survey
projects are underway. Indian assistance to Bhutan during the VIII Five Year Plan (19972002) of Bhutan was also discussed in detail during the visit of the Planning Minister of
Bhutan. The proposed assistance will include execution of three major projects in Bhutan
i.e. Tala Hydro-electric Project with 1020 MW capacity, Dungsum Cement Plant with
1500 tonnes per day capacity and Kurichu Hydro- electric Project with 45 MW capacity.
The Tala project is the biggest bilateral cooperation project ever undertaken by India. The
Deputy Chairman Planning Commission led an inter-Ministerial delegation on visit to

Thimpu from 30 January-2 February 1997.
The Minister of External Affairs visited Dhaka from 6-9 September 1996 and held
detailed discussions with the Bangladesh
-3>
Prime Minister, the Foreign Minister and other leading members of the Government. All
issues in bilateral relations were reviewed. In regard to the issue of the sharing of the
Ganga Waters, it was agreed to continue discussions both at political level and in a joint
committee of experts. Both sides reiterated their intention to arrive at an agreement on the
issue before the onset of the next lean season in January 1997. Subsequently the
Bangladesh Minister for Water Resources came to India for discussion in October and the
Foreign Minister paid a visit to India in November.
Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina paid an official visit to India from 10-12 December 1996,
during which a landmark Treaty on Sharing of the Ganga Waters at Farakka was signed
by the Prime Ministers of India and Bangladesh. The Treaty runs for 30 years and is
renewable at mutual consent. It also provides for a review at the end of five years or after
two years, if requested by either party. The sharing agreement takes into account the
basic requirements and minimum needs of both sides. Therefore, during the critical
period within the lean season i.e. from 1 March-10 May, India and Bangladesh each shall
receive a guaranteed flow of 35,000, cusecs of water in an alternating sequence of three
10 day periods each.
The Treaty on Sharing of the Ganga Waters has been acclaimed both in India and
Bangladesh. it has also received widespread international notice. The UN SecretaryGeneral also welcomed the conclusion of the Treaty signed by the two countries.
The Foreign Minister of Bangladesh visited India in December 1996 to attend the
SAARC Ministerial Meeting.
The Prime Minister undertook a visit to Bangladesh on 6 & 7 January 1997. The visit
consolidated the greatly enhanced bilateral relationship between India and Bangladesh.
Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina visited India from 14-16 February 1997 to participate in
the Inter-Parliamentary Specialised Conference on "Towards Partnership Between Men
and Women in Politics". During her stay in India, she called on the President and held
discussion with the Prime Minister.
The Fifth meeting of the India-Bangladesh joint Economic Commission (JEC) chaired by
the Minister of External Affairs and the Foreign Minister of Bangladesh was convened on
12 March 1997.
-4>
The Commission agreed to step up the pace and scope of cooperation in the fields of
economy and finance, trade and commerce and transport and communications. Both sides

agreed to restore the Petrapole-Benapole railway link. The meeting of the JEC after a
period of three years marked an important stage in enhancement of' bilateral relations.
Indian exports to Bangladesh continued to show a growing trend and reached Rs 3470
crores in 1995-96 making Bangladesh one of India's most dynamic markets. imports from
Bangladesh have also grown to about Rs 280 crores. The Government of India decided to
extend tariff concessions and remove quantitative restrictions on the import of goods in
14 sectors of interest to Bangladesh. This was announced by the Minister of External
Affairs while in Dhaka and the concessions are to be made effective from 1997.
Discussions on security related issues also yielded positive results with both sides
reiterating their determination not to permit their territory to be used by insurgents and
undesirable elements. India was assured by Bangladesh on this score. Bangladesh
accepted the proposal to send a high level team, including the Members of' Parliament
from the Chittagong Hill Tracts area, to interact with Chakma refugees in Tripura and to
encourage them to return to their homes.
Bilateral relations with Sri Lanka continued to be close, friendly and cooperative. High
level contacts were regularly maintained to strengthen bilateral cooperation in all fields of
mutual interest. As a close neighbour India has been watching developments in Sri Lanka
with interest. Peace and stability in Sri Lanka are of relevance for the region and are in
India's larger interest.
A spirit of mutual understanding and desire to cooperate marked the visit of Sri Lankan
Foreign Minister Lakshman Kadirgamar to India from 19-21 June 1996. During his visit,
Foreign Minister Kadirgamar had meetings with the Prime Minister, the Finance
Minister, the Industry Minister and the Leader of the Opposition in addition to wideranging discussions with the Minister of External Affairs covering all subjects of mutual
interest. He briefed the Indian leadership on the security situation in Sri Lanka and also
on the ongoing debate on the proposed devolution of powers to regional councils. It was
reiterated that India has always stood for a peaceful
-5>
political settlement of the ethnic issues. The Sri Lankan President came to India on a
private visit in December 1996. During her visit, she called on the President and had
detailed exchange of views on bilateral issues with the Prime Minister.
The Government of India sent 1750 tonnes of rice to assist Sri Lankan efforts for
rehabilitation of civilian population of Jaffna. The problems relating to fishermen of both
the countries were kept under constant consultation. The Government of India took steps
to streamline the procedure for the early release of Sri Lankan fishermen innocently
straying into the Indian waters. The need for humane treatment of Indian fishermen
straying into Sri Lankan waters was impressed upon the Sri Lankan authorities.
On the economic side, bilateral trade continued to record substantial growth as in the last
few years. Both countries agreed on the need to further expand trade and investment both

in the bilateral as well as the regional context. India extended a fresh line of credit worth
Rs 105 crores through an, agreement signed in January 1996. The Sub-Commissions on
Science and Technology and on Social, Cultural and Educational Affairs met in Colombo
in September 1996. The Minister of External Affairs visited Sri Lanka from 19-22
January 1997 and co-chaired the third session of the Indo-Sri Lankan joint Commission.
The Sri Lankan Foreign Minister visited India in December 1996 to attend the SAARC
Ministerial Meeting.
India continues to maintain very close and friendly relations with Maldives, which is an
important maritime neighbour. A regular and cordial interaction was kept up during the
year. Deputy Foreign Minister Salah Shihab inaugurated a seminar on Indo-Maldives ties
at the Institute of Asian Studies in Hyderabad in June 1996. Maldivian Minister of
Transport and Communication Ahmed Zaki visited India in connection with the
Ministerial Conference on Infrastructure held on 28 & 29 October 1996. Speaker of
Citizens' Majlis Dr Abdulla Hameed paid a private visit to India in October 1996. Foreign
Minister Fathulla Jameel visited Delhi for the SAARC Ministerial Meeting in December
1996.
Indian assistance to Maldives focussed mainly on human resource development schemes.
India and Maldives agreed to cooperate in developing a distance education programme
for
-6>
Maldives. A delegation from the Indira Gandhi National Open University, led by Pro
Vice-Chancellor Professor Janardan jha, visited Maldives to assess the Maldivian
requirements and preparation of the scheme to be launched shortly.
The Maldives Institute of Technical Education, a Government of India funded project,
was successfully completed and the complex was handed over to the Government of
Maldives on 16 September 1996. This institute, a symbol of Indo-Maldives cooperation,
would satisfy the long felt demand of facility for imparting vocational training to the
youth of Maldives.
India continued providing technical training to students, including medical and paramedical students, from Maldives under the ITEC programme.
India's relations with Myanmar remained cooperative and cordial. A regular and
constructive interaction was maintained with the Myanmar authorities in areas relevant to
India's strategic interests such as improved border management, border trade, security
dialogue and checking traffic in narcotics and arms.
Chief of Air Staff Air Chief Marshal S K Sareen paid a goodwill visit to Myanmar from
30 April-2 May 1996. In December 1996, the Commander in Chief (Air) of Myanmar
Lieutenant General Tin Ngwe led a defence delegation to India. Further cooperation
between the defence forces was discussed during these visits.

The Government of India approved the construction/ development of Tamu-KyigoneKalewa and Kyigone-Kalemyo roads in Myanmar. The project will be executed by the
Border Roads Organization and is expected to be completed in three years. Once
completed the road would significantly improve the infrastructure in an area close to
Indian borders and would provide an impetus to border trade and also improved
communications.
India facilitated the visit of Buddhist monks from Myanmar to places of religious interest
in UP and Bihar.
The Myanmar Deputy Minister for Home visited India for the Fourth National Level
meeting which took place in New Delhi in October 1996. issues such as checking illegal
trade, insurgent activities and overall border management were discussed. The Fourth
Indo- Myanmar meeting of Heads of Nodal Agencies under the Indo-7>
Myanmar Agreement on Reducing Demand and Preventing Illicit Trafficking in Narcotic
Drugs and Psychotropic Substances was held in August 1996. During this meeting both
sides reviewed steps for checking traffic in narcotics etc.
The bilateral trade with Myanmar showed appreciable improvement. As compared to Rs
497 crores in 1993-94, the volume of trade reached around Rs 612 crores.
The Government desire to build a relationship of trust, friendship and cooperation with
Pakistan. During the year, the Government continued their efforts to resume the bilateral
dialogue with Pakistan. The Prime Minister, in his letter of 8 June 1996 to the then Prime
Minister of Pakistan, put forward the concrete proposal of resuming Foreign Secretary
level talks, which have remained suspended at Pakistan's choosing since January 1994.
After the victory of the Pakistan Muslim League led by Nawaz Sharif in the February
1997 elections, the Prime Minister sent a letter to Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif
reiterating India's desire to resume the bilateral dialogue as a measure to improve the
relations. On receipt of a positive response from Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif, the
Minister of External Affairs, in his felicitation letter to Foreign Minister of Pakistan
Gohar Ayub Khan, reiterated India's desire to convene bilateral talks at an early date.
Bilateral talks at the level of Foreign Secretaries of both the countries from 28-31 March
1997 represent official talks for the first time since January 1994. To create a positive
environment and foster people -to-people relations, the Government took several
measures to increase the number of visas being issued to Pakistani nationals and to
encourage increased interaction between the intellectuals, scholars, journalists and
academicians of the two countries. The Government also exercised restraint in
responding to the polemical statements of the Pakistani leaders. Pakistan's response to
these measures was not encouraging.
Pakistan's support to cross-border terrorism directed against India, particularly in Jammu
and Kashmir, continued unabated. Concerted efforts were made to disrupt the political

process in the State. Pakistan attempted, unsuccessfully, to question the credibility of
elections, which were widely welcomed by the international community. Pakistan
persisted with its propaganda on Kashmir in the international fora. The Government took
steps to apprise the international community of Pakistan's continued support to cross-8>
border terrorism. The Government also took up this issue with Pakistan on several
occasions.
Pakistan continued its efforts to acquire sophisticated arms and technology, in excess of
its legitimate requirements, from various sources. During the year several reports
surfaced about illegal and clandestine acquisitions by Pakistan for its weapons oriented
nuclear and missile programmes. The Government continued to closely monitor these
developments and their bearing on the security environment in the sub-continent. The
Government remain committed to taking all measures to safeguard national interest and
security.
The Foreign Minister of Pakistan visited India in December 1996 to attend the SAARC
Ministerial Meeting.
The situation in Afghanistan remains unstable, with the various factions still in conflict
with each other. The situation has been further exacerbated by the interference of
Pakistan directly and more so through its creation, the Taliban. With the take over of
Kabul by the Taliban militia on 27 September 1996 a new dimension has been added to
the unstable condition in Afghanistan. The Taliban militia, reportedly with the support of
Pakistan regulars, in quick succession captured Jalalabad, Surobi and ultimately Kabul.
Realising that the fall of Kabul was imminent, President Rabbani and Commander
Masood with their forces and other leaders retreated from Kabul to the north. Within a
few hours of their capture of Kabul, the Taliban brutally murdered the former Afghan
President Najibullah and his brother.
On the military front, the Taliban made significant advances during January 1997 against
the combined forces of the Northern Alliance consisting of General Abdul Rashid
Dostum, Commander Ahmad Shah Masood and Hizb-e-Wahdat leader Karim Khalili.
Taliban are now in control of two-thirds of the country. However, since February there
has been no significant forward movement by them. The forces of Northern Alliance
have been able to keep them in check in the two main battle-fronts-Ghorband Valley and
Badghis.
The Taliban continue the pursuit of obscurantist doctrine and the consequent denial of
human rights, especially the rights of women. The human rights violations by the Taliban
regime have been universally condemned.
-9>
India maintained her traditional policy of friendship and cooperation with Afghanistan,
with the Government of Professor Rabbani, whom it has continued to support as the

legitimate Government of Afghanistan. Contacts with Rabbani Government continue at
various levels. Though a regular programme of cooperation could not be sustained due to
the unstable condition there, India has continued extension of humanitarian assistance to
Afghanistan. During the period, items despatched were medicines, tea and cooking oil
worth Rs 7 lakhs. In addition, India set up a month-long camp for providing artificial
limbs to Afghan amputees in Kabul during August-September. The camp benefited about
1100 Afghans. India will continue the policy of humanitarian assistance to Afghanistan.
India supports the unity, independence, territorial integrity and sovereignty of
Afghanistan. India has called for the cessation of foreign interference in Afghanistan and
for peaceful discussions and negotiations between Afghan parties. India also supported
the efforts of the UN Secretary General and his Special Representative in bringing peace
to Afghanistan.
India has been in the formal international peace processes on Afghanistan. India attended
the Tehran conference on Afghanistan on 29 & 30 October 1996. In recognition of India's
ability to contribute to the United Nations efforts aimed at ending the crisis in
Afghanistan, India was among the 19 countries invited by the UN Secretary General to a
meeting in New York on 18 November 1996 of regional states and other states with
influence in Afghanistan. India was invited, despite the attempts of some countries to
scuttle the invitation, to the meeting of the International Forum on Assistance to
Afghanistan held on 21 & 22 January 1996 in Ashkabad, Turkmenistan.
India's Mission in Kabul, which was reopened on 3 May 1996, had to be closed down
again on 26 September 1996 in view of the insecurity posed by the imminent Taliban
take over of Kabul.
In recent years, India-China relations have acquired maturity and substance. While
continuing to address outstanding issues, including the boundary question, both sides
have sought to expand mutually beneficial cooperation in all areas, particularly in the
economic and technological fields. Both sides agree that a long- term, good neighbourly,
friendly, constructive and cooperative relationship should be established.
-10>
Political contacts between India and China continued through high level exchanges and
consultations at other levels. President Jiang Zemin's visit to India from 28 November-1
December 1996 was part of the process of dialogue at the highest level. Other high level
exchanges included the visits by the Chief justice and the Ministers of Commerce,
Personnel and Law & justice to China and the Chinese Minister of Communications to
India.
A significant outcome of the visit of the Chinese President has been the signing of the
Agreement on Confidence Building Measures (CBMs) in the Military Field along the
Line of Actual Control in the India-China Border Areas. This agreement is built on the
foundation of the Agreement on the Maintenance of Peace and Tranquility along the Line
of Actual Control (LAC) in the India- China Border Areas, signed in September 1993,

and provides for a number of important CBMs which will help in preserving peace and
tranquility in border areas. The importance of paying adequate attention to each other's
concerns on vital issues affecting unity, territorial integrity and security, was underlined
in discussion's with the Chinese side during President Zemin's visit.
The India-China border has been generally peaceful in recent years. Both sides have
agreed that, as part of the implementation of Border Peace and Tranquility Agreement
and the Agreement on CBMs, it is necessary to accelerate the process of clarification of
the alignment of the entire LAC, including through an exchange of maps. Both sides have
also agreed to work out details of force reduction or limitation along the LAC and put
into place additional confidence building measures. Discussions on these issues are held
within the framework of the India-China Joint Working Group and India-China Expert
Group.
The ninth meeting of the India-China Joint Working Group (JWG) was held in Beijing in
October 1996. The JWG continued discussions aimed at arriving at a fair, reasonable and
mutually acceptable solution to the boundary question and on the implementation of the
Border Peace and Tranquility Agreement. The fifth meeting of the India-China Expert
Group was held in New Delhi from 3-5 March 1997. The meeting discussed ways and
means of following up on the implementation of the Agreement on Confidence Building
Measures in the Military Field along the Line of Actual Control in the India-China
Border Areas signed during President Jiang Zemin's
-11>
visit. The Sixth Meeting of the joint Economic Group is expected to be held in Beijing in
the second quarter of 1997.
The two countries agreed to impart a much greater economic and technological content to
bilateral relations. The volume of trade in 1995 was Rs 4160 crores, representing an
increase of 30 per cent over the previous year. In 1996, the total volume of trade is
expected to increase further., Over fifty joint ventures between India and China have
been set up. Minerals, chemicals, pharmaceuticals, machinery and marine products are
some of the areas in which the two countries have expanded cooperation. Given the size
and strength of Indian and the Chinese economies, the potential for economic and
technological cooperation remains vast.
Four hundred and thirty five pilgrims performed the Kailash Mansarovar Yatra in
fourteen batches between June-September 1996. This is the largest number since the
pilgrimage began in 1981. In order to reduce the burden on the individual pilgrims, the
Government agreed, in May 1996, to pay to the Kumaon Mandal Vikas Nigam (KMVN)
Rs 3250 per pilgrim for logistical support on the Indian side of the pilgrimage route. In
response to the Government's request, the Chinese Government indicated. diat the fee
payable to the Chinese side would be maintained at US$ 500 per pilgrim till the year
2000 for Indian pilgrims going for the Yatra from India to China.
India's Chairmanship of SAARC continued through the year 1996-97, coinciding with the

beginning of SAARC's second decade of existence. The period witnessed an
intensification of activity in all sectors and the launching of several new initiatives for
SAARC action, aimed at widening and enriching its agenda over the coming years, in
keeping with the global trend towards consolidation of regional organisations.
in the core area of regional economic cooperation, the momentum that had been
generated by the First SMRC Trade Fair and the first meeting of SAARC Commerce
Ministers at New Delhi in January 1996 continued and quickened. Substantial progress
was made in the liberalisation of intra-regional trade under the South Asian Preferential
Trading Arrangement (SAPTA). The Second Round of Negotiations launched by the
Sixteenth Session of the Council of Ministers at New Delhi in December 1995 was
successfully concluded
-12>
during the year after four meetings. As a result, nearly 2000 additional tariff lines have
now been covered under preferential tariffs for intra-regional trade, over and above the
484 lines which had been offered under concessional tariffs during the First Round. Of
this consolidated figure, India has granted the highest number of tariff concessions on
911 lines.
The Committee on Economic Cooperation (CEC) met in New Delhi in October 1996 and
reviewed the implementation of SAPTA and the progress towards creating a South Asian
Free Trade Area (SAFTA) preferably by the year 2000 and latest by the year 2005, as
agreed by the Council of Ministers in December 1995. Other highlights of the
Committee's report include:
- Special treatment urged to be granted, in the process of trade liberalisation, to the Least
Developed Countries (LDCs).
- An Inter-Governmental Expert Group on Transition to SAFTA created to prepare an
action plan 'with timeframes for movement towards a South Asian Free Trade Area
within the mandated timeframe of the year 2000-2005.
- Agreement that regional conventions may be concluded by Member States for
promotion and protection of investments, avoidance of double taxation and share market
and portfolio investment.
- Emphasis was placed on speedy conclusion of the currently ongoing Tripartite Studies
being conducted with joint participation of the governmental, business and academic
sectors for expansion of economic cooperation in all its aspects.
Reflecting the interest of the business communities in all SAARC countries, the SAARC
Chamber of Commerce and Industry (SCCI) organised a pioneering multi-dimensional
SAARC Economic Cooperation Conference (SECC) in New Delhi on 19-21 November
1996. The Conference was inaugurated by Prime Minister Shri H D Deve Gowda.
Minister of External Affairs Shri I K Gujral delivered the key-note address. Businessmen,

academics and journalists from all SAARC countries participated actively in this
Conference. A series of far reaching recommendations were made by the ten Working
Groups of the SECC, in a wide and diversified range of areas holding possibilities for
economic cooperation, including trade, investment,
-13>
energy, communications,travel and tourism, science and technology, business data
dissemination, human resource development, women entrepreneurs and social
dimensions of business development. The Report of the Conference, which is of
particular value as it reflects the views and expectations of the business communities
themselves, will be examined in detail by the SAARC Committee on Economic
Cooperation. The Conference has recommended that the SECC should be organised by
the SCCI on an annual basis, preferably coinciding with the SAARC Trade Fairs and the
Meetings of the SAARC Commerce Ministers. In recognition of the impetus that such
simultaneous interaction at various levels can give to the process of economic
cooperation in the region, this recommendation has been welcomed by the Seventeenth
Session of the SAARC Council of Ministers (New Delhi, December 1996).
The social sector, another priority area for SAARC, witnessed several important SAARC
events. The present decade has been declared as the SAARC Decade of the Girl Child. A
Mid-Decade Review of the Status of the Girl Child was conducted at a Workshop held in
New Delhi in October 1996. The Technical Committee on Women in Development, in its
meeting at New Delhi in December 1996, conducted a detailed appraisal of Girl Children
in Exceptionally Difficult Circumstances (GCEDC) based on the findings of an expert
workshop which had studied the matter. The set of recommendations emanating from this
appraisal has been accepted.
The Third SAARC Ministerial Conference on Children of South Asia was held in
Rawalpindi in August 1996, to which an Indian inter- ministerial delegation was led by
Minister for Parliamentary Affairs and Tourism Shri Srikant Kumar Jena. In addition to
conducting an evaluation of progress towards the mid-decade goals contained in the
National Plans of Action of SAARC countries within the overall framework of the World
Summit Declaration on Children, and setting targets for the year 2000 to achieve agreed
goals relating to the survival, protection, development and participation of children in
society, the Conference also adopted the "Rawalpindi Resolution on Children of South
Asia". The Resolution includes a "Vision beyond the Year 2000" embodying certain long
term goals, strategies and a series of organised steps leading up to the year 2010, aimed at
reducing child mortality, disability and malnutrition, promotion of primary education,
elimination of child labour and the development
-14>
of community based social support systems responding to children in need. The Ministers
have recommended through the Resolution that the years 2001-2010 be declared as the
"SAARC Decade of the Rights of the Child", reflecting SAARC's common resolve to
build a secure future for the children of South Asia.

The Eighth SAARC Summit held in New Delhi had noted that illiteracy is one of the
major causes of poverty, backwardness and social injustice and had called on the Member
States to initiate more concrete programmes aimed at eradication of illiteracy in the
region by the year 2000. 1996 was declared the "SAARC Year of Literacy". Recognising
the valuable contributions made by non-governmental organisations in this sector, India
organised a SAARC Conference of Voluntary Agencies working in the Field of Adult
Literacy and Continuing Education Programmes in New Delhi from 14-16 October 1996.
The Conference, designed as a purely non-governmental interaction and attended by
NGOs from SAARC countries, adopted a Declaration containing specific
recommendations for promotion of collaboration among South Asian NGOs and
voluntary organisations, aimed at convergent action to integrate education with other
socio-economic development initiatives. A Working Committee has been formed.
SAARC has been increasingly adopting common positions on important economic and
social issues before international fora. This trend continued during the year 1996-97. A
SAARC Housing Ministers Conference was held in Colombo from 28 February-1 March
1996 to formulate a SAARC collective position preparatory to the second UN Conference
on Human Settlements (HABITAT-II). The Ministers adopted the "Colombo Resolution
on Human Settlements", which was subsequently circulated as a document of the UN
Conference in Istanbul in June 1996 as collective input of SAARC member states.
Minister for Food Shri Devendra Prasad Yadav led the Indian delegation to the SAARC
Meeting of Food/Agriculture Ministers in Islamabad on 8 & 9 October 1996, which drew
up a SAARC collective position preparatory to the World Food Summit in Rome in
November 1996. Prime Minister Shri H D Deve Gowda, as the current SAARC
Chairman, highlighted the main elements of the collective SAARC position in his address
at the Summit. The SAARC position was also circulated as a working document of the
Summit Conference.
The Seventeenth Session of the SAARC Council of Ministers,
-15>
consisting of Foreign Ministers of Member States was hosted by India at New Delhi in
December 1996. The main decisions of the Council of Ministers' Meeting include:
- Approval of the results of the Second Round of Trade Negotiations .
- The Eighth Meeting of the Committee on Economic Cooperation to be held in New
Delhi in April 1997 to, inter alia, monitor progress of intra-SAARC trade flows under
SAPTA on products covered in the First and Second Rounds of Trade Negotiations, to
examine the Report of the Tripartite Study by the SAARC Expert Group, and to examine
the recommendations emanating from the First SAARC Economic Cooperation
Conference which can be implemented for SAARC action at the Governmental level.
- Endorsement of the recommendations of the First Meeting of Commerce Ministers for
facilitation of intra-SAARC trade and for holding such meetings annually, preferably
simultaneously with the SAARC Trade Fairs and SAARC Economic Cooperation

Conferences; the second such set of events to be held in Pakistan in 1997.
- Endorsement of the Reports of the Third SAARC Ministerial Conference on Children of
South Asia and of the Meeting of SAARC Finance/Planning Ministers on Poverty
Eradication held in New Delhi in January 1996. Recommendation to the Ninth SAARC
Summit that 1997 be declared as the "SAARC Year of Participatory Governance".
- Endorsement of the mid-decade review of the implementation of the "SAARC Decade
of the Girl Child-1991-2000" and an indepth appraisal of the situation of Girl Children in
Exceptionally Difficult Circumstances, for submission to the Ninth Summit.
- Encouragement to be given to proposals from groupings of professional bodies,
voluntary organisations and community groups to form SAARC regional bodies.
Modalities to be evolved to enable selected groupings in the SAARC region to come
together for coordinated action.
- Decision to hold a Meeting of SAARC Information Ministers to promote cooperation in
media related matters.
-16>
- Decision to hold a Meeting of SAARC Environment Ministers to evolve a collective
SAARC position on issues before the Special Session of the United Nations General
Assembly to be held in June 1997 and to recommend other SAARC initiatives in this
field.
- Establishment of a Human Resource Development Centre in Pakistan.
- Several initiatives for tourism promotion and improvement of air and
telecommunication links between SAARC countries.
- Consideration to be given to expansion of the SAARC Visa Exemption Scheme.
- Facilitation of educational interaction between SAARC countries through additional
scholarships and fellowships.
- Recommendation for the holding of SAARC Film and TV festivals to intensify
cooperation in the cultural arena.
- Approval of the SAARC Youth Awards Scheme; Organisation of Youth Camps to
facilitate interaction amongst youth of SAARC countries.
- Approval for signing a Memorandum of Cooperation between SAARC and the
International Telecommunications Union; guidelines for the implementation of proposals
of cooperation between SAARC and the European Community under the SAARCEC
Cooperation Agreement signed in July 1996.

- Several administrative decisions for the improved functioning and strengthening of the
SAARC Secretariat, to-enable it to handle the increased responsibilities during SAARC's
second decade.
The Third Annual Meeting of Liaison Officers to Exchange information on the
Implementation of the SAARC Regional Convention on Suppression of Terrorism was
held in New Delhi in May 1996. It was unanimously agreed to operationalise the SAARC
Terrorist Offences Monitoring Desk (STOMD) in Colombo at the earliest and supply it
with relevant data on terroristic activities, tactics, strategies, methodologies and profiles.
The First Meeting of the Governing Board of the South Asian Development Fund
(SADF) was held in Dhaka in June 1996. With
-17>
this meeting, the Fund is now operational; the recommendations made by the Board on
the terms of reference and operational modalities of the three windows of the fund were
approved.
A SAARC Conference on Cooperation in Police Matters was held in Colombo in July,
1996. The Conference undertook an indepth.consideration of several matters of regional
interest, including suppression of terrorism, combating organised crime, drug trafficking
and drug abuse, as well as extradition of offenders. Such meetings will be held regularly.
A number of events and activities were organised by India in commemoration of
SAARC's first decade of existence. These included a commemorative postage stamp
issued on SAARC Charter Day (8 December 1996); special Radio/TV programmes;
painting competition; TV/Radio quiz competition and an essay writing competition.
India held the Chairmanships of two of the eleven SAARC Technical Committees, on
Health, Population Activities and Child Welfare, and Women in Development. Both
Committees met in New Delhi. India participated actively in other Technical Committee
Meetings in other SAARC countries, in the fields of Agriculture, Communications,
Environment and Meteorology, Prevention of Drug Trafficking and Drug Abuse, Rural
Development, Science and Technology, Tourism and Transport, as well as in a number of
workshops/seminars organised by these Committees. India will take over the
Chairmanships of the Technical Committees on Agriculture and Science and Technology
for the years 1997 and 1998.
-18>
2. South East Asia and the Pacific
During the year, India relations with the countries of the South East Asian region and the
South Pacific region continued to improve. As a validation of a conscious adoption of a
"Look East" Policy, India became a Full Dialogue Partner of the Association of South
East Asian Nations (ASEAN) and participated for the first time at the Post Ministerial
Conference (PMQ of ASEAN in Jakarta in July 1996. India also participated for the first
time in the meeting of the ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF) which deliberates on the

security and political concerns of the Asia Pacific region. Prime Minister of Malaysia Dr
Mahathir bin Mohamad visited India in December 1996 to accept the Jawaharlal Nehru
Award for International Understanding for the year 1994. President of Philippines Fidel
V Ramos and Prime Minister of Vietnam Vo Van Kiet visited India from 3-5 March and
7-9 March 1997 respectively. Minister of External Affairs Shri I K Gujral visited Jakarta,
Malaysia and Singapore. Chief Minister of Goa Shri Pratap Singh R Rane also visited
Thailand, Singapore and Malaysia from 10-24 February 1997. Finance Minister Shri P
Chidambaram visited Singapore for the Global Indian Entrepreneurs' Conference. In the
field of Civil Aviation, a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with Australia was
signed in October 1996 and Qantas national airline of Australia maiden flight from
Sydney to Mumbai.
Bilateral relations with Thailand were further strengthened when Princess Dr Chulabhorn
Mahidol, the youngest daughter of the King of Thailand, visited India from 29
November-I December 1996 in connection with the United Nations Environment
Programme (UNEP)
-19>
Awards Ceremony. Another Royal guest from Thailand was the second daughter of the
King, Princess Maha Chakri Sirindhorn, who visited Andaman & Nicobar islands from
21-26 December 1996. The Festival of Thailand in India, timed to coincide with 50th
Anniversary of Indian independence was inaugurated by Princess Maha Chakri
Sirindhorn.
Mr Suresh P Prabhu, Minister of Environment and Forests attended the Seventh Session
of the Governing Council of the South Asia Cooperative Environment Programme
(SACEP) in Male from April 20-23, 1998. An expert team from India visited Maldives
from July 4-9, 1998 to study the feasibility of setting up in Maldives an Institute of Hotel
and Catering Services. India provided technical training to a large number of Maldivian
candidates in diverse fields including medicine, engineering, computer science and
agriculture under its technical assistance and scholarships scheme.
Vice-President Shri K R Narayanan transited through Bangkok on his way to Mongolia.
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign Affairs Dr Amnuay Viravan received and
saw off the Vice- President as a special gesture.
Other important visits included those of a delegation of senior Officers from Thailand's
National Defence College from 20-23 May 1996 and that of Secretary (East) Shri K
Raghunath on 25 June 1996 for Senior Official level dialogue with the Thai Foreign
Office.
Commercial and economic relations with Thailand have steadily improved. Bilateral
trade during the year 1995-96 was Rs 2149 crores with imports amounting to Rs 563
crores and exports amounting to Rs 1586 crores marking a 24 per cent increase over
1994-95. investments from Thailand also registered an increase in fields such as fisheries,
telecommunications, food processing, real estate, financial and banking sectors and

tourism.
The Singapore Government took the initiative in holding the first-ever Global Indian
Entrepreneurs Conference (GIEC) from 19- 21 June 1996 bringing together Indian and
Indian origin businessmen from around the globe. The Government of India extended all
help in making the Conference a success and Finance Minister Shri P Chidambaram was
the key-note speaker. During the visit, the Finance Minister also called on Singapore's
Prime Minister, Deputy Prime Minister and held discussions with the Finance Minister
and the Information Minister.
The Minister of External Affairs paid an official visit to Singapore on 20 & 21 August
1996. Besides his counterpart, he met Singapore's Prime Minister and Deputy Prime
Minister. During discussions with Singapore's leadership, a review of projects involving
Singapore was undertaken. Regional and international issues of mutual interest were also
taken up.
Other important visits included those by Minister for Steel &
-20>
Mines Shri B P Baishya along with a 3 member official delegation on 4 & 5 October
1996 and that of Chief justice of India justice Shri A M Ahmadi accompanied by justice
Shri B P Jeevan Reddy and justice Shri B L Hansaria to Singapore on 23 & 24 May 1996.
India and Singapore held week long (3-13 March 1996) Anti Submarine Warfare
Exercises off Visakhapatnam. Chief of Naval Staff of Singapore Rear Admiral Kwek
Siew Jin participated in the concluding function of the exercises.
Bilateral trade and investment relations with Singapore continued to grow. The private
sector in both the countries spearheaded these efforts. Bilateral trade with Singapore for
the year 1995- 96 stood at Rs 6740 crores with imports amounting to Rs 3692 crores and
exports amounting to Rs 3048 crores.
Malaysian Prime Minister Dr Mahathir bin Mohamad accompanied by his wife and the
Ministers of Transport, Works and Science and Technology and Environment as well as
the Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs was on a state visit to India from 19-22 December
1996. The primary purpose was to receive the 1994 Jawaharlal Nehru Award for
international Understanding. Dr Mahathir called on the President, the Vice President and
held delegation level talks with the Prime Minister. During discussions the whole gamut
of Indo-Malaysian relations were reviewed and possibilities of further cooperation in the
fields of science, technology and human resource development amongst others were
discussed. India's investment priorities in infrastructure were highlighted. Need for
activating the existing instrumentalities for cooperation such as the joint Commission and
the Malaysian-India Defence Committee (MIDCOM) was projected.
Dr Mahathir delivered the First India-ASEAN Lecture instituted under the Full Dialogue
Partnership with ASEAN. Apart from New Delhi, Prime Minister Mahathir visited

Bangalore and the facilities of HAL, BHEL, ISRO and Aeronautics Development
Establishment (ADE).
The Minister of External Affairs paid an official visit to Malaysia on 18 & 19 August
1996. Apart from holding extensive bilateral talks with his counterpart, he called on
Deputy Prime Minister and Finance Minister Anwar Ibrahim. During his visit, ports,
power and highways were identified as three areas where Malaysian expertise
-21>
can be beneficial to India. As a part of regular contacts between the Foreign Offices of
India and Malaysia, Secretary (East) Shri K Raghunath visited Kuala Lumpur on 3 & 4
May 1996 during which he called on Foreign Minister Dato Abdullah Ahmad Badawi.
Trade between the two countries increased satisfactorily with figures for financial year
1995-96 amounting to Rs 4273 crores (exports: Rs 1311 crores and imports: Rs 2962
crores) marking a 46 per cent increase over the previous financial year.
With a view to maintaining contacts at Senior Officials' level, Secretary (East) Shri K
Raghunath visited Brunei Darussalam on 1 & 2 May 1996. During the visit, the Second
Meeting of the Indo- Brunei joint Committee at Secretary's level set up in 1995 was held.
He also called on the Acting Foreign Minister. Though bilateral trade between the two
countries is limited, the two countries are seeking ways to expand it.
President of Philippines Fidel V Ramos paid a State visit to India from 3-5 March 1997.
He was accompanied by leaders of the business community in Philippines and senior
officials. Earlier Under Secretary for Policy in the Department of Foreign Affairs
Rodolfo C Severino visited India from 7-10 February 1997 for foreign office
consultations. 6
Important visits to Philippines included separate visits by the Hon'ble Speakers of the
Legislative Assemblies of Orissa and Nagaland in the month of August 1996. The
Chairman of the Indian Railway Board visited Manila from 15-19 September 1996 to
discuss possible cooperation in the railway sector.
Three children's films from India were screened in the International Children Film
Festival held in Manila from 19-26 May 1996.
To further acquaint Philippines' commerce and industry with reforms in India, the Indian
Embassy and the State Bank of India organised a Business Seminar in April 1996 on the
emerging opportunities in India in the new economic environment which attracted more
than 60 business personalities. Another Trade Workshop on India jointly organised by the
Indian Embassy and the Filipino-India Chamber of Commerce in June 1996 was attended
by prominent businessmen.
-22>
Indo-Philippine trade grew at a steady pace with bilateral trade continuing its upswing

with overall value reaching Rs 554 crores (imports: Rs 72 crores and exports: Rs 482
crores) a 54 per cent increase over the previous financial year. To further expand trade
and business, the second Meeting of the India-Philippines Joint Business Council was
held in New Delhi on 12 & 13 September 1996 to identify potential items of exports to
Philippines.
India continued to have friendly and close relations with Indonesia during the year
Bilateral economic relations improved considerably. Bilateral trade in 1995-96 went up to
Rs 3777 crores from Rs 1884 crores in 1994-95. An exclusive Indian Trade Exhibition
was held in Jakarta in March 1996 and simultaneously, a meeting of the joint Business
Council (JBQ was also held and an office of FICCI was opened in Jakarta. Minister of
External Affairs Shri I K Gujral visited Indonesia in July 1996 to attend the ASEAN
Regional Forum (ARF) and ASEAN-PMC meetings in Jakarta where India was formally
admitted as member of the ARF and Full Dialogue Partner of ASEAN. Secretary (East)
in the Ministry of External Affairs also visited Jakarta in June 1996 for bilateral talks.
Chief of Naval Staff Admiral V S Shekhawat and Air Marshal K B Singh attended the
inauguration of the Indonesia Air Show held in Jakarta on 20 June 1996. During the
World Food Summit held in Rome, Prime Minister Shri H D Deve Gowda had a meeting
with the Indonesian President Soeharto on 16 November 1996. The two leaders discussed
means to build and expand bilateral relations and the need to strengthen India's relations
with ASEAN countries in general.
Indonesia agreed to India's proposal for setting up a Telemetry Tracking ground station at
Biak (Kalimantan) for continuous monitoring of the Indian Space Research
Organisation's (ISRO) Geosynchronous Satellite Launch Vehicle (GSLV). An agreement
for cooperation in the field of space science is in the final stages of negotiation.
In December 1996, India and Indonesia signed a Cultural Exchange Programme for the
years 1997-1999 under the aegis of the India- Indonesia Cultural Agreement with a view
to promoting further understanding and closer cooperation in the field of culture and
education.
India maintained very close and friendly relations with Vietnam.
-23>
Prime Minister of Vietnam Vo Van Kiet made an official visit to India from 7-9 March
1997. He held extensive discussions with the Indian leadership reiterating the continued
support of Vietnam on regional and global issues. The Third Meeting of the IndiaVietnam joint Working Group (JWG) was held in New Delhi on M & 17 January 1997 to
review progress on various bilateral cooperation programmes. A Work Plan for
Agricultural Cooperation was signed between India and Vietnam during the JWG
meeting. Chief of Naval Staff Admiral V S Shekhawat visited Vietnam in May 1996.
Bilateral trade increased to Rs 46387 lakhs in 1995-96 from Rs 32227 lakhs in .the
previous year. Another Rupee credit of Rs 90 crores on soft terms was extended to
Vietnam this year which is being utilised for capital goods imports from India. The
number of ITEC slots for Vietnam was increased to 120 during the year from 100 last

year.
India continued to have very close and warm relations with Laos. An MOU for
cooperation in the field of agriculture was negotiated in August 1996. Government of
India have pledged to provide medicines worth Rs. 15 lakhs to Laos as flood relief. It is
proposed to sign an agreement with Laos for setting up an India- Laos joint Commission
with a view to further strengthening the friendly relations between the two countries.
Relations with Cambodia remained very friendly and. warm. An agreement to set up an
India-Cambodia joint Commission on Trade, Economic, Scientific and Technological
Cooperation has been finalised and will be signed shortly. First Prime Minister Prince
Norodom Ranariddh visited Bodh Gaya, Patna on 16 December 1996 on a pilgrimage.
Relations between India and Australia continued to grow in diverse fields. Australian
Foreign Minister Alexander Downer visited India from 19-23 October 1996 to launch the
Australia- India New Horizons Promotion to raise Australia's profile in India. He called
On the Prime Minister and exchanged views on bilateral economic and political relations
and regional issues such as Asia Europe Meeting (ASEM), Indian Ocean Rim Initiative
(IORI) and Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC). He also had meetings with the
Industry Minister, the Finance Minister and the Minister of State for Commerce. The
other prominent Australian leaders who visited India to participate in the New Horizons
Programme during the core period of the programme (22 October-8 November 1996)
were Deputy
-24>
Prime Minister and Minister for Trade Tim Fischer, Minister for Employment, Education,
Training and Youth Affairs Senator Amanda Vanstone, Minister for Communications
and Arts Senator Richard Alston, Minister for Resources and Energy Senator Warwick
Parer, and three Deputy Premiers from Tasmania, New South Wales and Western
Australia. Leader of Opposition in the Australian House of Representatives Kim Beazley
and Shadow Foreign Minister Laurie Brereton, also visited India during the Programme.
An Australian Parliamentary delegation led by Parliamentary Secretary to the Prime
Minister, Senator Nicholas Hugh Minchin, visited India from 25-31 August 1996.
The Chairman, India Australia Council Lieutenant General (Retd) A M Sethna visited
Australia from 13-21 April 1996. Minister for Steel and Mines Shri B P Baishya visited
Australia from 4-12 October 1996 at the invitation of the Minister for Resources and
Energy Senator Warwick Parer. Minister of Railways Shri Ram Vilas Paswan visited
Australia at the invitation of Australian Government from 2-7 February 1997. Minister
for Textiles Shri R L jalappa visited Australia from 9-15 February 1997.
On the economic front, India-Australia relations expanded. During 1995-96, the total
bilateral trade reached Rs 459223 lakhs which is about 10 per cent more than the bilateral
trade during the year 1994-95.

India-New Zealand relations continued to be friendly and cordial. Overall bilateral trade
remained at a modest level. Minister for Textiles Shri R L jalappa visited New Zealand
from 15-19 February 1997. He inaugurated the Buyer-Seller-Meet (BSM) organised by
Apparels Export Promotion Council in Auckland and attended a meeting of the IndiaNew Zealand joint Business Council on Wool in Wellington. Chief of Naval Staff
Admiral V S Shekhawat paid a four-clay goodwill visit to New Zealand from 9-12 July
1996. Additional Secretary Shri Sushil Dubey visited New Zealand on 25 & 26 August
1996 in order to obtain a regional perspective. He met New Zealand Foreign Office
officials.
India opened a resident Mission in Port Moresby, Papua New Guinea (PNG), on 12 April
1996 and the first resident High Commissioner to PNG Shri V S Verma presented his
credentials on 14 May 1996.
-25>
Government of India have closely followed developments in Fiji as well as the process of
constitutional reforms that has been set in motion. It has also expressed the hope that the
implementation of the Constitution Review Commission's recommendations will be done
in a manner that meets the expectations of the Fijians of Indian origin. Government of
India have consistently taken the stand that the 1990 racially biased constitution should
be reviewed to arrive at a constitutional arrangement that is democratic, just, nondiscriminatory and acceptable to all the communities living in Fiji.
Efforts were made to strengthen and maintain India's friendly relations with other Pacific
Island countries.
Government of India established diplomatic relations with Micronesia on 29 November
1996 and also decided to establish diplomatic relations with Marshall Islands.
Additional Secretary Shri Sushil * Dubey visited Papua New Guinea, Marshall Islands,
Palau, Solomon Islands, Western Samoa, Vanuatu and Micronesia as Special Envoy of
the Minister of External Affairs to canvass support for India's candidature for the nonpermanent seat of the UN Security Council.
-26>
3. East Asia
India's relations with countries of East Asia region continued to expand during the year.
Exchange of views between the governments continued at a high political level. Trade
and economic cooperation showed a sharp increase.
Minister of External Affairs Shri I K Gujral held talks on bilateral relations and
international issues with Japanese Foreign Minister Yukihiko Ikeda in July 1996 during
the ASEAN- Post Ministerial Conference/ASEAN Regional Forum meetings. Finance
Minister Shri P Chidambaram visited Japan from 23-28 November 1996 during which he
met his Japanese counterpart Hiroshi Mitsuzaka and Minister of International Trade and
Industry (MITI) Shinji Sato. He inaugurated two important investment seminars, one

organised by Nihon Keizai Shimbun (Nikkei), the largest economic newspaper, and the
other by the Nagoya Chamber of Commerce and industry.
A MITI commissioned study group on Indian economy and investments in India gave a
favourable and positive projection of economic opportunities in India. India-Japan Trade
Talks were held on 7 & 8 November 1996. The 27th meeting of the India-Japan Business
Cooperation Committees was held in New Delhi on 13 & 14 November 1996. The 4th
meeting of the joint Committee on the Japan-India Cooperation in Science and
Technology took place in Tokyo on 10 & 11 June 1996. Interaction between the two
countries in the cultural sphere continued with exchanges of scholars, students and
cultural delegations.
In September 1996, the Government of Japan announced Official
-27>
Development Assistance (ODA),to India of approximately Rs 4745 crores for 1996-97
covering, inter alia, infrastructure projects in power, transport, water supply system,
irrigation and environment sectors.
India's two-way trade with Japan in 1995 was Rs 19110 crores with exports to Japan
amounting to Rs 8900.50 crores. During January- June 1996 India's exports and imports
to Japan were Rs 5516 crores and Rs 4616.50 crores respectively. According to the
Secretariat of industrial Approvals, Japanese investment approvals from 1991 to August
1996 amounted to Rs 3600 crores making Japan the fourth largest investor.
The momentum for the expansion and strengthening of cooperation between India and
the Republic of Korea (ROK) was maintained during the year.
The volume of trade between India and. ROK during 1995 was Rs 6671 crores, India's
exports to ROK being Rs 2786 crores and imports Rs 3885 crores. According to the
Secretariat of Industrial Approvals ROK investments in India upto August 1996 are Rs
2632 crores.
The 14th meeting of the India-ROK joint Business Council (JBQ was held in Seoul on 8
October 1996. Cooperation between the two countries in the field of science and
technology continued to expand. Exchanges of students, scholars and cultural delegations
under the India-ROK Cultural Exchange Programme continued. Pusan city hosted "Asian
Week 96", a sports and cultural event, from 13-21 September 1996 in which an Indian
delegation led by the Lieutenant Governor of Delhi participated. The Tagore Society of
Korea organised a week of Tagore events from 20-26 May 1996 to commemorate the
poet's 135th birth anniversary. ICCR sponsored a 5-member Tagore Music Group from
Calcutta for the occasion.
India's relations with the Democratic People's Republic of Korea (DPRK) continued to be
friendly and cordial during the year. An Indian Parliamentary Delegation led by the
Speaker of the Lok Sabha visited the DPRK from 21-25 September 1996 at the invitation

of the Supreme People's Assembly (SPA) of the DPRK. The delegation met the SPA
Chairman, the Vice Chairman of the DPRK State External Economic Affairs Committee,
the DPRK Vice- President, the VicePremier and Foreign Minister and the Minister of
Labour.
-28>
The Government of India sent relief assistance of 1000 MT of wheat to the DPRK in
April 1996 in response to the DPRK's appeal in the wake of heavy damage and food
shortage on account of devastating floods in 1995-96. (India had earlier supplied 3500
blankets to DPRK in October 1995.) An ICCR-sponsored 10 member' Rajasthani folkdance and music troupe participated in the April Spring Friendship Art Festival held in
Pyongyang from 7-17 April 1996. An Indian National Junior Volley Ball team consisting
of 14 players including coaches, visited Pyongyang from 15-25 June 1996 and played
friendly matches with various DPRK teams.
-29>
4. Central Asia
Five years after their independence, India's relations with each country of Central Asia
and Azerbaijan have developed in a unique and specific way. The dynamics of these
individual relationships is, however, influenced by some common concerns and
challenges faced by the region as a whole. The continuing conflicts in Afghanistan,
Tajikistan and in the Transcaucasian region pose a threat to peace, stability and
development of the region. The strategic geopolitical location of the Central Asian
countries and their rich hydro-carbon resources makes them the theatre of efforts by
competing international interests to enhance their political and economic influence.
One of the most significant developments in the Central Asian region was the threat to
their stability and security by the northward movement of extremist and sectarian Taliban
forces and their seizing of Kabul. Kazakhstan, the Kyrgyz Republic, Uzbekistan and
Tajikistan joined Russia in a meeting in Almaty on 4 October 1996 at the conclusion of
which a joint Statement was issued by the participants. The Statement noted that the
flames of war were moving closer to the borders of the member countries of the
Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS), posing a direct threat to their national
interests and security besides destabilising the regional and international situation. The
Statement pointed out that destroying stability on the borders of Afghanistan and the CIS
countries "will be regarded as a threat to their own interests" and "will get an adequate
response". They appealed to all the conflicting Afghan parties, primarily the Taliban
movement to cease military activities
-30>
immediately. The Statement indicated that the binding condition for an end to the war
had to be the non-interference in the internal affairs of sovereign Afghanistan from
outside, and defence of its territorial integrity. The Central Asian Republics, with the
exception of Uzbekistan, participated in the Regional Conference on Afghanistan held in
Tehran on 29 & 30 October 1996. All countries of Central Asia participated in the UN
Conference on Afghanistan on 18 November 1996. India's interaction with countries of

the region underscored a common commitment to the stability, unity, independence and
territorial integrity of Afghanistan as well as a shared approach that the violation of these
principles would adversely affect the entire region. Developments in Afghanistan have a
direct bearing on the situation within Tajikistan and its efforts to achieve political
stability.
Relations between India and Kazakhstan have been marked by significant high level
visits during which far-reaching decisions -were taken for cooperation in science and
technology, trade and economic contacts, the energy sector and culture apart from a
wideranging exchange of views. Vice-President Shri K R Narayanan visited Kazakhstan
at the invitation of President Nursultan Nazarbaev from 20-22 September 1996 and
President Nazarbaev visited India from 9-11 December 1996. As a result of decisions
taken during these visits, Working Groups for focussed cooperation in medium and small
scale industries, peaceful uses of nuclear energy and defence were set up. It was also
decided that Indo-Kazakh cooperation in the hydro-carbon sector would involve not only
exploration and developmental activities but also investment for upgradation and
modernisation of existing infrastructural facilities such as refineries and pipelines as well
as training programmes. The Indo-Kazakh joint Sub-Committee on Science and
Technology met on 22 & 23 November 1996 in New Delhi and concrete areas were
identified for future cooperation including space, bio-technology, pharmaceuticals,
ecology and solar energy. A commemorative postage stamp on the national poet of
Kazakhstan, Abai Konunbaev, was released during President Nazarbaev's visit to India.
At the invitation of President Askar Akaev, Vice-President Shri K R Narayanan visited
the Kyrgyz Republic from 18-20 September 1996. He held discussions with President
Askar Akaev and Prime Minister Apas jumagulov on matters of bilateral, regional and
-31>
international interest of mutual concern. The Vice-President inaugurated jointly with
President Akaev the Gandhi Studies Centre at the Bishkek Humanities University where
he was also conferred the highest honorary degree by the University. The Vice-President
also addressed members of the Kyrgyz Parliament during the visit. India has offered
training slots for Kyrgyz nominees under the ITEC programme.
The highlight of India's relations with Turkmenistan was the State visit of President of
Turkmenistan Saparmurat A Niyazov to India on 25 & 26 February 1997. During the
visit, he had wide ranging talks with the President, the Vice President and had delegation
level discussions with the Prime Minister. Discussions during the visit revealed once
again a close political understanding between India and Turkmenistan on key regional
and international issues. The discussions focussed on measures to promote bilateral
cooperation in diverse areas and strengthening of bilateral relations. They also exchanged
views on regional and international issues of common interest. During the visit, the Prime
Minister and President Niyazov signed a Memorandum of Understanding on the
celebration of the 5QOth anniversary of Bairam Kham Turkmen in India and in
Turkmenistan. A Convention on the Avoidance of Double Taxation, an Agreement on
Cooperation in the Fields of Health and Medicine, a Memorandum of Understanding for

Cooperation in Environmental Protection and Forest and a Protocol on Cultural Exchange
Programme for 1997-98 were also signed.
Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign Minister Boris Shikmuradov visited India from 10-14
July 1996. He held extensive discussions with Minister of External Affairs Shri I K,
Gujral and called on the President and the Prime Minister.
During the visit of the Minister of External Affairs to Iran in February 1997, India, Iran
and Turkmenistan signed a trilateral agreement on international transit of goods between
India, Iran and Turkmenistan at the level of Foreign Ministers. The Agreement provides a
legal framework for the multi-modal movement of goods from India to Iran and
Turkmenistan and other CIS Member States that join the arrangement in future and vice
versa.
A pharmaceutical joint venture financed under the Indian credit line to Turkmenistan
became operational during the year.
-32>
Cooperation in human resource development continued through the offer of training
programmes for Turkmenistan experts Linder the ITEC programme.
Foreign Minister of Uzbekistan Abdulaziz Kamilov visited India from 19-23 August
1996. He held wide ranging discussions on bilateral and regional issues with Minister of
External Affairs Shri I K Gujral and called on the President and the Prime Minister.
People-to-people contacts and cooperation in human resource development were further
intensified with the inauguration of the India chair at the University of World Economics
in Tashkent. it was also agreed that an exclusive course for upto 25 Uzbek diplomats will
be organised by the Foreign Service Training Institute of India. The utilisation of Rs 35
crores credit line extended by India has proceeded satisfactorily.
India and Tajikistan maintained the tradition of close political understanding and mutual
cooperation. India offered Tajikistan several slots for training under the ITEC programme
for the fiscal year 1996-97. A pharmaceutical plant , in Dushanbe constructed with the
use of the Indian credit line became operational during the year. India views with close
interest and sympathy the efforts being made to normalise the political situation within
the country through peaceful dialogue and negotiations.
India's relations with Azerbaijan have been further activated through consultations on
bilateral and multilateral issues. Secretary (East) Shri K Raghunath visited Baku on 12
March 1997 where he held wide-ranging talks with President Haidar Aliyev, Foreign
Minister Hassan Hasanov and the Minister for Foreign Economic Relations. A joint
delegation of Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry (FICCI) and the
CIS Chamber of Commerce and Industry visited Baku from 15-19 December 1996. The
delegation had meetings with Azeri Foreign Minister Hassan Hasanov and the Minister
for Trade. The visit highlighted the potential for bilateral cooperation in trade and joint
ventures in areas such as cotton yarn, food processing, pharmaceuticals, hotel

development and the oil and gas sectors.
In January 1996, a coalition government was formed in Turkey under the leadership of
Prime Minister N Erbakan of the Refah Party and the True Party led by Deputy Prime
Minister and Foreign
-33>
Minister Tansu Ciller. India has made a determined effort to impart greater content and
substance to relations with Turkey in trade, culture and the energy sectors. A 14-member
delegation of FICCI visited Turkey from 11-13 December 1996 for the first meeting of
the Indo-Turkish joint Business Council (JBQ. An agreement was signed between FICCI
and its counterpart body in Turkey on establishing the JBC and defining its scope and
functioning. The FICCI delegation called on President Demirel and had meetings with
other dignitaries. Rajya Sabha Vice Chairperson Smt Najma Heptulla visited Ankara for
the General Assembly of the International Parliamentary Union in April 1996. Two ships
of the Indian Navy visited Turkey in November 1996. Under Secretary in Turkish
Foreign Ministry Ambassador Onur Oymen visited India from 2-4 February 1997 for
foreign office consultations. He met Foreign Secretary Shri Salman Haidar and had
delegation level talks with Secretary (East) Shri K Raghunath. During the discussions,
views were exchanged on bilateral cooperation and regional and international issues of
common interest.
-34>
5. The Gulf, West Asia & North Africa
The Gulf region with its geographical propinquity is important to India from the
economic and security viewpoints. Centuries old interaction between India and the region
and the region's centrality in the Islamic world makes the Gulf also, politically important.
Gulf countries together account for 15 per cent of India's total foreign trade. Nearly twothirds of the country's energy requirements are met from this region. An estimated 25
lakhs Indians live in the area and their annual remittances to India are of the order of a
few hundred crores of rupees.
For the Gulf countries, India is a source of manpower and an avenue for their
investments. The Gulf countries also utilise India's educational and health facilities. India
is also seen as a source of science and technology and a centre for training in civilian and
non-civilian areas. This mutuality of interests is reinforced by the economic reforms in
India and the rapid growth and development in the Gulf countries. India's policy towards
the Gulf continues to be guided by a desire for peace, stability and security in the region.
India's relations with countries of West Asia and North Africa (WANA) region continued
to gain further momentum and substance. While political and economic linkages were
consolidated through exchange of high level visits and conclusion of bilateral cooperation
agreements, India's gestures of humanitarian assistance to Lebanon and Sudan, apart from
ongoing cooperation programmes under ITEC
-35>

with several of the countries, engendered further mutual goodwill with them.
India maintained its support for the Arab and Palestinian causes, as well as for the Middle
East Peace Process (MEPP). Developments in the region and lack of progress in the
peace process in recent months however gave rise to growing concern. India urged all
parties concerned to persevere resolutely for expeditious and successful conclusion of the
peace process, and offered to contribute towards this objective in every feasible manner.
The opening of India's Representative Office to the Palestinian National Authority (PNA)
was an important measure to maintain close and regular contacts with the Palestinian
leadership and people.
Bilateral consultations at different levels with leaders of the region were maintained
through exchange of visits, as well as on occasions of the United Nations General
Assembly and other international meetings.
A more effective projection to these countries of India's principled stand on Kashmir
remained a distinguishing feature. This was reflected in Pakistan's continuing failure to
gather support from them to internationalise the issue in the UN and other multilateral
fora. Government's efforts to restore normalcy in the State by reactivating the political
process and the successful holding of the elections contributed to a more positive
appreciation of the situation in these countries.
The traditionally friendly relations between India and Bahrain were marked by exchange
of visits and close interaction between the private sectors of the two countries. Foreign
Secretary Shri Salman Haidar visited Bahrain on 15 April 1996 for bilateral consultations
with the BahrainiForeign Office. He called on the Amir of Bahrain and met the Foreign
Minister. Minister of State for Commerce Dr B B Ramaiah visited Bahrain on 2 & 3
November 1996 to participate in the 13th International Congress of Non- Resident
Indians. A delegation from the Indian Merchants Chamber (IMC) visited Bahrain on 2 &
3 March 1996 and signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) on Cooperation with
the Bahrain Chambers of Commerce and Industry. Other important exchanges in the
economic sphere include the first meeting of the Indo-Bahrain joint Business Council
held in Bahrain on 8 & 9 October 1996, and the joint Seminar on "Doing Business With
Bahrain" held in Delhi on
-36>
11 December 1996. The Bahrain Marketing and Promotion Board (BMPB) opened an
office in Mumbai to promote trade and investment between the two countries.
India continues to be concerned at the economic hardships faced by the Iraqi people due
to the UN sanctions and has gifted sugar, baby food, wheat and rice. India favours a
phased withdrawal of the'UN sanctions in tandem with the Iraqi compliance of the UN
Security Council requirements. In the wake of the US missile attack against Iraq on 3
September 1996, the official spokesman issued a statement expressing grave concern at
the development. After the second missile attack that took place on 4 September 1996,
the Minister of External Affairs made identical statements in both the Houses of

Parliament calling upon the US to refrain from further attacks and respect Iraq's
sovereignty and territorial integrity. At the World Food Summit in Rome in November
1996, a meeting took place between Iraqi Vice-President Taha Mohiuddin Marouf and
the Prime Minister.
Efforts were made to strengthen the relations with Iraq while conforming to the
requirements under the UN sanctions. Expert teams from the oil industry and the railways
have been in touch with their Iraqi counterparts for future cooperation after the UN
sanctions end. A four-member Agricultural Advisory Team visited Iraq in November
1996. Some Iraqi students availed of scholarships available in India for foreign students.
India participated in the Babylon International Festival for the fourth consecutive year.
As regards the deferred payments due from Iraq, there has been no progress due to the
UN sanctions.
Relations with Kuwait have been cordial and marked by warmth and goodwill. The
Foreign Secretary visited Kuwait in April 1996 and called on the Kuwaiti Foreign
Minister and held discussions with his counterpart, Sulaiman Majid At-Shaheen. The
Prime Minister and the Minister of External Affairs sent their felicitations to the Crown
Prince and Prime Minister Sheikh Saad At Abdullah and the Foreign Minister Sheikh
Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-jaber Al-Sabah on their re-appointment to the National Assembly
after the elections. A number of business delegations were exchanged between the two
countries. Kuwait has evinced interest in investment opportunities in India. The strength
of the Indian community in Kuwait is estimated at 2,40,000, exceeding the number prior
to August 1990.
-37>
The Government continued to follow the compensation claims of Indian nationals and
Indian companies who sustained losses during the Gulf crisis following Iraq's invasion
and occupation of Kuwait in August 1990.
A supplementary government claim under category "F for US$ 6,122,688 was submitted
to the United Nations Compensation Commission (UNCC) in December 1996.
The UNCC released US$ 57,500 for additional 16 category 'B" claims, thus bringing the
number of successful category "B" claimants to 183. The remaining 75 category "B"
claims out of a total 258 claims submitted to the UNCC have been either rejected or
transferred to "C" category. Disbursement of category "B" claims is being done through
the four designated banks viz. the Central Bank of India, the Indian Overseas Bank, the
Syndicate Bank and the Union Bank of India.
During the year under review the UNCC approved 79,454 category "A" claims and 5,869
category "C" claims. The amount of these approved claims comes to US$ 308,559,500
and US$ 44,834,752.51, respectively. No funds have been released by the UNCC towards
settlement of category "A" and "C" claims approved so far.
It is the exclusive responsibility of the UNCC to evaluate and scrutinise the claims,

evolve a payments procedure and deliver the awarded compensation to eligible claimants
for payment through national governments. It is not, therefore, possible to estimate the
timing or the quantum of the payment which may eventually be made by it.
There was a significant increase in high level exchanges of visits with Oman contributing
to further expansion and diversification of bilateral cooperation in several areas. The
President's State visit to Oman from 3-6 October 1996 was a landmark event. The visit
underscored the deep-rooted historical relations and efforts by the leaders of the two
countries to reinforce these ties in the interest of the peoples of the two countries. The
delegation accompanying the President included the Minister of Agriculture, the
Governors of Madhya Pradesh and Meghalaya, the Deputy Speaker of Lok Sablia, the
Minister of State for Home Affairs and six Members of Parliament. The President and
Ruler of Oman His Majesty Sultan Qahoos bin
-38>
Said Al-Said had extensive exchange of views on bilateral, regional and international
issues of mutual interest. During the visit, a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) on
Combating Crime, an MOU on Cooperation in Agriculture and Allied Sectors and an
Agreement on Cooperation in Science & Technology were signed. The President
extended an invitation to Ruler of Oman His Majesty Sultan. Qaboos to visit India, which
was accepted .
Other significant exchanges with Oman during the year were Foreign Secretary Shri
Salman Haidar's visit to Muscat on 7 May 1996; the visit of Minister of State for Foreign
Affairs of Oman Yousuf bin Alawi bin Abdullah to India in July 1996 when he called on
the Prime Minister and the Minister of External Affairs and discussed bilateral issues and
cooperation in the Indian Ocean Rim Area for Regional Cooperation and the visit of
Minister of Commerce and industry and Chairman of the Board of Oman Oil Company
Maqbool bin Ali bin Sultan to India from 10-12 August 1996 for discussions on the joint
venture hydrocarbon projects between India and Oman. Other important events include
the visit of a 24-member delegation to Muscat from 12-14 April 1996 when an MOU
with the, Oman Chambers of Commerce and industry for promoting bilateral trade and
investment was signed, the holding of the first meeting of the Indo-Oman joint Business
Council in Muscat on 5 October 1996 and the goodwill visit of three Indian ships, INS
Godavari, INS Suvarna and INS Shankush (submarine) to Omani ports in November
1996.
India's friendly relations with Qatar remained on an even keel. Secretary (East) Shri K
Raghunath visited Qatar in April 1996 and called on the Qatari Foreign Minister. The
first ever flight by Indian Airlines between Calicut and Doha was inaugurated on 6 March
1996. Indian Airlines now flies three times between Calicut and Doha thereby meeting
the considerable demand from the Indian community in Qatar. India participated in the
defence exhibition in Milipol Qatar 1996 in Doha from 9-12 November 1996. Two Indian
naval ships INS Godavari and INS Suvarna paid a goodwill visit to Doha from 16-19
November 1996.

The traditional ties with Saudi Arabia were further strengthened during the year with
exchange of significant visits. Foreign Secretary Shri Salman Haidar visited Saudi Arabia
in April 1996. A trade and investment delegation led by Assistant Deputy Minister for
Industrial
-39>
Affairs in the Ministry of Industry and Electricity Dr Asim Y Bokhari visited India in
May 1996 and held detailed discussions on investment opportunities in India. A member
of the Saudi Royal Family and joint Commander of the Allied Forces in the Operation
Desert Storm, Prince Khalid bin Sultan, visited India from 7-13 October 1996. He
delivered a lecture at the National Defence College, New Delhi, and called on the VicePresident, the Prime Minister and the Minister of External Affairs and met senior defence
officials. A six-member Parliamentary delegation led by Lok Sabha Speaker Shri P A
Sangma visited Saudi Arabia at the invitation of the Chairman of the Majlis 'Asshoura.
The visit marked the first-ever contact between parliamentarians of the two countries.
Saudi Petroleum and Mineral Resources Minister Dr Ali Al-Naimi and Deputy Minister
of Oil Sheikh Abdul Aziz bin Salman visited New Delhi from 3-5 December 1996 and
held discussions with Minister of State for Petroleum and Natural Gas and also called on
the Prime Minister. Saudi Haj Minister Dr Mahmoud bin Mohammad Al-Safar visited
India on 25 & 26 December 1996. He delivered a written message from King Fahd to the
Prime Minister and also called on the Minister of External Affairs.
The Ministry facilitated arrangements for the Haj pilgrimage for 56,000 pilgrims during
Haj '96. In coordination with Ministries of Finance, Civil Aviation, Health and Family
Welfare and Central and State Haj Committees, arrangements were made for the
transportation, stay, medical attendance and other needs of pilgrims. A high-level Haj
Goodwill Delegation also paid a visit in April 1996 to Saudi Arabia and called on the
King of Saudi Arabia, the Saudi Minister of Haj Affairs and the Governor of Makkah.
Bilateral relations between India and United Arab Emirates (UAE) continued to be
strengthened and diversified. Chief of Staff of UAE Armed Forces Lieutenant General
Sheikh Mohammed bin Zaycd al- Nahyan accompanied by a large delegation of UAE
military experts and officers paid an official visit to India from 5-8 March 1996. Sheikh
Mohammed called on the President, the Prime Minister, the minister of External Affairs,
the Minister of State for Defence and met the Chiefs of Armed Forces. The visit was
aimed at strengthening the bilateral cooperation between the two countries in general and
defence cooperation in particular.
Minister of Civil Aviation and Information and Broadcasting Shri C M Ibrahim visited
UAE from 31 October-7 November 1996
-40>
and called on the Crown Prince of Dubai, the Defence Minister of UAE, the Deputy
Prime Minister of UAE and the Ruler of Sharjah. Minister of Labour Shri M
Arunachalarn visited UAE as a Special Representative of the President of India from 30
November3 December 1996 to participate in the 25th anniversary celebrations of the

foundation of UAE and the 30th anniversary of accession of President Sheikh Zayed as
the Ruler of the Emirate of Abu Dhabi. Shri Arunachalarn delivered messages of
felicitations from the President and the Prime Minister of India to President of UAE
Sheikh Zayed. The Minister of External Affairs visited Abu Dhabi on 23 February 1997
and met Deputy Prime Minister Sheikh Sultan bin Zayed Al-Nahyan and Minister of
State for Foreign Affairs Sheikh Hamclan bin Zayed Al-Nahyan.
Keeping in view the high volume of trade with UAE, a number of high level business
delegations visited UAE during the year. These included delegations from the Indian
Merchants Chamber (March 1996), the Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and
industry (May 1996) and the Confederation 'of Indian Industries (October 1996). The
Indian Trade Promotion Organisation held an exclusive Indian exhibition "EXPO India"
in Dubai from 7-11 December 1996 in which 183 Indian companies participated. The
exhibition was inaugurated in the presence of Minister of State for Commerce Dr B B
Ramaiah. in late June, the Government of UAE announced amnesty for overstaying
illegal immigrants of all nationalities allowing them to leave without penalties by 30
September 1996. Subsequently the amnesty period was extended upto 31 October 1996.
The Ministry took all possible steps to ensure safe and orderly return of Indians granted
amnesty in a humane manner. The Indian Mission in Abu Dhabi and the Consulate in
Dubai issued more than 45000 Emergency Certificates to ensure that all the Indians
granted amnesty could leave UAE before the stipulated deadline. An estimated 60,000
Indians returned to India during the amnesty period.
Relations with Yemen have been warm and friendly, which are now marked by a
growing awareness in both countries of the potential for mutually beneficial economic
cooperation. Foreign Secretary Shri Salman Haidar visited Yemen on 15 & 16 March
1996 and held discussions with Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs
Dr Abdul Karim Al-Iryani and Deputy Foreign Minister
-41>
Ghalib Ali Jameel. The second meeting of the Indo-Yemen joint Committee was held in
New Delhi on 6 & 7 December 1996. The Indian delegation was led by Secretary (East)
Shri K Raghunath and the Yemeni delegation by Vice Minister for Planning and
Development Dr Muttahar Al-Saidi. The joint Committee took note of the healthy growth
in bilateral trade and cooperation in other economic sectors, and agreed to further extend
the cooperation to sectors like hydrocarbon, civil aviation, construction,
telecommunications, water resource management, power generation, agriculture, small
scale industry, transfer of technology and human resource development. it was also
agreed to cooperate actively towards realising the objectives set out in the Charter of the
Indian Ocean Rim Association for Regional Cooperation. At the conclusion of the joint
Committee Meeting, the two sides signed an Agreement on Cooperation in Scientific and
Technical Fields and a Memorandum of Understanding on Cooperation in the field of
Agriculture and Allied Sectors. An Agreement on Cooperation in the Field of Health and
Medicines was also finalised and initialled. The Federation of Indian Chambers of
Commerce and Industry (FICCI) and the Federation of YemenChambers of Commerce
and industry signed an Agreement for establishing a joint Business Council to stimulate

and develop business contacts between the business sector growth centres.
Bilateral relations with Iran retained their positive trend of increased understanding and
cooperation. The high-level exchange of visits between the two countries continued.
Vice-President Shri K R Narayanan paid an official visit to Iran from 22-27 October
1996. During his stay in Iran, he met President Rafsanjani, Speaker of the Majlis Nateq
Nouri, his host First Vice-President Hassan Habibi and Foreign Minister Dr Velayati.
During these meetings, issues of bilateral, regional and international importance relating
to political economic and cultural fields were discussed. Minister of Agriculture Shri
Chaturanan Misra visited Tehran to attend a regional conference on Afghanistan called
by Iran on 29 & 30 October 1996. The invitation to India to attend the conference was
amidst strong Pakistani protest and the decision to refrain from attending the conference
which in turn signified closer understanding between India and Iran on a crucial regional
issue. Governor of Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh Shri Mohammad Shafi Qureshi
visited Iran from 11-14 May 1996 as Special Envoy of the Prime Minister to attend the
inauguration
-42>
ceremony of Iran-Turkmenistan railway line which has economic and commercial
significance not only for Iran and Turkmenistan but also for India and Central Asian
countries.
From the Iranian side, Speaker of Majlis Nateq Nouri paid an official visit to India from
25-29 November 1996. During his stay in India, he had meetings with the President, the
Vice-President, the Prim6 Minister and the Minister of External Affairs among others.
During the visit, an Agreement on the formation of a joint Business Council UBC) was
signed between the Federation of Indian Chamber. of Commerce & Industry (FICCI) and
Iranian Chamber of Commerce Iranian Minister of Foreign Affairs Dr Ali Akbar Velayati
and Deputy Foreign Minister A Broujerdi also visited India for bilateral consultations on
various issues on 17 October 1996 and from 3-5 September 1996 respectively.
The Ninth session of the India-Iran joint Commission was held in Tehran on 21 & 22
February 1997 under the co-chairmanship of the Minister of External Affairs and the
Foreign Minister of Iran. Important issues discussed were the establishment of a joint
venture fertilizer project, a pipeline project for transportation of natural gas to India,
proposals on Trade Agreement, Double Tax Avoidance Agreement, Agreement for
Promotion and Protection of Foreign Investment and co-operation in the fields of
agriculture, health and education .
These interactions together with the regular contacts between the two foreign offices
resulted in further cementing of bilateral cooperation on various issues.
A supplementary Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) on the Qeshm island Fertiliser
Project under discussion between the two countries was signed on 26 November 1996.
This MOU is an addition to the MOU signed on the subject on 6 March 1994. The
present MOU inter alia spells out the prices of various inputs for the project and the

escalation formula.
The continuing process towards political pluralism and democracy, along with
Government's efforts to contain violence and terrorism in Algeria were noted with
interest and encouragement. India's diplomatic representation to Algeria was upgraded
again, with the appointment of an Ambassador in Algiers. This would facilitate imparting
a stronger impetus to bilateral cooperation and
-43>
promotion of mutual understanding. Both India and Algeria initiated several steps to
continue exchange of high level visits and to expand bilateral economic and commercial
cooperation. During the visit of the Chief justice of India to Algeria in December 1996,
an agreement was reached for active cooperation in the field of judiciary. The 6th
meeting of the bilateral joint Commission was held in New Delhi in March 1997.
Bilateral ties of friendship, mutual understanding and cooperation with Egypt were
further strengthened by building upon the momentum imparted by the Prime Ministerial
visit to Egypt in October 1995. The meetings between the Prime Minister and President
Hosni Mubarak at the G- 15 Summit in Harare, and between the Minister of External
Affairs and Egypt's Foreign Minister Amre Moussa at the UNGA in New York, sustained
the ongoing high level dialogue, prior to further high level visits in the coming months
between the two countries. A significant landmark was the visit of the Grand Sheikh of
Al Azhar (Cairo)- the pre-eminent institution of Islamic learning-in October 1996, which
served to add a new dimension of mutual understanding at intellectual, academic and
cultural levels. The visit of Minister of State for Planning and Science & Technology Shri
Y K Alagh to Cairo for the Middle East and North Africa Economic Conference in
November 1996 also afforded opportunities to explore additional measures of
cooperation in economic and technological fields. The two countries signed a new
agreement to continue their cultural exchange programme. They also concluded an
Agreement on Promotion and Protection of investment, and plan to soon finalise another
Agreement on Avoidance of Double Taxation. Cooperation proposals are being 2ictively
pursued in several other fields including small scale sector, information technology,
banking, civil aviation, shipping, industry, and information, as well as judiciary.
Bilateral relations with Israel continued to develop satisfactorily, particularly in areas of
trade, economic and technological cooperation. The high point was the visit of President
Ezer Weizman from 29 December 1996-5 January 1997. Agreements were signed during
the visit for cooperation in the fields of science & technology, culture, and for exchange
of technical experts. President Weizman laid the foundation stone of an agricultural
demonstration farm in New Delhi being set up with Israeli collaboration for exchange of
-44>
technologies and training of personnel. Earlier, in May 1996, the AGRITECH exhibition
in Israel was attended by a large number of people from the Indian farming community
led by the Ministers and officials from several State Governments. The Chief Minister of
Maharashtra led dignitaries and others to participate in the Global Marathi Conference

organised in Israel in October 1996 by Israelis of Indian origin having migrated from
Marathi speaking areas. The joint Business Council was upgraded to India-Israel
Business Alliance. A large number of senior business representatives accompanying
President Weizman provided a useful opportunity for forging new trade and business
cooperation linkages.
Traditional friendly relations with Jordan were bolstered with regular contacts at various
levels. Minister of Supply of Jordan led a delegation to India in October 1996 to explore
purchase of bulk commodities from India and other measures to promote bilateral trade.
The visits by a Jordanian defence delegation and from the University of Jordan were
reflective of the multi- dimensional nature of bilateral cooperation and mutual
'understanding.
The bilateral relations with Lebanon were further strengthened. Secretary General in the
Lebanese Foreign Office Zafer Al-Hassan visited India in February 1997 as part of the
continuing bilateral consultations. During the Israeli military offences against Lebanon in
April 1996, India extended political support, calling for an immediate cease-fire and the
implementation of Security Council resolution 425. India dispatched humanitarian
assistance for the displaced Lebanese by way of 13 tonnes of medicines and babyfood.
The Prime Minister sent a message of congratulations to Prime Minister Rafik El Hariri
on his re- appointment in November 1996 following the national elections in Lebanon.
Steps were initiated to revive high level political contacts and exchange of visits. To
promote bilateral commercial exchanges and economic cooperation, IndiaLebanon
Business Forum was launched in New Delhi in November 1996, following a counterpart
Forum set up in Lebanon the previous year. India appointed an honorary Consul General
in Tripoli, a major commercial city of Lebanon.
India's relations with Libya have been cordial and friendly, characterised by mutual
understanding and economic cooperation. Besides sustaining their bilateral dialogue and
consultations on matters of mutual interest, the two countries also continued their
-45>
efforts to further strengthen economic cooperation, including the implementation of the
agreements in the last joint Commission meeting held in April 1995.
While both India and Morocco continued their efforts to upgrade their growing bilateral
relations and understanding. The organisation of an exclusive "Indian Trade Expo" in
Casablanca, Morocco, in April 1996, was a major initiative to promote bilateral
commercial exchanges building on the basis of the joint Commission meeting held in
June 1995. Deputy Chairperson of the Rajya Sabha Dr Najma "eptulla visited Morocco
on this occasion and jointly inaugurated the Expo alongwith Moroccan dignitaries. Her
talks in Rabat, especially with Prime Minister Abdellatif Filali, consolidated the mutual
understanding underpinning the bilateral relations. The visit of Morocco's External
Commerce Minister to India in December 1996 ensured that the momentum of growing
bilateral trade would be maintained.

India's traditional friendly relations with Palestine were given a major boost with the
opening of India's Representative Office to the Palestine National Authority, in Gaza, on
24 June 1996. This also gave impetus to contacts and cooperation with Palestinian people
in other fields such as culture and education. India's diplomatic representation to the State
of Palestine continues simultaneously through the accreditation of the Ambassador of
India in Tunis. India maintained its support for Palestinian national aspirations, as well as
to the MEPP. India shared the wide-felt concern at the developments affecting the peace
process, and urged all parties concerned to re-intensify their efforts so as to ensure
successful conclusion of the peace process within agreed time schedules, building on the
interim agreements and understandings which should be fully implemented. India
continued its moral, material and technical assistance to Palestinians through the
Representative Office in Gaza. While the disbursement of India's earlier pledged
contribution of Rs 350 lakhs continued, bilateral consultations were held with the
Palestinian authorities for utilisation of the second pledge of a like amount. On the
occasion of the International Day of Solidarity with the Palestinian People, the Prime
Minister addressed a message reiterating India's commitment and support for the
Palestinian people and their legitimate aspirations, and a special function was held in
New Delhi to commemorate the Day. An
-46>
invitation extended by the Prime Minister to President Arafat was accepted, and the visit
is expected to take place in 1997.
Friendly relations with Sudan were strengthened during the year through expansion and
diversification of bilateral economic cooperation. Cooperation agreements were signed in
the fields of health and culture. As a token of India's sympathy and support, a
consignment of essential drugs and medicines was dispatched to Sudan in November
1996 for the flood victims. Bilateral consultations were initiated to explore possibilities
of cooperation in new areas such as oil exploration, civil aviation, and specific industrial
sectors.
Progress was similarly made in strengthening bilateral relations with Syria. Vice Minister
in the Syrian Ministry of Foreign Affairs Raslan Alloush visited India in March 1997 as
part of the continuing bilateral consultations. India organised a successful trade exhibition
in Aleppo. The Minister of Civil Aviation and Information and Broadcasting led a
delegation to Syria for talks aimed at reinvigorating the implementation of a bilateral
cooperation agreement in the field of information and broadcasting. Syrian delegations
visited India for cooperation in the fields of education and scientific research and a
bilateral work plan was concluded in the area of science & technology. A cooperation
agreement in the field of remote sensing was also signed.
Bilateral relations with Tunisia retained their positive trends of increasing understanding
and cooperation. These were given a major fillip with exchange of delegations between
the two countries in several fields, including trade, agriculture, science & technology, and
environment. A bilateral agreement to renew the cultural exchange programme was
signed, and agreements were also concluded for cooperation in the fields of tourism and

for avoidance of double taxation. Active consultations were held for holding of the next
meeting of the bilateral joint Commission soon, and for exchange of high level political
visits.
Foreign Minister of the Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic Malainine Sadek paid an
unofficial visit to India in September 1996 and held talks with the Minister of External
Affairs on matters of mutual interest.
India maintained traditional cordial relations and cooperation with the regional
organisations, namely, League of Arab States (LAS),
-47>
Union of Arab Maghreb (UAM) and the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC). Consultations
were held with them as required on matters of common interest. The Minister of External
Affairs congratulated new Secretary General of Gulf Cooperation Council jameel
AlHujailan, on his appointment and extended him an invitation to visit India. The
invitation was accepted and the visit will take place at a mutually convenient time.
The 24th session of Islamic Conference of Foreign Ministers took place in Jakarta from
11-13 December 1996. The Middle East Peace Process, Bosnia, Afghanistan and Somalia
dominated the deliberations. The Conference passed a resolution at the behest of Pakistan
on Kashmir, identical to the one passed at the 23rd session in Conakry in December
1995. However, the inaugural address by the President of the host country contained no
references to Kashmir unlike the case with the Conakry Conference. Prior to the Jakarta
Conference, the Ministry took up with members of OIC the draft resolution on Kashmir
which had been circulated; and received assurances of support from many members. A
number of OIC members articulated support in India's favour during the deliberations.
OIC condemned the kidnapping of the western hostages in Kashmir by Al-Faran and
asked for their release.
-48>
6. Africa(South Of Sahara)
The Government have extended the hand of friendship and cooperation to all the
countries of Africa. The Government's approach has been to consolidate the gains of
almost five decades of close ties of friendship; to intensify bilateral economic and
commercial links for mutual benefit; to share developmental experiences as part of
India's commitment to South-South Cooperation; and to strengthen institutional linkages
with regional and sub-regional groups in Africa in recognition of the trend towards
regional and global economic integration.
The visits to India of President of Senegal Abdou Diouf, Deputy President of South
Africa Thabo Mbeki, Prime Minister of Ethiopia Meles Zenawi and Prime Minister of
Mauritius Dr Navinchandra Ramgoolam and the visits of Prime Minister Shri H D Deve
Gowda to Mauritius and Zimbabwe have further strengthened and diversified India's
relations with Africa. India's traditionally friendly ties with the countries of Africa were

further reinforced through bilateral contacts at the highest levels on the margins of major
multilateral events such as the 51st UNGA in New York, Sixth G-15 Summit at Harare,
and the World Food Summit in Rome, and through the visits of several Special Envoys.
The presence of Prime Minister Shri H D Deve Gowda at Harare for the G-15 Summit,
and India's participation at the Summit and Ministerial Meetings of the Organisation of
African Unity, Southern African Development Community, and Economic Community
of West African States, were reflective of India's desire to play a meaningful role in
regional initiatives for development in Africa.
-49>
India's engagement in economic, industrial and technological cooperation vvith the
countries of Africa, continues to grow steadily. Bilateral trade between India and the
countries of Africa has virtually doubled from Rs 5372 crores in 1994-95 to Rs 9600
crores in 199596. India also continued to strengthen cooperation in the field of human
resource development-Africa through the provision of training slots, deputation of
experts and supply of equipment under the Indian Technical and Economic Cooperation
(ITEC) Programme and the Special Commonwealth African Assistance Plan (SCAAP).
The traditionally close and privileged relations with Mauritius were further enhanced
with the visit to India in August 1996 of Prime Minister Dr Navinchandra Ramgoolam
and that of Prime Minister Shri H D Deve Gowda to Mauritius in February 1997. A
parliamentary delegation from Mauritius visited India in November 1996 and one from
India visited Mauritius in January 1997. The eighth meeting of the Indian Mauritius joint
Commission took place in Mauritius in February 1997. As a special gesture, the
Government of India agreed to an additional weekly service of Air Mauritius to Delhi on
the same terms as the flights already operating between Mauritius and Bombay. Both
countries concluded a new Credit Agreement of Rs 10.50 crore (US$ 3 million) to
finance import by Mauritius of capital goods, consultancy services and consumer
durables from India. A Cultural Exchange Programme for the period 1996-98 was
concluded during the visit of Mauritius' Minister for Arts, Culture and Leisure in August
1996. As in the past, Mauritius continued to show solidarity with and understanding of
India's positions on various international issues. The two countries remained committed
to working closely together to impart content and vigour to the emerging Indian Ocean
Rim Association for Regional Cooperation.
Relations with Seychelles took a significant step forward with the conclusion of a
Tourism Agreement on 3 October 1996. The Government of India gifted a consignment
of rice and medicines as a gesture of support to the people of Seychelles. Emergency
relief assistance in the form of rice was also provided to the Comoros. A comprehensive
bilateral protocol on political, trade, economic, cultural, scientific and technical
cooperation was concluded with Comoros on 24 July 1996. India welcomed the
Presidential elections in Comoros in April 1996 and in Madagascar in December 1996 as
a
-50>
reaffirmation of the democratic will of the peoples of these countries.

India continued to value and build upon its historically close relations with Ethiopia,
Kenya, Uganda and Tanzania. The visits of Prime Minister of Ethiopia Meles Zenawi to
India in March 1997 and earlier of the Ethiopian Minister for Education Genet Zewdie in
June 1996 provided opportunities for strengthening bilateral cooperation between the two
countries, especially in the fields of education and technical training, water resources
management and development of small industries. The private visit to Delhi in December
1996 of the Foreign Minister of Uganda Eriya Kategaya provided a useful opportunity for
both countries to review developments in their relations. The revival of the East African
Community, following an agreement concluded between Kenya, Uganda and Tanzania in
April 1996, held out the prospects of increased trade and economic exchanges with these
countries. Bilateral trade with Kenya increased by 114 per cent in 1995-96, and that with
Tanzania by 33 per cent in comparison with the previous year. The participation of the
Minister of State for Commerce Dr B B Ramaiah, and a team of leading Indian
businessmen at the "Made in India" Show organised by the Confederation of Indian
Industry in Nairobi in August 1996, the visit to India of a delegation of the Ugandan
Manufacturers' Association in November 1996, and the visit of Tanzanian Minister for
Communication and Transport William J Kusila in December 1996 were reflective of the
heightened interest in and potential for economic and commercial cooperation between
India and the countries of East Africa.
India remained concerned at developments in the Great Lakes region and at the threat that
continuing civil conflict posed to peace and stability in the region. India has commended
the efforts of regional countries and of the international community to establish durable
peace in the region based on a democratic order and respect for human rights.
India's relations with South Africa were placed on a new footing with the visit of South
African Deputy President Thabo Mbeki in December 1996. The visit was preceded by the
second meeting of the India-South Africa joint Commission and by other exchanges at
ministerial and official levels. South Africa has rapidly emerged as one of India's main
trading partner in Africa. The conclusion, during the visit, of an Agreement on the
Avoidance of Double Taxation,
-51>
a Cultural Cooperation Agreement and a Memorandum of Understanding on Cooperation
in the Field of Defence Equipment have added a significant new dimension to an already
dynamic and multi-faceted relationship. The South African Deputy President's call for a
strategic partnership between India and South Africa to resist the imposition of a world
order that sought the disempowerment of the developing nations, was reflective of the
close identity of views between the two countries on issues that vitally affect the
collective interests of developing countries. President of South Africa Dr Nelson Mandela
will be visiting India from 27-29 March 1997, reflecting once again the intensity of
friendship between the two countries.
India continued to build upon its close and friendly relations with Angola, Botswana,
Lesotho, Malawi, Mozambique, Namibia, Swaziland, Zambia and Zimbabwe. The

Minister of External Affairs deputed Special Envoys to each of these countries during the
year as a reaffirmation of India's commitment to strengthening cooperation with these
countries in a spirit of South-South partnership. During the visit of Prime Minister Shri H
D Deve Gowda to Harare for the Summit of the G-15 group in November 1996, a
Memorandum of Understanding was concluded on cooperation for the development of
small-scale industries in Zimbabwe. The Prime Minister also gifted to the President of
Zimbabwe a rural automatic telephone exchange manufactured in India. India welcomed
the re-election of President Frederick Chiluba of Zambia in the elections held in
November 1996. There was steady progress in India's cooperation with Zambia,
Botswana and Namibia in the area of defence training. The visit to India of President of
Namibia Sam Nujoma in February 1997 served to further reinforce the traditional ties of
friendship with that country. During the visit, India and Namibia concluded a Convention
on the Avoidance of Double Taxation and Prevention of Fiscal Evasion with respect to
Taxes on Income and Capital Gains. it was proceeded by the visit of Namibian Deputy
Minister for Trade and Industry Wilfred Emvula to India in April 1996. The high level
Indian participation at the International Trade Fair in Zimbabwe in November 1996, and
the award to Indian companies of two major contracts in Botswana for the upgradation of
airports and of the telecommunication network, were indicative of the growing economic
and commercial ties between India and the countries of Southern Africa. India's interest
in the establishment of a durable
-52>
peace in Angola was demonstrated by the continuing presence of over 1000 Indian
military personnel in Angola as part of the United Nations Angolan Verification Mission
(UNAVEM III).
India's recent opening to the countries of West Africa was further consolidated during the
year with the visits of Special Envoys of the Minister of External Affairs to various West
African countries, and progress in bilateral agricultural and rural development projects
being undertaken in Burkina Faso, Mali and Senegal. India is now categorised among the
major assistance partners in cooperation programmes being undertaken in Ghana, and its
contribution to human resource development is recognised at the highest levels. A team
of agriculture experts visited Senegal, Cote d'1voire, Ghana and Togo in August and
September 1996 with a view to formulating specific programmer of agricultural
cooperation with these countries. Relations with Senegal moved significantly forward
with the State visit to India of President of Senegal Abdon Diouf in February 1997.
During the visit an Agreement on * the Establishment of a joint Commission for
Economic, Technical, Political & Cultural Cooperation and a Memorandum of
Understanding on the Establishment of an Agricultural Development Project in Senegal
were concluded. Earlier in August 1996, a project for the computerisation of the office of
the Prime Minister of Senegal was successfully commissioned with Indian assistance.
The Prime Ministers of India and Senegal also concluded an agreement during the G-15
Summit at Harare for the setting up of a vocational training centre for entrepreneurship
development and small scale industries training in Senegal. India participated in the
Dakar International Trade Fair in December 1996. The conclusion of a bilateral
agreement on 16 May 1996 to establish a joint Commission with the Central African

Republic was demonstrative of India's desire to reach out in a spirit of partnership to
hitherto distant countries with whom India shared a common historical experience.
India viewed the Presidential elections in Benin, Chad, the Gambia, Ghana and Niger,
and arrangements to bring the peace processes in Liberia and Sierra Leone back on
course, as positive developments contributing to political stability and economic
development of the region. India was also encouraged by the Government of Nigeria's
reiteration of its intention to faithfully implement its programme of transition to civilian
democratic rule.
-53>

Nigeria regained its status in 1995-96 as India's largest trading partner in Africa. India
provided emergency relief assistance in the form of rice and medicines to Burkina Faso,
Guinea, Sierra Leone, Liberia and Niger. There was an enhancement of ITEC
cooperation programmes with the countries of West Africa in line with India's
commitment to help build up indigenous capacities and promote self-reliance in those
countries.
India has viewed the Organisation of African Unity (OAU) as embodying the spirit of
resurgent Africa and has been fully supportive of the programmes and objectives of the
OAU since its inception over three decades ago. India was represented as a guest at the
32nd Summit meeting of the OAU in Yaounde, Cameroon in July 1996 by a delegation
led by Minister of Steel and Mines Shri B P Baishya. The Prime Minister of India also
addressed a special message to the Summit, in which, as an expression of India's
solidarity, he committed India's assistance to the OAU's Peace Fund and to the technical
upgradation of the OAU Secretariat. At the G-15 Summit at Harare, the Prime Minister
also announced a Fund of Rs 100 crores to assist the developing countries of Africa.
During the year, India was engaged in constructing relations of partnership and
cooperation with regional organisations like the Common Market for Eastern & Southern
Africa (COMESA), Southern African Development Community (SADC), Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), United Nations Economic Commission
for Africa (UNECA) and African Development Bank. India was an active participant at
the partnership meeting of the UNECA at Addis Ababa in April 1996. Special Envoys of
the Prime Minister and the Minister of External Affairs were also deputed to represent
India at the Summit and ministerial meetings of the SADC in Lesotho in August 1996
and of the ECOWAS in Abuja in July 1996 respectively. India also participated in the
Tokyo International Conference on African Development (TICAD) at Abidjan in July
1996. Cooperation between India and the countries of Africa within the Indian Ocean
Rim Association for Regional Cooperation has constituted a positive example of SouthSouth cooperation with the aim of harnessing the rich natural resources and abundant
productive capacities of the region for common benefit.
-54>
7.Europe

Eastern Europe
India's relations with the countries of East and Central Europe have been traditionally
warm and friendly. There is considerable goodwill for India in these countries at all
levels and our ties with them are multi-faceted, encompassing most areas of bilateral
cooperation. New commonalities of approach and outlook have emerged. High level
exchanges with these countries testify to the importance attached to the relationship by
both sides and have contributed to an intensification of bilateral ties. There has been a
consensus in India on maintaining good relations with most of these countries and this
has not been subject to political changes. In turn, these countries acknowledge the
importance of their traditional ties with India. Viewing India as a large emergent market,
they have also been keen to build upon existing business and institutional linkages with
it.
Based on continuity, trust and confidences relations with the Russian Federation are an
important foreign policy priority for India. Both countries have emphasised the
importance which they attach to bilateral relations and consider them not to be subject to
political vicissitudes. With post Cold War transitional difficulties now left well behind,
India's relations with Russia are progressing well in almost all areas of bilateral
cooperation, including trade and economy, science and technology, culture and defence.
There is recognition both in India and Russia of the strategic dimension of Indo-Russian
relations. Both countries share similar
-55>
perceptions on many international issues. Interactions on developments in the region
lying between the borders of India and Russia have been found to be beneficial and
contacts are being maintained on the evolving situation in Afghanistan.
A major event during the year was the landmark official visit to the Russian Federation
undertaken by the Prime Minister from 24- 26 March 1997, which provided a new
impetus to the traditionally close, friendly and multi-faceted ties between India and
Russia. While in Russia, the Prime Minister had meetings with President Boris Yeltsin
and Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin during which the high priority accorded to
bilateral relations and the importance of intensifying these further to mutual benefit was
reaffirmed by both sides. Opinions and assessments on a wide range of international and
regional issues were also shared. Several important bilateral documents were signed
during the visit.
There have been many frequent high level exchanges between India and Russia during
1996-97, effectively contributing to the further strengthening of bilateral links in a very
wide range of areas of mutual interest.
A delegation of young Russian Parliamentarians from the State Duma (Lower House of
the Russian Parliament) visited India from 12-17 September 1996.
Mayor of Moscow Yuri Luzhkov visited India from 16-19 September 1996 at the

invitation of the Chief Minister of Delhi. Apart from his host, he called on the Prime
Minister and the Minister of External Affairs.
Russian Defence Minister Igor Rodionov visited India from 21-23 October 1996. This
was the first visit by the Russian Defence Minister to India following the breakup of the
Soviet Union. During the visit, an agreement providing for cooperation between the
armed forces of the two countries was signed.
Russian Deputy Prime Minister Oleg Davydov visited India from 26- 30 October 1996 to
participate in the India Economic Summit organised by the Confederation of Indian
Industry. He called on the Prime Minister and held discussions with the Minister of
External Affairs, the Finance Minister and the Minister of State for Commerce.
Russian Railway Minister Anatoly Zaitsev visited India from
-56>
28-31 October 1996 in connection with an ESCAP meeting and met the Minister for
Railways in New Delhi.
Russian Deputy Prime Minister Vladimir Fortov visited India from 9-13 November 1996
for attending a Conference on high pressure physics at Mumbai. He met the Minister of
External Affairs and the Minister of State for Science and Technology while in New
Delhi.
A seven-member delegation of the Russian State Duma Committee on Nationalities
Affairs visited India from 25-30 November 1996 at the invitation of the Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Home Affairs.
Russian Minister for Fuel and Energy Pyotr Rodionov visited India from 6-9 December
1996 in connection with the Fifth International Conference on Energy held in Goa. While
in Delhi, lie held discussions with the Minister of State for Power.
From the Indian side, the Minister for Human Resource Development Shri S R Bommai
represented the Government of India at the inauguration of the "Days of Indian Culture"
in Russia from 16-28 September 1996. During his stay in Moscow, he met Prime
Minister Chernomyrdin and other high level Russian dignitaries.
A Parliamentary delegation, led by the Speaker of the Lok Sabha Shri P A Sangma
visited Russia from 20-26 October 1996 and met Prime Minister Chernomyrdin apart
from the Chairmen of both Houses of the Russian Parliament.
Home Minister Shri Indrajit Gupta visited Russia from 4-8 November 1996 at the
invitation of Russian Minister for Interior Anatoly Kulikov. Apart from his host, lie met
the Secretary of the Security Council Ivan Rybkin and other senior Russian dignitaries.
The Defence Secretary visited Russia from 26 November 2 Dccember 1996 during which

a contract for the supply to India of SU-30 MKI aircraft was signed.
The Seventh Review Meeting of the Integrated Long Term Programme of Cooperation in
Science and Technology (ILTP) joint Council between India and Russia was held in New
Delhi on 8 & 9 January 1997 under the co-chairmanship of Director General of Council
of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR) Prof C N R Rao, and Member of the
Presidium of the Russian Academy of Sciences
-57>
Academician Guriy Marchuk. Meetings of the concerned Working Groups under the
Indo-Russian Inter-Governmental Commission were held as follows-0) Working Group
on Pharmaceuticals met in New Delhi from 1-5 April 1996; GO Working Group on Coal
met in New Delhi from 10-13 July 1996; (iii) Working Group on Metallurgy met in New
Delhi from 23-28 September 1996; Ov) Working Group on Science and Technology met
in Moscow from 24-28 December 1996; (v) Working Group on Power met in Moscow
from 13-15 January 1997; (vi) Working Group on Culture met in New Delhi from 15-17
January 1997; (vii) Working Group on Trade and Economic Cooperation met in Moscow
from 23-27 January 1997, while its Sub-Group on Transport met in Moscow from 22-24
January 1997; (viii) Working Group on Information Technology met in New Delhi from
23-25 January 1997; and Gx) Working Group on Petroleum met in Moscow on 24 & 25
January 1997.
Minister of External Affairs Shri I K Gujral visited Russia from 9-13 February 1997 as a
guest of the Government of the Russian Federation. During the visit, he met Prime Mini '
ster Viktor Chernomyrdin, First Deputy Prime Minister Viktor Ilyushin, Foreign Minister
Yevgeny Primakov, Speaker of the State Duma Gennady Seleznyev, Mayor of Moscow
Yuri Luzhkov, Secretary of the Security Council Ivan Rybkin and other senior Russian
dignitaries. He also co-chaired the Third Session of the Indo- Russian InterGovernmental Commission (IGC) on Trade, Economic, Scientific, Technological and
Cultural Cooperation. Besides the Protocol of the Third IGC Session, an Agreement on
the Establishment of a joint Shipping Service between India and Russia and a
Memorandum of Understanding on Certification in the field of information Technology
were signed during the visit.
The Chairman of the Central Bank of the Russian Federation Sergei Dubinin visited India
from 10-16 February 1997 at the invitation of the Governor of the RBI. Chief Justice of
India justice Shri A M Ahmadi visited Russia from 15-23 February 1997 at the invitation
of the Chairman of the Russian Constitutional Court Vladimir Tumanov.
India's relations with other CIS countries-Armenia, Belarus, Georgia, Moldova and
Ukraine as well as the three Baltic countries of Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania-continued
to develop satisfactorily. An Armenian Parliamentary delegation led by the Speaker of
the
-58>
Armenian National Assembly Babken Ararktsian visited India from 4-7 December 1996

and called on the President, the Vice-President and the Prime Minister.
India's relations with all the countries of Central Europe have progressed satisfactorily.
There was a particular impetus given to bilateral ties with Poland, the Slovak Republic
and the Czech Republic as a result of the State visit of the President of India to these
countries. These visits were marked by great warmth and goodwill for India at all levels.
The leaders of all these countries confirmed the importance and priority they attached to
relations with India.
President of India Dr S D Sharma accompanied by a high level delegation paid a State
visit to Poland from 6-9 October 1996 and met President Alexander Kwasniewski and
Prime Minister Wlodzimierz Cimoszewicz. A Bilateral Investment Protection
Agreement, a Cultural Exchange Programme and a Protocol on Foreign Office
Consultations were signed with Poland during the visit.
Earlier, Chief justice of India justice Shri A M Ahmadi led a three-member delegation to
Poland from 21-28 June 1996. Minister of State for Coal Smt Kanti Singh visited Poland
from 12-14 November 1996 for discussions on cooperation in the field of mining. Polish
Minister for Foreign Economic Relations Jan Czaja visited India from 9-13 November
1996. First President (Chief justice) of the Supreme Court of Poland Adam Strzemlrosz
visited India from 20-26 January 1997 at the invitation of the Chief justice of India.
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Finance of Poland Grzegorz Kolodko visited
India from 8-12 January 1997 at the invitation of the Finance Minister. He also called on
the President and the Prime Minister.
The President of India paid a State visit to the Slovak Republic on 9 & 10 October 1996
and had meetings with President Michal Kovac and Prime Minister Vladimir Meciar. An
Agreement on Cooperation in the field of Science & Technology and an Air Services
Agreement were signed during the visit. Earlier, the Defence Secretary visited the Slovak
Republic on 16 & 17 April 1996 for discussions with his Slovak counterpart Jozef
Gajdos.
Slovak Minister of Economy Karol Cesnik visited India from 14-17 December 1996 soon
after the conclusion of the Second Session of' the Indo-Slovak joint Committee in New
Delhi on 12 &
-59>
13 December 1996. The joint Committee Session was co-chaired by Slovak Deputy
Minister of Economy Dusan Gutan and the Additional Secretary in the Ministry of
Commerce.
The President of India paid a State visit to the Czech Republic from 10-13 October 1996
and had meetings with President Vaclav Havel and Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus. A
Bilateral Investment Protection Agreement, a Cultural Agreement and a Protocol on
Foreign Office Consultations were signed during the visit. in August 1996, the Czech
Republic opened an Honorary Consulate in Calcutta. A meeting of the Indo-Czech joint

Committee was held on 5 & 6 February 1997.
The Home Minister visited Bulgaria from 31 October-4 November 1996 at the invitation
of the Bulgarian Minister of Interior Nikolay Dobrev and had several meeting with high
level Bulgarian dignitaries. Bulgarian Minister for Trade and Foreign Economic
Cooperation Atanas Paparizov visited India from 2-6 December 1996 for the Eleventh
Session of the Indo-Bulgarian joint Commission.
A Hungarian Parliamentary delegation led by Gyorgy Csoti visited India from 20-27
January 1997. Chairman of the Hungarian Parliamentary Committee on Human Rights,
Minorities and Religious Affairs Gabor Gellert Kis visited India in the first half of
February 1997.
A meeting of the Inclo-Romanian joint Commission was held in New Delhi on 10 & 11
February 1997.
India welcomed the signing of the Agreement on normalisation of relations between the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and Croatia in August 1996
-60>
Assistant Foreign Minister of Croatia Frane Krnic visited India from 14-16 September
1996 for bilateral political consultations and called on the Minister of External Affairs.
An Agreement on Maritime Transport between India and Croatia was signed in New
Delhi on 3 January 1997.
Minister of Trade of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia Djordje Siradovic visited India
from 1-4 December 1996. This was the first such visit after UN sanctions against FRY
were lifted on 1 October 1996. Secretary (West) in the Ministry visited Slovenia from 2224 August 1996 and signed a Protocol on Foreign Office Consultations between India
and Slovenia. State Secretary in the Ministry for Foreign Affairs of Slovenia Ignac Golob
visited India from 15-17 December 1997 and signed an Agreement on Cultural
Cooperation with the Secretary in the Department of Culture.

Western Europe
India's relations with the countries of Western Europe have continued to be close and
productive. The end of the Cold War era, the increasing political and economic
integration of West European nations into the European Union and India's deregulation
and opening up of the economy created the basis for further development of bilateral
relations based on a complementarity of interests and mutual benefit.
With the expansion of the European Union (EU) and its move towards a common foreign
and security policy, India's political dialogue with the countries of the EU has assumed
added significance. Sustained efforts have been made to strengthen the EU's
understanding on issues of vital concern to India, both regional and global.

The EU is the single largest economic entity of the world. It is also India's largest trading
partner and foreign investor. With the introduction of economic liberalisation in India,
special efforts have been made to develop and expand India's economic ties with this part
of the world. India's exports to EU countries in the year 1995-96 increased by 27 per cent
over the previous year to reach approximately Rs 29,104 crores. From the beginning of
the liberalisation period upto December 1995, actual investment inflows from West
European countries amounted to Rs 2760 crores. West European countries also continued
to be a leading source of development assistance, technology and joint ventures.
Trade and investment ties with the European Union (EU) continued to grow at a
satisfactory pace. it had been agreed that high- level contacts between India and the EU,
EC and the European Council, would increase. The decision of the European
Commission (EQ to bring out a "Communication" on India (special study on long-term
relations) was a positive development and enabled focus on the means of fully tapping
the potential for cooperation with
-61>
India. A Memorandum of Understanding on the Indo-EC Economic Cross Cultural
Programme, a scheme funded by the EC to develop a greater understanding of the EU in
India and vice-versa, was signed.
Periodic meetings of India's Heads of Missions (HOMs) in Germany, France, UK,
Belgium, Italy, the Netherlands, Austria, Sweden and Ireland continued during the year.
The meetings serve a very useful purpose in enabling the HOMs to have a better
understanding and to respond effectively to the challenges and opportunities arising from
the common approaches of EU countries on foreign and security policies, as well as on
economic issues. It was also decided to hold these meetings in the country holding the
Presidentship of the EU at the time to enable HOMs to be briefed by senior members of
the country concerned on their priorities within the EU.
The Prime Minister visited Davos (Switzerland) and addressed the World Economic
Forum in February 1997. He informed the participating corporate leaders and others of
the economic reforms initiated in India and called upon the captains of industry and
finance to play a valuable and mutually beneficial role in the economy to accelerate
economic growth.
During his stay in Davos, the Prime Minister had separate bilateral meetings with Heads
of States/Governments and other dignitaries from several countries, corporate leaders and
media personalities. The discussions were productive and focussed mainly on furthering
bilateral economic relations and foreign investments.
Indo-British relations based on complementarity of interests continued to develop
satisfactorily. These ties were reinforced by high-level visits. From the British side
visitors this year consisted of Foreign Secretary Malcolm Rifkind, Parliamentary Under
Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs Dr Liam Fox and
Parliamentary Under Secretary of State for Trade & Industry Ian Taylor. Shadow Foreign

Secretary Robin Cook also visited India in October-November 1996. A delegation of
Members of Parliament from the House of Commons Select Committee of Trade and
Industry visited India in May 1996.
Prime Minister John Major visited India on 9 & 10 January 1997. He met the Prime
Minister at both cities (Calcutta and Bangalore)
-62>
he visited in India. In Calcutta, the British Prime Minister attended the Confederation of
Indian Industry Conference. He was accompanied by the President of the Board of Trade
of UK Ian Lang and an exceptionally strong business delegation.
From the Indian side, Minister of Finance Shri P Chidambaram. Minister of
Parliamentary Affairs & Tourism Shri Srikanta Kumar Jena and Minister of Steel &
Mines Shri B P Baishya as well as Minister of State for Defence Shri N V N Somu,
Minister of State for Power Dr S Venugopalachari and Minister of State for Urban
Affairs Dr U Venkateswarlu visited the UK. At the invitation of the UK branch of the
Commonwealth Association, a Parliamentary delegation led by the Speaker, Lok Sabha
Shri P A Sangma visited the UK from 1-8 November 1996.
There has been a spurt of economic activity between the two countries in recent years.
Bilateral trade has increased by 70 per cent over the last three years and Britain continues
to be the second largest foreign investor in India, with * actual investments from 1991 to
November 1996 amounting to Rs 1374.7 crores.
Regular Foreign Office consultations and specialist level talks with the UK on United
Nations and arms. control issues have continued and contributed to a better understanding
of each others' positions.
Indo-German relations have continued to make rapid strides buttressed by high level
visits and progress in economic relations between the two countries.
German Defence Minister Volker Ruhe visited India from 23-25 October 1996. His visit
was followed by that of Minister of Economics Gunther Rexrodt from 30 October-4
November 1996. Rexrodt's visit coincided with the holding of the Asia-Pacific
Conference of German industries in New Delhi for which a very large number of German
industrialists visited India. The Vice Chancellor and Foreign Minister of Germany Dr
Klaus Kinkel visited India from 23-25 January 1997. This was his second visit to India as
Foreign Minister. During his stay, Dr Kinkel called on the President and the Prime
Minister. He had two rounds of discussions and held a joint press conference with the
Minister of External Affairs. Dr Kinkel also gave an address at the Rajiv Gandhi
Foundation on Foreign Affairs and Security Issues.
-63>
From the Indian side, Chief Minister of Kerala Shri E K Nayanar visited Germany from
15-19 November 1996 to attract investments and to promote Kerala as a tourist

destination.
The 5th Meeting of the Indo-German Consultative Group took place in Berlin in AugustSeptember 1996. The recommendations of the Group were submitted to the two Heads of
Government.
Relations with France continued to develop satisfactorily. Special Envoy of the French
President Michel Rouge visited India from 2125 May 1996 to discuss the G-7 Summit
which was then scheduled to be held in France in June 1996. Special Envoy of the French
Foreign Minister jean Francois Deniau also visited India from 11-14 November 1996.
French Minister for Research Francois d'Aubert visited India from 31 January-3 February
1997.
Relations with Italy received a boost with the visit of the President to that country from
13-16 October 1996. The President was received by Italian President Dr. Oscar Luigi
Scalfaro with whom he held discussions on bilateral and international issues of mutual
interest. During his stay in Italy, Italian Prime Minister Prof Romano Prodi and other
dignitaries also called on the President.
The Prime Minister visited Italy to attend the World Food Summit from 15-17 November
1996. During his stay, the Prime Minister also had a meeting with Italian Prime Minister
Prof Romano Prodi.
Chief Minister of Maharashtra Shri Manohar Joshi visited Italy from 6-13 October 1996.
Italian Minister of Foreign Trade Dr Augusto Fantozzi visited India from 4-7 December
1996 to attend the Indo-Italian joint Commission Meeting.
A number of high-level visits from Austria to India contributed to the acceleration of
bilateral ties. Austrian Minister of Finance Viktor Klima accompanied by a delegation of
Austrian businessmen, visited India from 4-7 August 1996. Austrian State Secretary
Benita Ferrero-Waldner visited India from 16-20 October 1996. Her visit was followed
by that of President of the Federal Economic Chamber of Austria Leopold Maderthaner
and accompanying Austrian Businessmen from 16-20 November 1996.
With Ireland assuming the Presidency of the European Union for the second half of 1996,
the process of dialogue and consultations with the country increased. It was in this
context that Secretary
-64>
(West) in the Ministry visited Dublin in July 1996 and held discussions with the Irish
Foreign Office.
Minister of Foreign Affairs of Portugal Dr Jaime Gama visited India from 6-11 February
1997. During the visit he called on the President, the Prime Minister and the Minister for
Human Resource Development Shri S R Bommai. He also had extensive discussions with
the Minister of External Affairs. An Air Services agreement was signed between the two

countries.
A delegation of the Walloon Parliament (Belgium) visited India from 17-25 September
1996. Minister of Foreign Affairs of Belgium Erik Derycke visited India from 16-19
February 1997. During the visit, he had discussions with the Minister of External Affairs
and he also called on the Prime Minister and the Finance Minister.
The Dutch Minister for Development Cooperation J P Pronk visited India from 8-14
August 1996. This was followed by a visit by Minister for Foreign Trade A van Dok-van
Wheele to India from 12- 19 October 1996. An economic package worth Rs 100 crores
for promoting investments, exports and transfer of technology was announced during her
visit.
Relations with Luxembourg received further impetus with the visit of Deputy Prime
Minister of Luxembourg Jacques Poos to India from 9-13 September 1996. State
Secretary of Luxembourg George Wohlfart also visited India from 29 April-l May 1996.
-65>
Minister for Surface Transport Shri T G Venkatraman visited Greece from 25-27 June
1996, to attend the funeral service of former Prime Minister of Greece Andreas
Papandreou. During his stay in Greece, the Minister was received by the Greek Prime
Minister.
Indo-Finland relations were given specific orientation and direction when President of
Finland Martti Ahtisaari visited India from 25-28 November 1996. The President's
delegation also included Minister of Foreign Affairs Tarja Halonen, Minister for Foreign
Trade Ole Norrback and a large business delegation. During his stay in India the Finnish
President called on the President and held talks with the Prime Minister. He also
interacted with members of the Indian industry.
Danish Minister for Development Cooperation Poul Nielson visited India from 25
November-4 December 1996. Foreign Minister of Denmark Niels Helveg Petersen
visited India from 17-19 February 1997. He briefed the Minister of External Affairs on
NATO expansion and the ASEM Foreign Minister meeting in Singapore where he was
returning from.
The Foreign Affairs Committee of the Norwegian Parliament visited, India from 8-14
January 1997. The delegation included the Speaker of the Norwegian Parliament.
President of Cyprus Glafcos Clerides paid a state visit to India from 10-15 February
1997. A large business delegation came with him. The President held wide-ranging
discussions with the Indian leaders, focussing on the resolution of the Cyprus issue and
other multilateral, regional and bilateral issues. An Agreement on Merchant Shipping was
signed during this visit.
EC Commissioner Emma Bonino visited India from 7-10 August 1996.

-66>
8. The Americas
North America
The US elections which were held on 5 November 1996 marked the culmination of a year
long electoral activity. US President Bill Clinton defeated Republican challenger Bob
Dole by securing 49 per cent of the votes cast as against 42 per cent secured by Dole. The
Republicans have meanwhile maintained their control over both Houses of the US
Congress. In the Senate, their margin increased by 2 seats to 55 versus 45. In the House,
the Republican majority was reduced by 8 seats, but is still comfortable.
Indo-US relations continued to see steady diversification during 1996-97. The expansion
of the pace and scope of exchanges between the two countries continued on a full range
of political, scientific, technological and social issues. Trade and investment, however,
continued to be the cornerstone of bilateral relations.
US Assistant Secretary of State for South Asian Affairs, Robin Raphel, held discussions
in September 1996 with senior officials of the Ministry of External Affairs on wideranging issues concerning Indo-US relations. The visit of Ms Raphel was part of the
periodic consultations between India and US on the entire gamut of Indo-US relations.
Deputy US Trade Representative Jeffery Lang and Deputy Assistant US Trade
Representative Rick Ruzicka visited India from 7-10 October to hold bilateral
discussions. US Coordinator for counter-terrorism Phillip C Wilcox was in India on 14 &
15 October.
The year also witnessed greater interaction with US Congressmen and Senators. The
visits included those of Congressman
-67>
Jim McDermott and Congresswoman C Maloney (1-11 April 1996), Chairman Senate
Sub-Committee for Near Eastern and South-Asian Affairs Hank Brown (4-7 August
1996), Congressmen S Levin, N Abercrombie and A Hastings & Congresswoman Connie
Morella (1-8 December 1996).
Bilateral defence relations with the US continued to develop satisfactorily during the
year. The 2nd meeting of the Indo-US Defence Policy Group (DPG) took place in Delhi
on 23 & 24 October 1996. The two sides had a detailed exchange of views on security
perceptions in the Asia-Pacific and on issues of mutual concern. In the field of defence
research and production cooperation, they agreed on a programme of immediate
cooperation on high priority areas as well as additional areas for possible future joint
ventures. Prior to the DPG meeting, meetings of the joint Technical Group related to joint
research and development in defence cooperation also took place in Bangalore and New
Delhi in September 1996. Chief of Army Staff General Shankar Roychowdhury visited
the US in September 1996. The Commander-in-Chief of the US Pacific Command
Admiral Joseph W Prusher led a delegation to India from 9-12 January 1997.

As a part of Indo-US defence cooperation, the joint Indo-US Naval exercise Flash
Iroquoise/Sangam '96 was held in September 1996.
Expansion of trade and investment continued during the year. Bilateral trade turnover
rose to around Rs 33,477 crores with Indian exports reaching Rs 19,764 crores. Approved
investments from US for the period April-November 1996 amounted to around Rs
8,947.8 crores as against Rs 7,054 crores during the whole of 1995.
Several business related visits took place during the year. Governor of Ohio State George
Voinovich led a 14 member Business Mission from 9-20 April 1996 and Lieutenant
Governor of Kentucky Dr Stephen Henry was accompanied by a 4 member commercial
delegation from 4-15 April. Congressman Jim McDermott led a 20- member Greater
Seattle Business and Trade Mission from 3-13 December 1996.
The private sector alliance between the US and Indian business, the Indo-US Commercial
Alliance, has been working well in areas of common interest. The 2nd joint Board
meeting was held in
-68>
Washington on 16 & 17 October 1996. The 19th meeting of Indo-US joint Business
Council was held in New Delhi on 6 December 1996.
The meeting of the Indo-US Economic and Commercial Sub-Commission and its
Working Group on Finance and Investment was held in Washington on 11 & 12
December 1996. The Revenue Secretary visited the US for a meeting of the joint
Working Group on Narcotics on 8 October 1996.
India and the US continued to have a different perception and approach to nuclear and
missile non-proliferation issues, as was reflected in the CTBT negotiations during the
year.
In April 1996, the US Administration decided to proceed with the one time transfer to
Pakistan of military equipment worth US$ 368 million. The military package did not
include the F-16 aircraft.
An Amendment to the US Foreign Operations Bill to restric US bilateral aid to India to
the last year's initial allocation was defeated in the House of Representatives on 5 June
1996 by a decisive 296 votes to 127. The amendment was proposed by the Republican
Senator Dan Burton for alleged human rights violations in Punjab and Kashmir.
India-Canada relations have seen remarkable expansion in the last four years. The visit of
the Canadian Prime Minister jean Chretien to India in January 1996 with 7 Provincial
Premiers marked a definitive commitment on both Sides to reinvigorate India-Canada
relations and to return to it the warmth of its earlier relationship.

The Minister of External Affairs visited Canada from 29 September-1 October 1996 at
the invitation of the Canadian Foreign Minister. Apart from the official discussions with
his counterpart, the Minister called on the Canadian Prime Minister and also met the
Premier of the Province of Ontario. Other engagements included a dinner-meeting with
the Indo-Canadian community, a meeting with captains of industry and commerce, and a
round table discussion with academics and foreign policy experts.
Minister of Foreign Affairs of Canada Llyod Axworthy accompanied by a high level
delegation of Members of the Canadian Parliament and senior officials visited India from
7-15 January 1997 at the invitation of the Minister of External Affairs. Foreign Minister
-69>
Axworthy called on the President and the Prime Minister and had discussions with the
Minister of External Affairs on a wide range of bilateral issues and regional and
international matters of mutual interest. Minister Axworthy also met the Minister of
Communication, the Minister of State (MOS) for Planning and Programme
Implementation and Science and Technology and the MOS for Power and NonConventional Energy. The Minister of External Affairs and the visiting Minister
exchanged notes establishing a joint Ministerial Committee headed by the two Ministers
for intensifying cooperation and consultations between the two countries in the political
as well as in the economic and commercial fields. Memoranda of Understanding for
economic assistance by the Canadian International Development Agency (CIDA) of Rs
76 crores for three projects relating to Capacity Development of Revenue Administration,
Energy Infrastructure Services and Facilitation of Private Sector Development in India
were signed. The Canadian Minister also visited Calcutta and Chandigarh. At Calcutta,
he participated in the "Canada Day" programme of the CII Partnership Summit. At
Chandigarh, an office of the Canadian High Commission was jointly inaugurated by the
Minister of External Affairs and the Canadian Foreign Minister. The two Ministers
agreed to intensify cooperation between the two governments to combat terrorism in all
its forms, regardless of its motives. The two Ministers also reiterated the strong interest of
both governments in revitalising India-Canada relations and sustaining the momentum in
the expansion and diversification of bilateral cooperation and consultations that had
already been established.
Member of Parliament and member of the Standing Committee on Foreign Affairs and
International Trade in the Canadian Parliament, Michel Dupuy, visited India from 19-22
November as a special representative of the Canadian Prime Minister to explore new and
innovative ways of expanding India-Canada interaction and cooperation.
Canadian Minister of Citizenship and Immigration Lucienne Robillard visited India from
10-13 April 1996 primarily to inspect the Canadian High Commission's Consular Section
in New Delhi, which is one of Canada's largest visa issuing outlet in the world. During
the visit, the Minister called on the Minister of External Affairs and discussed issues Of
Mutual interest.
Civil aviation talks were held between senior Indian and

-70>
Canadian officials in Ottawa on 14 August 1996. An agreement was reached for
increased seat allotment between Air India and Air Canada.
In the period January-July 1996 Canada was the 17th largest investor country in India
with an investment of Rs 110.4 crores. Bilateral trade from January to September 1996
amounted to Rs 2435.62 crores. A 35 member Confederation of Indian Industry
delegation led by CII President visited Canada from 13-19 June 1996.
In October 1996, President of the Canadian Space Agency William M Evans visited India
to hold bilateral discussions with ISRO.
Central and South America and the Caribbean
India's relations with the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean continued to be
close and cordial. The thrust of India's policy has been to strengthen and widen relations
with the region and to put more economic content into it. The 51st United Nations
General Assembly, the Caribbean Community (CARICOM) Summit, the G-15 Summit,
and the World Food Summit provided opportunities for interaction with the leadership of
these countries at the highest levels. Exchange of visits served to reinforce the traditional
bonds of friendship with these countries. Economic and commercial ties were enhanced,
major Indian exhibitions were organised in Argentina and. Brazil and visits of trade
delegations were promoted. A thrust is being maintained to project India and Indian
culture in the region especially in the Caribbean where there is a substantial population of
Indian origin.
The region consists of 33 independent countries. India has 13 Missions in the region,
while countries of this region maintain ten Missions in India. India has a number of
honorary consuls in the region and there are many honorary consuls in India of the
countries of the region.
A general consensus has built up in the region for promotion of democracy and economic
liberalisation. Presidential and general elections were held in the Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Nicaragua and. Surinam. The countries of the region are promoting regional
groupings to promote regional strengths. There has also been a tendency of coming to a
common resolution to express a Pan-71>
American attitude and independent viewpoint. A case in point has been tile criticism
voiced from the region against the Helms- Burton Bill.
Recognising this, India has put in place institutional relations with the Rio Group and the
Central American States. Efforts were made this year to develop similar arrangements
with the Southern Cone Common Market (MERCOSUR), Caribbean Community
(CARICOM), Association of Caribbean States (ACS) and the ANDEAN Community.
The first ever Indian Trade Exhibition "Indian Products Fair" organised by India Trade

Promotion Organisation (ITPO) was inaugurated in Buenos Aires by the Acting President
Dr Carlos Ruckauf on 12 June 1996. Sixty-four Indian Companies participated in the
Fair.
The Sixth Conference of International Ombudsmen institute was held in Buenos Aires
from 20-24 October 1996. Lokayukt (Himachal Pradesh) justice Shri P C Balakrishna
Menon, Lokayukt (Punjab) justice Shri S S Sodhi, Lokayukt (Maharashtra) justice Shri H
H Kantharia, and Upalokayukt (Karnataka) justice Shri Kamaleshwar Nath participated
in this conference.
Minister of State for Environment & Forests Captain Jai Narain Prasad Nishad visited
Buenos Aires to participate in the Third Meeting of the Conference of Parties to the
Convention on Biological Diversity held at Buenos Aires from 4-15 November 1996.
A concerted effort was made during the year to operationalise the bilateral cooperative
arrangements identified during tile visit of President Cardoso of Brazil in January 1996.
India's new Consulate General started functioning in Sao Paulo (Brazil) with effect from
12 April 1996.
Minister of State for Commerce Dr B B Ramaiah and the Secretary Department of
Science and Technology visited Sao Paulo on the eve of the first-ever Indian Trade Fair
held in Sao Paulo from 6-10 November 1996 in which 104 Indian companies
participated.
A Chile-India Chamber of Commerce was inaugurated in Santiago, capital of Chile,
ewith the aim of promoting bilateral trade.
-72>
Colombia, as the Chairman of The Non Aligned Movement (NAM), gave lead and
coordinated its activities during the year.
Foreign Minister of Costa Rica Fernando E. Naranjo paid an official visits to India from
28 February-5 March 1997.
President of the People's National Assembly of Cuba Ricardo Alarcon de Quesada visited
India as a Special Emissary of the Government of the Republic of Cuba from 22-26
September 1996. Cuban Vice Foreign Minister Isabel Allende visited New Delhi from
18-22 October 1996 for bilateral consultations. Vice-Minister for Foreign Investment and
Economic Cooperation of Cuba Noemi Benitez y de Mendoza visited India as the leader
of the Cuban delegation to the Third Session of the Indo-Cuba joint Commission for
Economic, Scientific and Technical Cooperation, which was held in New Delhi from 2022 November 1996. This was preceded by a meeting of the Trade Revival Committee on
18 & 19 November 1996. The meeting identified means to revive and strengthen
economic, commercial and scientific cooperation.

A bust of Mahatma Gandhi was unveiled and the Plaza de la India was inaugurated in
San Salvador, capital of El Salvador, on 18 April 1996.
The thirty-six year old civil war in Guatemala ended with the signing of the final peace
accord between the Government of Guatemala and the leftist guerillas on 29 December
1996. The signing ceremony was attended by India's Ambassador accredited to
Guatemala as Special Envoy of the President of India.
A Memorandum of Understanding was signed by the Minister of External Affairs with
the Foreign Minister of Haiti during UNGA session at New York in September 1996 for
the establishment of Diplomatic Relations between India and Haiti.
Tupac Amaru (MRTA), a leftist guerilla organisation of Peru, attacked the Japanese
Ambassador's residence in Lima on 17 December 1996 and seized around 500 hostages
who were attending a reception at the residence. The guerillas, who are demanding
release of hundreds of their fellow activists from Peruvian prisons, have by now released
all but 83 hostages. The remaining hostages include the brother of the President, the
Foreign and the Agriculture Minister and other senior Peruvian officers. The
-73>
negotiations are continuing to resolve the impasse. India views the developments in Lima
with concern and strongly condemns all acts of terrorism.
Prime Minister of Trinidad & Tobago Basdeo Panday paid an official visit to India from
23 January-4 February 1997. He was the Chief Guest at the Republic Day Celebrations
on 26 January 1997. During his visit a number of bilateral arrangements and Memoranda
of Understanding were signed.
The 5th World Hindi Conference was held in Trinidad and Tobago from 4-8 April 1996.
Foreign Minister of Venezuela Dr Miguel Angel Burelli-Rivas paid an official visit to
India from 2-5 March 1997. During his visit an Agreement on Bilateral Annual
Consultations between the Foreign Offices was signed.
The Minister of External Affairs held meetings with Foreign Ministers of the Rio Group
and the Foreign Ministers of the Central American group during the UNGA in September
1996 in New York. Relations with MERCOSUR were initiated with Minister of External
Affairs's meeting with the Foreign Ministers of MERCOSUR at the UNGA. India's
request for observer status has been accepted by the Association of Caribbean States
(ACS). An Indian delegation was present at the ACS Ministerial Council Meeting held in
Havana in December 1996. The ANDEAN Community and India have agreed to set up
an institutional relationship. Secretary (East) in the Ministry visited Barbados as Special
Envoy of the Prime Minister in connection with the Summit of CARICOM Heads of
States and Governments. Efforts are continuing towards establishing institutional
relations with CARICOM .

An Indian Observer Delegation participated in the 26th General Assembly of the
Organisation of American States (OAS) held in Panama from 3-7 June 1996. Indian
representatives also participated in some specialised regional meetings held under the
auspices of the OAS. India was granted Observer Status by the Association of Caribbean
States (ACS) during the 2nd Session of the ACS Foreign Ministers held in Havana from
9-13 December 1996.
The 5th International Energy Conference was held in Goa from 6-8 December 1996.
Among the foreign participants were Vice
-74>
Minister of Mines & Energy of Brazil Dr Jose Juiz Perez Garrido, Vice Minister for
Energy Policy and Development of Mexico Jorge Eduardo Navarrete, Minister of Energy
and Energy Industries of Trinidad & Tobago Finbar K Gangar, and Minister for Energy
& Mines of Venezuela Dr Erwin Arrieta Valera.
-75>
9.United Nations and international Organisations
Fundamental changes in international relations following the end of bloc-confrontation
have contributed to an increased focus on international organisations and particularly the
United Nations. The commemoration of the 50th anniversary of the establishment of the
United Nations also served to highlight the need to reform, restructure, strengthen and
revitalise the UN to enable it to respond fully to the needs and aspirations of the Member
States in the 21st century and beyond. India has been actively and constructively
participating in the process, influencing the debate on the proposed reforms, in
accordance with her world view and her perceptions of the role of the United Nations and
India's place within it. India's effort have been to ensure that the UN is rendered more
responsive to the concerns of the vast majority of its members-the developing countries.
India supports a strengthened and revitalised UN with various UN organs and
programmes working strictly within their mandates and in accordance with the UN
Charter. India actively participated in the Open Ended Working Groups of the UN on
Strengthening of the UN, Agenda for Development, Agenda for Peace, Financial
Reforms, and on Reforms and Expansion of the UN Security Council. India is the coChairman of the Working Group on the Strengthening of the UN.
India continued her active participation in the UN Peace Keeping Operations across the
globe. Constructive contributions were made by India in a series of major conferences
held during the year, namely,
-76>
the World Solar Summit, World Food Summit and HABITAT 11.
India's strong support to the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) and to its objectives and
principles was reflected in her active participation in the work of NAM.
India's close involvement with the Commonwealth continued, mainly by way of

Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting (CHOGM) held in 1995. India actively
participated in the Senior Officials Meeting (SOM) held in London in October 1996 and
other meetings of the Cormmonwealth. The Commonwealth Secretary General Chief
Emeka Anyaoku visited India from 16-20 March 1997.
The 51st session of the UN General Assembly was held in the backdrop of the adoption
of the Comprehensive Treaty to Ban Testing of Nuclear Weapons (CTBT), by the
resumed session of the 50th General Assembly, despite the absence of a consensus on the
treaty draft in the Conference on Disarmament. The elections to the nonpermanent seats
on the UN Security Council from three regions, Latin American Group, Western
European and Others Group, and the Asian Group, were held on 21 October 1996. India
and Japan were competitors for the single Asian seat. Despite strong efforts made to
project India's case and although there were indications that arguments favouring India's
candidacy were understood and appreciated by a number of developing countries and
many developed countries as well, in the secret ballot, Japan was elected to serve on the
Security Council as a non-permanent member for the term 1997-98.
The regular session of the 51st General Assembly concluded on 17 December 1996, with
the appointment of Kofi Annan of Ghana as the next Secretary General of the United
Nations. The appointment of Kofi Annan, an acclaimed international civil servant, who
was also the Under Secretary General of the UN in charge of Department of Peace
Keeping Operations, has been welcomed by India.
Political Issues
India continued to participate actively in the UN Peace Keeping Operations. Indian
contingent to the UN Angola Verification Mission-Phase III (UNAVEM-III) consists of
one infantry battalion group and one engineering company. In addition, military
observers and staff officers were also deputed to Angola. During the year, around I 100
-77>
Indian troops staff officers and military observers were stationed in Angola. India
provided military observers to the UN Iraq-Kuwait Observer Mission (UNIKOM) as well
as to the UN Observer Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL). There are at present 5 military
observers deputed to UNIKOM and 6 military observers to UNOMIL. Indian police
observers were also deputed to UN International Task Force (UNIPTF) in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Indian peace-keepers are also deployed in the UN Special Mission in Haiti
(UNSMIH).
India actively contributed to the debate and decisions of the Special Committee on Peace
Keeping Operations. A major outcome of this year's deliberations was the agreement to
increase the membership of the Committee to include all troop contributing countries.
This would significantly enhance the participation of developing countries and their
representation in the Special Committee on Peace Keeping Operations
The Open Ended Working Group (OEWG) of the UN General Assembly on the
"Question of Equitable Representation on and Increase in the Membership of the Security

Council" continued its deliberations in 1996. Its mandate has been extended upto the end
of the 51st session of the UN General Assembly. While a convergence of views emerged
on some issues important differences persist on many other crucial aspects. The OEWG
has been asked to submit agreed recommendations before the end of the 51st session of
the UN General Assembly i.e. mid-September 1997.
India has consistently called for expansion in both nonpermanent and permanent
members' categories and for objective criteria for the selection of new permanent
members. This was reiterated by the Minister of External Affairs in his address at the
Plenary Debate of the 51st session of the UN General Assembly. India is opposed to a
selective expansion of the UN Security Council and believes that any piece-meal or
temporary solution that does not provide for adequate representation of developing
countries in both permanent and non-permanent members category may lead to a
weakening of the UN itself.
India reiterated its call in support of an International Convention to Combat Terrorism.
The resolution on Terrorism adopted in the 51st session of the UN General Assembly
includes the consideration of the elaboration of such a Convention. it was also decided to
-78>
establish an Ad hoc Committee of the Sixth Committee which would elaborate a
Convention on Terrorist Bombings, to begin with, and thereafter a Convention on the
Acts of Nuclear Terrorism, and then to address means of further developing a
Comprehensive Legal Framework of Conventions dealing with International Terrorism.
A new Declaration to supplement the 1994 Declaration on Measures to Eliminate
International Terrorism was also adopted along with the resolution. The new Declaration
is aimed at governing the abuse of right to asylum of refugees turned terrorists.

Disarmament and International Security
In 1996, India continued to play a leading role in various multilateral disarmament forathe Conference on Disarmament (CD) at Geneva, the UN Disarmament Commission
(UNDC) and the First Committee of the United Nations General Assembly (UNGA). In
the Conference on Disarmament, India followed its consistent and principled stand on the
Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty (CTBT).
India had visualised the CTBT as part of a step by step process of global nuclear
disarmament, leading to the complete elimination of all nuclear weapons within a time
bound framework. India also believed that the objective of CTBT was not merely to end
test explosions but to end the qualitative development and refinement of nuclear weapons
whether through explosive or other means. Based on India's position on CTBT, concrete
Indian textual proposals on amendments were tabled on 26 January 1996. The Indian
proposals served to link the CTBT to the objective of elimination of nuclear weapons
within an agreed time frame. As the Indian proposals were not taken on board, India
made a definitive statement on 20 June 1996 that it could not subscribe to the CTBT in its

existing form as it was not conceived as a measure towards universal nuclear
disarmament and was not in India's national security interest. India's nuclear option is
part of vital national security and India will not accept any constraints on this option as
long as other countries remain unwilling to accept the obligation to eliminate their
nuclear weapons within a time bound framework. The article pertaining to "Entry Into
Force", conditional upon ratification of the treaty by 44 countries including India, was an
unprecedented step in international law and practice of multilateral treaty negotiation.
India made it clear that such a requirement, despite India's clearly stated
-79>
position, would oblige India to oppose the adoption of the CTBT text. Following the
assessment of the Chairman of the Ad hoc Committee that his draft was the best
attainable text, India opposed the adoption of the draft Treaty by the Ad hoc Committee
and its submission to the CD Plenary. Subsequently, India also opposed the transmission
of the Special Report by the CID to the 50th UNGA as there was no consensus on the
draft treaty text
In the resumed session of the 50th UNGA, Australia moved a resolution seeking adoption
of a draft treaty text identical to the non-consensus draft treaty being negotiated in
Geneva. In the voting on the Australian resolution on 10 September 1996, India, along
with Bhutan and Libya voted against the resolution, while Cuba, Tanzania, Lebanon,
Syria and Mauritius abstained. 158 countries voted in favour of the resolution. The vote
was preceded by a general debate where a large number of countries addressed the issue
of nuclear disarmament. Several NAM countries stressed the need for elimination of
nuclear weapons within a time bound framework. In a suo moto statement made in
Parliament on 11 September 1996, the Minister of External Affairs reiterated that India
would maintain its opposition to the treaty and not sign it in its present form. He also
stated that India would continue to take initiatives in the UN and other fora in keeping
with India's consistent and principled policy of achieving progress towards the goal of a
nuclear weapon free world which will enhance India's security as also global security.
On 3 September 1996, India deposited its instruments of ratification of the Chemical
Weapons Convention (CWC). India maintains that the CWC is a significant milestone in
multilateral disarmament negotiations in both its negotiating process and its nondiscriminatory character and provides a valid model for future disarmament agreements.
With the fulfilment of the requirement of 65 ratifications, the CWC will enter into force
on 29 April 1997 and India will now set up a National Authority and take steps towards
domestic legislation for implementation of the activities prescribed under CWC. Nonratification of the CWC by the US and Russia-the world's principal chemical weapon
arsenals- is a cause of concern. In India's view this may lead to CWC becoming a nonproliferation treaty rather than a disarmament treaty. In case of non-ratification of the
CWC by major countries and countries of the region, India reserves the right to review
the situation for an appropriate response.
-80>
India, as a State Party to the Biological Weapon Convention (BWC), participated actively

in the deliberations of the Ad hoc Group meetings of the State Parties. The Indian
delegation continued to support strengthening of the Convention and the unimpeded
transfer and exchange of bio-technology for peaceful purposes for creating a nondiscriminatory and transparent regime. India participated in the fourth Review
Conference of the BWC in November-December 1996. A strengthened BWC would
serve to ensure that this class of weapons of mass destruction is also effectively
eradicated.
As a State Party, India participated in the Review Conference of the Convention on
prohibition or restrictions on the use of certain conventional weapons which may be
deemed to be excessively injurious or to have indiscriminate effects. The Review
Conference adopted a revised Protocol 11 on Land Mines and Protocol IV on Blinding
Laser Weapons. India's efforts in the Review Conference were governed by the belief that
the true focus should remain the civilian whose life and livelihood must be protected
from the menace of land mines. Despite the strengthened Protocol, grave areas of concern
remained as transfers of land mines were not banned and the use and transfer of 'smart
mines' may have been encouraged. However, India supports the move towards complete
ban on anti-personnel land mines, which should be universal and non-discriminatory.
This needs to be carried out in a phased manner since many countries use mines as
weapons of defence along long borders.
In the First Committee of the United Nations, the Indian Resolution on "Convention on
Prohibition of Use of Nuclear Weapons" was adopted with 83 votes in favour, 27 against
with 24 abstentions. Another Indian Resolution on "The Role of Science and Technology
in the context of International Security and Disarmament" was adopted with 81 votes in
favour, 38 against with 24 abstentions. Based on the NAM Cartagena Summit, India
continued to co-sponsor the Resolution on "Nuclear Disarmament", which was adopted
with 87 votes in favour, 39 against with 20 abstentions. This Resolution, inter-alia, calls
on the Conference on Disarmament (CD) to establish on priority basis an Ad hoc
Committee on Nuclear Disarmament and for the eventual elimination of nuclear weapons
within a time bound framework. This Resolution also endorsed the paper of twenty eight
countries from the Group
-81>
of 21 (neutral & NAM Countries), including India, on the proposed programme of
elimination of nuclear weapons in three phases (1996-2010) submitted by them in CD in
August 1996.
India continued to submit its data to the UN Register of Conventional Weapons. In the
UN Disarmament Commission, it welcomed the adoption of the paper entitled
"Guidelines for International Arms Transfers in the context of GA Resolution 46/36 # of
6 December 1991". India had expressed concern at the continued transfer of small arms
and light weapons especially where illicit trade in such weapons leads to their diversion
to non-state entities. International cooperation in curbing illicit arms traffic and
condemning it will be an important factor in combating this phenomenon.

At various international fora, India continued its principled opposition to the various Ad
hoc export control regimes and called for their conversion into universal, transparent,
non- discriminatory treaties.
As designated member of the Board of Governors of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA), India actively participated in its meetings and all activities of the IAEA.
In activities relating to technical cooperation, India underlined the importance of
promotional activities as stated in the Status of the IAEA. India also trained nationals
from different countries, selected by IAEA, at several R&D facilities. India also
participated in various specialist meetings and conferences of the Agency.
As a member of the Board of Governors, India has been emphasising that the issue of
strengthening the effectiveness and improving the efficiency of the Safeguards System
needs to be carefully considered. India took part in Nuclear, Radiation and Radioactive
Waste Safety Activities of the Agency.
India participated actively in the meetings of UN Committee on Peaceful Uses of Outer
Space (COPUS) and its two sub-committees viz. Scientific and Technical Sub-committee
and the Legal Subcommittee.
Economic, Social and Humanitarian Issues
India continued to play an active role in the Economic and Social Council, the Second
Committee of the UN, the Governing
-82>
Boards of the specialised agencies and international meetings on economic, social and
environmental issues. India sought to ensure that development issues remained high on
the agenda of the United Nations. It also attempted to project the concerns and aspirations
of the developing countries highlighting the importance of attaching priority to the
eradication of poverty, and stressing the need for new and additional resources,
technology and promotion of an open, fair and equitable international economic
environment conducive to sustained economic growth in developing countries.
The challenge before India has been to arrive, along with others, at consolidated common
positions on behalf of the developing countries at a time when the traditional parameters
of the North- South relationship have been undergoing a significant transformation. Many
developing countries have undertaken structural economic reforms and market
liberalisation measures. Official Development Assistance remains stagnant and
developing countries are being advised to target the private sector as a source of capital.
The traditional norms of South-South 'cooperation in the face of infrastructure and
resource constraints are in the process of transformation.
India has been participating actively in the field of reforms of the UN in the economic
and social sectors. it has, however, stressed that reforms should not be undertaken as a
purely budget reduction exercise, but as a means to ensure that more resources are
available for the needs of the developing countries.

India participated constructively in the UN Conference on Trade and Development
(UNCTAD IX) held in Midrand, South Africa, in April-May 1996. UNCTAD has been
under pressure from developed countries as an institution. Developing countries,
including India, emphasised the need to strengthen the development agenda of the United
Nations, and UNCTAD's position as the sole organisation in the UN system, which can
comprehensively examine trade and development, in an integrated fashions. India played
a prominent role in ensuring that the reforms of the UNCTAD did not impair its ability to
assist the developing countries. A detailed programme of work for UNCTAD for 19962000 was adopted in trade in goods and services, investment, enterprise development,
technology and finance. it was also decided that UNCTAD X will be held in 2000 in
Thailand.
-83>
The Indian delegation to the World Food Summit held in Rome, from 13-17 November
1996, was led by Prime Minister Shri H D Deve Gowda. The Conference adopted the
Rome Declaration and Plan of Action. This included an international commitment to
reduce by half the number of those malnourished by 2010. As a developing country, with
a remarkable record of achieving food self- sufficiency, India was at the forefront of
efforts to promote South-South cooperation in this area.
India made a significant contribution to the success of HABITAT II held in Istanbul in
June 1996 which adopted an Istanbul Declaration and a Habitat Agenda to ensure
adequate shelter for all and for sustainable human settlements development. As the
spokesman of G-77 & China in the crucial Working Group on International Cooperation
India effectively articulated the concerns of the developing countries and secured
agreements on many key issues. As a result, HABITAT 11 not only designated UN
Commission on Human Settlements (UNCHS) as the focal point for the implementation
of the Habitat Agenda, it also called for its strengthening by the General Assembly.
India also participated in the First World Solar Summit held in Harare in September
1996. India's expertise in the development and utilisation of solar energy is one of the
best among developing countries. India has also initiated solar projects within the context
of G-15. The Summit finalised a decade long programme of activities to promote the
utilisation of solar energy.
An important resolution on action against bribery and corruption in international
commercial transactions was adopted first in the Economic and Social Council and
thereafter by the 51st session of the General Assembly. The resolution and the
accompanying declaration call for action against private companies and public servants
involved in corruption in international commercial transactions, while reiterating national
sovereignty and paramountcy of national judicial processes in actions against the erring
public servants. it also calls for action to ensure that bank secrecy provisions do not
impede or hinder criminal investigations or other legal proceedings.
India maintained its position in support of advancement and empowerment of women in

the Commission on Status of Women and in the General Assembly.
-84>
India played a significant role in the revitalisation of the Commission on Social
Development, in particular in ensuring that its meetings are held on a regular annual basis
and expansion of its membership is undertaken for adequate and effective follow-up of
the decisions reached at the World Summit on Social Development held in Copenhagen
in March 1995.
India supported the decision that a special session of the UNGA on the question of drugs
would be held in June 1998.
India participated actively in various conferences and discussions on environmental
issues aimed at the implementation of the agreements reached at United Nations
Conference on Enviornment and Development (UNCED) and Agenda 21. The specific
areas of activities are as follows:
(a) The fourth Session of the Commission of Sustainable Development (CSD), including
a High Level Segment, was held in New York during April/May 1996. The Session
reviewed in detail the follow up at national and global levels of Chapters 9 and 17 of
Agenda 21 relating to Atmosphere and Oceans. The Session itself being the last one
before the Summit Session in 1997 when the General Assembly would review the
achievements of UNCED, there was an underlying emphasis on the achievements and
future goals of CSD. In addition the cross sectoral issues of financial resources, trade and
environment, transfer of technology, capacity building, education, poverty alleviation and
population, etc. were taken up for detailed discussions. The participants at the High Level
segment stressed the importance of the Special Session in 1997 when UNGA would
review the overall progress of UNCED and discuss appropriate strategies for future
implementation. There was broad consensus that the Special Session should not attempt
to renegotiate Agenda 21, or other inter-governmental agreements in the field of
sustainable development.
(b) The Second Conference of Parties to the Framework Convention on Climate Change
(FCCC) was held in Geneva in July 1996. A Ministerial Declaration adopted during the
Conference strongly endorsed the findings of the Second Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) confirming that the continued rise in
green house gases has a direct impact
-85>
on the global climate system leading to global warming, and therefore required remedial
action in the form of legally binding objectives for limitation of emissions on the part of
developed countries. The Indian delegation supported efforts of Group of 77, aimed at
highlighting the commitments under the FCCC made by developed countries towards
transfer of technology an ' d financial resources to developing countries. The guidelines
for national communications of developing countries in line with their commitments
under the FCCC were finalised. The Global Environment Facility (GEF), the interim

financial mechanism, was provided guidelines in accordance with provisions of the
FCCC.
(c) The 9th Session of the Inter-Governmental Negotiating Committee on Desertification
(INCD) was held in New York in September 1996. The Indian delegation made efforts to
ensure that, while countries in Africa received due priority, the problem of desertification
in Asia was also adequately addressed. The question of provision of resources through
international development cooperation, technology transfer to meet the challenge of land
degradation and cooperation among the developing countries to share their expertise were
among the issues stressed. Besides participating in the international conferences on
desertification held at Rome in June 1996, and at Beijing in August 1996, India hosted a
Regional Conference on the implementation of the Convention to Combat Desertification
in Asia at New Delhi in August 1996. During the year, India ratified the Desertification
Convention.
(d) The Third Conference of Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity was held
in Buenos Aires in November 1996. A Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) between
the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) and the Global Environment Facility
(GEF) was finalised to enable the GEF to continue to function as an interim mechanism.
India, along with G-77 and China, stressed the need for providing financial resources in a
timely and predictable manner and facilitating transfer of technology. Indian delegation
called for the principle of sovereign rights over biological resources to be reflected in the
revised International Undertaking on Plant Genetic Resources and for the concept of
farmers' rights to be included in benefit
-86>
sharing. Access to genetic resources, intellectual property rights, bio-safety and in-situ
conservation of bio-diversity were some of the important issues discussed during the
meeting.
Human Rights
India continued her active and constructive participation in the debates on human rights
issues in the UN Commission on Human Rights, the Economic and Social Council, the
specialised sub Commissions and the General Assembly. The basic position of India has
been a constructive engagement in favour of a balanced, holistic, non-selective, impartial
and cooperative approach to human rights issues in keeping with the spirit of the Vienna
Declaration and bearing in mind the principle of "universality, indivisibility and
interrelatedness" of all human rights. India has also emphasised the need for
depoliticisation of human rights issues and a preference for thematic rather than countryspecific approaches. India highlighted the development aspect of human rights, as well as
the fact that the "development" aspect of the triad, "democracy, development and human
rights" was the weakest link. It was India's endeavour to place the Right to Development
in the context of the Working Group of the Third Committee on the adaptation of the
human rights machinery and in the context of restructuring of the office of the UN High
Commissioner for Human Rights/Center for Human Rights.

The 52nd session of the Commission on Human Rights was held in Geneva from 18
March-26 April 1996. India participated actively in the deliberations of the Commission.
Along with likeminded countries, India also urged the Commission to consider
appropriate steps to end politicisation and confrontation in human rights fora. India
highlighted the importance of pluralism and tolerance as essential adjuncts to democracy
for the promotion of human rights, and initiated a thematic resolution on the subject,
which was finally co-sponsored by 31 countries and adopted by consensus. India
effectively thwarted attempts by Pakistan to politicise and internationalise the Jammu and
Kashmir issue in the Commission on Human Rights.
The 48th session of the Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection
of Minorities met in Geneva from 5- 30 August 1996. India is represented on the SubCommission.
-87>
As a signatory to more than sixteen human rights conventions, India attaches the highest
importance to fulfilling its reporting obligations. During the year, India submitted its
tenth to fourteenth reports to the Committee on Elimination of Racial Discrimination.
India's third periodic report under the International Convention on Civil and Political
Rights was also finalised and submitted to the Human Rights Committee.
A number of eminent Indians continued to serve with distinction as members of
important human rights bodies. These included Member and Vice Chairman of the
Human Rights Committee, former Chief justice of India Shri P N Bhagwati; Member and
Vice Chairman of the Committee on Elimination of Racial Discrimination and Protection
of Minorities Smt Shanti Sadiq Ali; Special Rapporteur on the Freedom of Opinion and
Expression Shri Abid Hussain and Member of the Working Group on Arbitrary
Detentions Shri Kapil Sibal.
In pursuance of its policy of transparency in the promotion and protection of human
rights, India hosted the visit of UN Special Rapporteur on Religious Intolerance
Abdelfattah Amor from 1-15 December 1996. in addition to having high-level dialogue
in New Delhi, the Special Rapporteur and his team visited Jammu & Kashmir, Punjab,
Uttar Pradesh and Maharashtra, as part of their Mission. This is the second visit of a high
ranking UN Human Rights functionary to India, after the visit of UN High Commissioner
for Human Rights Jose Ayala Lasso to India during 1995.
Administrative Financial and Budgetary Issues
The United Nations is faced with a financial crisis of unparalleled magnitude. The arrears
of Member States are estimated at over Rs 11,550 crores. It is essentially a cash flow
problem on account of non-payment of arrears by Member States. An Open Ended High
Level Working Group was constituted in 1994 to deal with the Financial Situation of the
United Nations. The Group submitted a report in June this year, essentially
recommending that its mandate be extended by one more year. It was unable to make any
significant progress on any of the issues relating to the current financial crisis.
Discussions on draft texts for addressing the question of payment of arrears and measures

to ensure that future payments are made in full and on time, did not lead to results clue to
various objections,
-88>
essentially by those Member States who were in arrears. On the questions of changes in
the methodology for the calculation of assessed contributions, the positions of developing
and developed countries remained far apart.
In this scenario the focus of tile Fifth Committee was on continued reform and budgetary
management within the limit of resources provided for in 1996-97. It is likely that some
efforts would be made by a select group of countries to control budgetary expenditure
through a prioritisation of the UN's activities, generally away from those of concern to
due developing countries, through demands for greater efficiency in the use of available
resources.
The General Assembly adopted the Medium' Term Plan for 1998-2001, the Budget
Outline for 1998-99 and the Revised Estimates for 1996-97. For the first time, at the
initiative of India, "combating of international terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations" was included as a priority in the Medium Term Plan. The concept of
"promotion of sustained economic growth and sustainable development" which some
developed countries have resisted was also accepted as a priority.
India continued its efforts to seek reimbursements for its participation in UN Peace
keeping Operations and for equal death and disability benefits for the peace-keepers in
UN service, irrespective of their nationality.
Elections and Appointments
During the year, India was elected or nominated by acclamation/ consensus to the
following bodies:
1. Commission on Sustainable Development for the period 1997-99.
2. Commission on Social Development for the period 1997-2000.
3. UN Statistical Commission for the period 1997-2000.
4. The Commission on Elimination of Racial Discrimination for a term of four years (Smt
Shanti Sadiq Ali).
5. The International Narcotics Control Board for a term of three years (Shri C
Chakrabarty).
-89>
6. The International Centre for Public Enterprises for a term of four years (Shri C K
Modi).

7. Committee on New and Renewable Sources of Energy for a term of four years (Dr E V
R Shastri).
8. The International Tribunal on the Law of the Sea for a term of three years (Dr P C
Rao).
9. The Executive Committee of the International Criminal Police Organisation (ICPO)Interpol for a term of three years (Shri J Singh).
10. The International Law Commission for a term of five years (Dr T S Rao).
Special Agencies
India continued to participate actively in all the activities of ESCAP which is the regional
arm of the United Nations for the Asia and Pacific. India hosted the UN-ESCAP
Ministerial Conference on Infrastructure in New Delhi from 23-29 October 1996. India
participated in the Symposium hosted by China in Shanghai in March 1997 to
commemorate the 50th Anniversay of the founding of ESCAP.
The unprecedented financial crisis of the UN Environment Programme (UNEP) on
account of the failure of some states to honour the commitments made during the 18th
Governing Council meeting eroded the ability of the Programmc to fulfil its mandate.
India's efforts were aimed at retaining the priorities established by the Governing Council
in this financial climate, to ensure that UNEP continued to play its catalytic role in the
environmental field. Executive Director of UNEP Elizabeth Dowdswell, whose term was
to expire on 31 December 1996, was given a year's extension by the General Assembly at
the recommendation of the Secretary General of the UN.
United Nations Industrial Development Organisation (UNIDO) was also plagued with
financial crisis, following the withdrawal of the United States from the organisation,
announced during the General Conference in December 1995. This meant a budgetary
reduction of 25 per cent and the emergence of Japan as the largest donor to UNIDO.
United Kingdom has also given notice of withdrawal from UNIDO and Germany has
frozen its decision to
-90>
withdraw. These developments have Created institutional pressure on UNIDO.
Non-Aligned Movement
NAM commemorated its 35th anniversary during the year. The Commemorative
Resolution adopted at the NAM Ministerial meeting in New York on 23 September 1996
highlighted the need for solidarity in thought and action amongst the NAM countries.
India also participated in the meeting of the NAM Methodology Committee in Colombia
in May 1996. India also actively contributed to the meeting of Experts in Science and
Technology of Non-Aligned countries held in Colombia on 16-18 March 1997.
The Ministerial Meeting of NAM held in New York on 25 September 1996 unanimously

welcomed India's offer to host the next Conference of the Foreign Ministers of NAM in
New Delhi from 4-8 April 1997.
India's commitment to the principles and objectives of NAM, implying freedom of choice
and autonomy and indepence of action, remains strongest. The Movement was a response
to the inequalities and severe imbalances in the distribution of economic and political
power in the world, which persist in new forms. The Non-Aligned Movement gives a
sharper profile to thematic concerns of developing countries in keeping with the evolving
times. Revitalisation of the role of NAM is an issue which has engaged the attention of
the Movement in recent times. NAM has been particularly conscious of the need to
promote and safeguard the interests of the developing countries in the present rapidly
changing international economic environment and to articulate its perspectives on a
variety of issues. It is responsive to the increasing importance of economic issues in the
World agenda. Global nuclear disarmament to attain a nuclear weapon free world through
a universal Nuclear Weapons Convention is a priority objective. NAM is playing a
constructive role in promoting both South-South cooperation and interaction with the
North. These issues are expected to be a focus of attention at the meeting of the Foreign
Ministers of NAM Member States in New Delhi.
Commonwealth
India continued to play an important role in the Commonwealth and participated in the
Commonwealth Senior Officials Meeting
-91>
(SOM) held in London on 29 & 30 October 1996. A number of new ideas for the
Edinburgh CHOGM (October 1997) were discussed. it was decided that the theme of the
Edinburgh CHOGM would be "Trade, Investment and Development: the Road to
Commonwealth Prosperity".
India participated in the Inter-govenmental Group on Refugees and Displaced Persons,
set up at CHOGM '95, which met in October 1996 and February 1997 and in the Intergovenmental Group on Criteria for Commonwealth Membership, which met in
September ,1996 and February 1997.
India will continue to foster its ties with the Commonwealth where its position as the
largest country gives it a special place. India will continue to advance the interests of
developing countries in the Commonwealth, stressing the importance of technical
cooperation and developmental activities and promotion of South-South cooperation.
International Law: Developments and Activities
The 48th Session of the international Law Commission (ILC) was held at Geneva from 6
May-26 July 1996. The Commission adopted a set of 20 articles on the draft code of
crimes against peace and security of mankind and commentaries on those articles and
recommended that the General Assembly select the most appropriate form that the draft
code could take which would ensure its widest possible acceptance. On State
responsibility the Commission completed on first reading a set of sixty draft articles (with

annexes) and decided to transmit the draft articles to Governments for their comments.
The topic of international liability for injurious consequences arising out of acts not
prohibited by international law was considered in a Working Group of the Commission.
The report of the Working Group consisting of 22 draft articles and commentaries were
transmitted to the General Assembly for comments. Regarding the topic of State
succession and its impact on the nationality of natural and legal persons, the Commission
set out its recommendations to the General Assembly regarding its plan and approach to
be followed on the topic.
The United Nations Commission on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL) held its 29th
session from 28 May-14 June 1996 at New York. The adoption of a set of rules in the
form of "Model Law on
-92>
Legal Aspects of Electronic Data Interchange" in international trade practices was the
main outcome of this session. The proposed Model Law is designed to assist States in
modernising legislation to accommodate the increasing use of Electronic Data
Interchange in commercial transactions. Existing laws tend to govern only "paper-based"
commerce which relies on signatures and original hard copies of documents. The new
Model Law is expected to mainly remedy such situations. The Commission also
approved the substance of draft notes on organising arbitral proceedings and decided that
the text adopted by the Commission be entitled "UNCITRAL Notes on Organising
Arbitral Proceedings" with a view to making arbitral proceedings more practicable and
efficient. The Commission also considered the report of the Working Group on
International Contract Practices and approved its request to the Secretariat to prepare a
revised version of draft uniform rules on receivable financing. The report of the Working
Group on Insolvency Law, working on draft provisions on judicial cooperation, also
considered such areas as access and recognition.
The 51st session of the United Nations General Assembly at its Sixth Committee (Legal)
considered the following agenda items: Measures to Eliminate International Terrorism;
Establishment of an International Criminal Court; Framework Convention on
international Water-courses; Report of the Charter Committee; Report of the International
Law Commission; Report of the UNCITRAL; United Nations Decade of International
Law; New International Economic Order; Status of Additional Protocols of 1977;
Protection and Security of Diplomatic and Consular Missions; Host Country Relations
and Internal System of justice in the United Nations Secretariat. On the agenda item
entitled "Measures to Eliminate International Terrorism", a draft Convention on the
Prevention and Suppression of International Terrorism prepared by the Legal & Treaties
Division (L&T Division) was circulated as an official document of the General
Assembly.
On the recommendation of the Sixth Committee the General Assembly at this session
actopted the following important resolutions:
(a) The resolution on Terrorism indicated the possibility of considering in future the

elaboration of a comprehensive convention on International Terrorism. It decided to
establish an Ad hoc Committee of the Sixth Committee which would elaborate a
Convention on Suppression of Terrorist Bombings,
-93>
thereafter a Convention on the Acts of Nuclear Terrorism, and then to address means of
further developing a Comprehensive Legal Framework of Conventions dealing with
International Terrorism. Annexed to the resolution on Terrorism is a new Declaration to
supplement the 1994 Declaration on Measures to Eliminate International Terrorism.
(b) The resolution on International Criminal Court (ICC) renews the mandate of the
PREPCOM to meet four times between February 1997 and April 1998, before the
Diplomatic Conference to be convened in mid-1998.
(c) A resolution renewing the mandate of the Working Group of the Whole to elaborate a
Framework Convention on the Law of the Non- navigational Uses of International Watercourses, which met from 7-25 October 1996, to meet again in 1997 to consider the. ILC
draft articles and other issues.
(d) Resolutions on the Charter Committee decided that at its next session the Committee
should consider on priority basis the question of the implementation of the provisions of
the Charter relating to Assistance to third States affected by the application of sanctions
under Chapter VII of the Charter. On the specific subject of the assistance to third States
affected by sanctions, the resolution invited the Security Council to consider the
establishment of further mechanisms or procedures as appropriate towards a solution to
this problem.
(e) The resolution on the International Law Commission authorised the ILC to undertake
a substantive study of the topic on Nationality in Succession of States and recommended
two new topics relating to diplomatic protection and unilateral acts of States; requested
comments of governments on the topic of international liability, and drew the attention of
States participating in ICC PREPCOM to the relevance of the Draft Code of Crimes
Against Peace and Security of Mankind; decided to hold during the 52nd session of the
Sixth Committee a colloquium on progressive development and codification of
international law to commemorate the 50th anniversary of the establishment of ILC.
(f) The resolution on UNCITRAL approved the recommendations made by the
UNCITRAL in its 29th session and recommended
-94>
separately to States the UNCITRAL Model Law on Electronic Commerce.
(g), The resolution on the United Nations Decade of International Law outlined the
programme of activities for the final term of the Decade 1997-99 and considered it
desirable to draft a programme of action on the centennial of the first Peace Conference
initiated by Russia and the Netherlands, and adopted a specific resolution on Electronic

Treaty Data Base.
The 35th Session of the Legal Sub-Committee of the UN Committee on Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space (COPUOS), held at Vienna from 18 March-4 April 1996, considered the
following agenda items:(a) Question of review and possible revision of the principles relevant to the use of
nuclear power sources (NPS) in outer space;
(b) Definition and delimitation of outer space;
(c) Character and utilisation of geostationary orbit (GSO); and
(d) Legal aspects related to outer space benefits, particularly taking into account the
needs of the developing countries.
On the question of outer space benefits, the Legal Sub-Committee made substantial
progress on a declaration on international cooperation in exploration and use of outer
space for the benefit of and in the interests of all states taking into account in particular
the needs of developing countries. The Sub-Committee also considered the question of
new agenda items that could be taken up for consideration. These were:
(a) commercial aspects of space activities (e.g. property rights, insurance and liability);
(b) review of existing norms of international law relating to space debris;
(c) legal aspects of space debris;
(d) comparative review of the principles of international space law and international
environmental law.
The Legal and Treaties Division has prepared the Draft Periodic Report under Article 19
of the Convention on the Elimination of All
-95>
Forms of Racial Discrimination and participated in the presentation of the Report to the
Committee on Racial Discrimination.
The Division participated in the Meeting of Experts on the Committee for the National
Implementation of International Humanitarian Law held in Geneva in October 1996. The
meeting recommended setting up of a mechanism, whether formal or informal, depending
on national situations, comprising of high level officials of the relevant Ministries, as
useful for implementing international humanitarian law.
The 35th Annual Session of the Asian African Legal Consultative Committee was held in
Manila from 4-9 March 1996. Apart from a two day Special Meeting on the

establishment of an International Criminal Court, other subjects considered included the
Report of the international Law Commission, Law of the Sea, United Nations Conference
on Environment and Development Follow Up, UN Decade of International Law, Law
Relating to Status and Treatment of Refugees, Deportation of Palestinians in Violation of
International Law, Trade Law Matters and Mutual Cooperation in judicial Assistance.
The Division also participated in the bilateral negotiations on protection and promotion of
investments with Austria, BelgoLuxemberg Union, Czech and Slovak Republics,
Uzbekistan, Spain, Oman, China and Egypt.
On extradition matters consultations and exchange of drafts took place with Oman,
Bulgaria, Romania, Greece, Switzerland, Ukraine, France, Bhutan and Belgium.
Further negotiations for conclusion of treaties on Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal
Matters were held with France; consultations and exchange of drafts took place with
UAE, Greece, Kazakhstan, Russian Federation and Malaysia. Negotiations for conclusion
of agreements on transfer of prisoners were held with the UK, Canada and France, while
consultations and exchange of drafts took place with South Africa.
The Division participated in bilateral negotiations for the conclusion of Air Services and
Mutual judicial Assistance Agreements. The Division forwarded a number of bilateral,
agreements for registration with the UN. The Division prepared and processed for
-96>
signature of the President, Instruments of Full Powers, Ratifications and Accessions for
several multilateral and bilateral treaties/ agreements involving India.
India became a party to several Multilateral Conventions including: the Chemical
Weapons Convention; the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification in those
Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or Desertification, particularly in Africa;
Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, 1959; ILO Convention No.
147 concerning Minimum Standards in Merchant Ships; and the international Tropical
Timber Agreement. India also ratified the Amendments to Articles 6 and 22 of the
International Telecommunications Satellite Organisation (INTELSAT) Operating
Agreement.
India has signed many bilateral agreements in various fields during the year. A list of
treaties/agreements entered into by India during the year is at Appendix V. A list of
Instruments of Full Powers issued during 1996 for signing Agreements on behalf of India
is at Appendix VI and a list of Instruments of Ratification is at Appendix VII.
-97>
10. Foreign Economic Relations
The Economic Division (ED) and the Multilateral Economic elations Division (MER)
followed developments relating to regional, sub-regional and trans-regional economic
groupings and preferential and free trade areas.

India's regional and Multilateral diplomacy has registered a number of successes in the
field of economic cooperation in recent times. The fifth Association of South-East Asian
Nations (ASEAN) Summit in December 1995 upgraded India to the status of a full
Dialogue Partner of ASEAN "reflecting the growing ties between the two sides that have
developed in recent years". This was a major positive development in India's evolving
relationship with ASEAN. It is a vindication of India's 'look-East' policy and a tribute to
the intense and high level diplomatic effort Mounted by it, as well as a manifestation of
the success of the Sectoral Dialogue Partnership. India has since successfully participated
at the ASEAN-Post Ministerial Conference (PMC) in Jakarta in July 1996 as a full
Dialogue Partner for the first time. The long term vision, overall strategy and future
agenda of cooperation with ASEAN were chalked out. The first ASEAN-India Joint
Cooperation Committee (JCC) has since been held in November 1996 in New Delhi,
signalling the operationalisation of the main mechanism for Dialogue Partnership and
economic cooperation in the agreed areas of trade, investment, science and technology,
tourism, infrastructure, human resource development and people-to-people interaction.
The first India-ASEAN Lecture was delivered by the Prime Minister of Malaysia in
December 1996 marking the beginning of the India-ASEAN Lecture Series.
-98>
G-15, a Summit level group of 15 developing countries for South- South Consultation
and Cooperation, organised its Sixth Summit in Harare during November 1996. Prime
Minister Shri H D Deve Gowda led the Indian delegation to the Sixth Summit. The G-15
Summit affirmed the viability of the Group as a forum for South-South Cooperation and
North-South Dialogue. Indian techno-economic projects in G-15 are in an advanced stage
of implementation. These encompass South-South Cooperation in Solar Energy
Applications, Gene Banks of Medicinal and Aromatic Plants, Computer Training
Programmes, Small Scale Industries Cooperation and an Entrepreneur and Technical
Development Centre for vocational training. On North-South issues, India played an
active role at the Summit by drawing attention to concerns and prospects of developing
countries in the evolving international trading system with special reference to WTO
issues. The Summit helped achieve a broad convergence of views on a number of key
areas. The Summit also provided a sharper focus to India's political and economic
relations with Africa. A special initiative of a revolving fund for Africa of Rs. 100 crores
was announced. India will also be establishing an Informatics Training Centre for Africa
in Zimbabwe. Memoranda of Understanding have been concluded with Zimbabwe and
Senegal for small scale industries cooperation.
The Indian Ocean Rim Association for Regional Cooperation (IOR- ARC) was launched
formally in Mauritius on 6 March 1997 at a ministerial level meeting, in which Minister
of External Affairs Shri I K Gujral participated. The IOR-ARC consists of 14-members,
viz., Australia, India, Indonesia, Kenya, Madagascar, Malaysia, Mauritius, Mozambique,
Oman, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Singapore, Tanzania and Yemen. India was one of the
most active participants in the two years it took to develop and realise IOR-ARC and
coordinated the preparation of the Association's Charter. IOR-ARC is tripartite in nature
involving officials, academics and the business community. The focus of IOR-ARC is on

the large canvas of economic cooperation with special emphasis on trade and investment
liberalisation, promotion and facilitation; collaboration in human resources development;
science and technology and tourism. Cooperation within IOR-ARC is given effect
through projects within the Work Programme of IOR-ARC. India is coordinator for the
creation of the Indian Ocean Rim Business Centre and IOR-NET electronic data network,
the first IOR-ARC Trade Fair in India in
-99>
1999, undertaking of studies on investment facilitation and promotion and trade-creating
joint ventures and the establishment of an IOR Chair in Indian Ocean Studies and
Associate Fellowship Programme. The successful establishment and institutionalisation
of IOR-ARC is a development of historic significance and a matter of particular
satisfaction for India as the creation of a community of Afro-Asian nations amongst the
littoral States of the Indian Ocean Rim including Australia, was a cherished Nehruvian
ideal. It is appropriate that this vision could be realised during the 50th anniversary of
Indian Independence.
Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) had decided in 1993 to impose a
moratorium of three years on admission of new members. India had formally conveyed to
members of APEC its interest in associating with APEC and participating in its activities.
This has been taken up on a sustained basis with APEC member economies both directly
as well as through Indian Missions in these countries. The subject of India's membership
has also been raised with individual APEC member economies during high level bilateral
interactions. This was taken up at the Foreign Ministers level during the ASEAN-Post
Ministerial Conference in Jakarta in July 1996. It has also been discussed bilaterally
during other ministerial meetings. The APEC Economic Leaders Meeting in Philippines
during November 1996 did not admit any new member, but decided to evolve criteria for
admission of new members to be finalised at the next APEC Summit Scheduled at
Vancouver in 1997. India will continue to reiterate its interest in membership of APEC
on the basis of its geographical location, degree of trade and investment interaction and
potential, size of the economy, and ability to contribute to larger Asia-Pacific economic
cooperation. In addition, a sustained diplomatic campaign conveying India's interest in
participation in three APEC Working Groups on Regional Energy Cooperation, Industrial
Science & Technology, and Trade Promotion has been maintained. India participated in
the Working Group on Regional Energy Cooperation in October 1996.
The first Asia-Europe Meeting (ASEM) in Thailand in 1996 took steps towards
institutionalisation by agreeing to have biennial Summits, the next one being in London
in 1998. India had taken up the issue of its participation with EU and Asian members of
ASEM through Indian Missions as well as in bilateral meetings. India feels
-100>
that being a "dynamic regional economy", no ASEM would be complete without India's
participation.
India's economic interaction with the developed countries through the 29-member

Organisation of Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) made good progress.
The OECD's Policy Dialogue relationship with India continued through India's
participation in policy dialogue workshops on investment, trace, transfer pricing and
steel. OECD will hold a special symposium with India in order to further enhance and
strengthen the dialogue relationship.
India continued to play an important role in the Group of 77 (G- 77), a grouping of
developing countries active in the field of South-South Cooperation. The G-77 Foreign
Ministers met in New York in September 1996. The Minister of External Affairs attended
the meeting which focussed both on issues of South-South Cooperation and North-South
Dialogue of interest to developing countries. A South-South Conference on Trade,
Finance and investment was held in San Jose, Costa Rica from 13-15 January 1997. The
three-day Conference adopted the San Jose Declaration' and accepted in principle the San
Jose Plan of Action'. These are aimed at accelerating and updating the Caracas Plan of
Action (CPA) of 1981 on South-South Cooperation in the light of changes in the
international economic environment due to globalisation and liberalisation. The
Conference reiterated the commitment of the developing countries to South-South
Cooperation and suggested specific measures in this direction. The San Jose Declaration
and San Jose Plan of Action constitute important reference points for South-South
Cooperation through Economic and Technical Cooperation among Developing Countries
(ECDC/TCDC).
In terms of India's economic diplomacy, 1996-97 was a watershed. Between 1991 and
1995, economic reforms were underway in India and their projection in the international
community was a major task. This was accomplished successfully and India effectively
conveyed the distance travelled in trade and investment policy liberalisation and their
irreversibility. This was substantiated by robust increases in trade and investment flows.
During 1996, the expectations of the international community were much more focussed
on results achieved and the success rate of trade and investment transactions attempted.
Thus, whilst continuing with promotion work in this area, economic diplomacy was
increasingly
-101>
geared with ground level and transactional problems and facilitation, particularly with a
view to meeting export and investment targets-bilaterally, regionally and globally.
Specific political initiatives served to reinforce economic objectives towards India's
neighbourhood, ASEAN and East Asia region, Central Asia and Commonwealth of
independent States (CIS) countries, Europe, Africa, Latin America and North America. In
turn, growing economic engagements in these countries and regions were sought to be
used to develop a fund of political goodwill.
The Economic Division continued to provide a standard backstopping arrangement and a
nodal point for addressing the concerns of Indian exporters and industry by constantly
providing and seeking timely inputs to and from indian Missions. The information
dissernination role assumed crucial significance particularly in terms of responding to
enquiries from Indian Missions and providing them the informational wherewithal to

carry out their economic and commercial functions effectively. Ranging from simple
trade enquiries from Indian exporters and Indian Missions to details about policy,
legislation and procedures on various aspects of trade and investment, the Economic
Division provided a regular and quick response service. It actively engaged in enhanced
interactions with the Indian business community, apex chambers of commerce and
industry, various ministries and trade promotion agencies as well as the local foreign
Missions in order to evolve a holistic approach and ongoing examination of export
promotion efforts and further improvements in Country's trade promotion strategies. The
Missions were continuously urged to improve upon their response time in addressing the
concerns and interests of the Indian business and exporting community. They were
advised from time to time to evolve the requisite data bases and develop promotional
strategies and undertake large scale information dissemination campaigns on India's
liberalised economic policies and concomitant opportunities to reach out to the largest
cross- section of the local businesses. While exhorting the Missions to accord the highest
priority to economic and commercial work, greater emphasis was placed on building
India's image and creating an Indian Brand Equity SO that a major export thrust could be
sustained. With the India Brand Equity Fund and the Quality Council of India coming
into existence, project identification has begun.
-102>
The Economic Division rendered valuable assistance in trade promotion efforts of
Government bodies and industry as well as associations in promoting the participation of
foreign business in Indian Trade Fairs and Indian business in foreign Trade Fairs,
Seminars, road shows, buyer-seller meets etc. Ministry was actively associated with the
"Made in India' shows in Mauritius, South Africa and Nairobi and FIEO's India EXPO in
Morocco, which were specifically aimed at promotion of Indian brand image abroad.
Similarly the Economic Division facilitated through direct contacts with foreign Missions
in India and Indian Missions abroad and in collaboration with apex chambers, business to
business exchanges to and from India. The Division also played a supportive role in
meeting the special and additional facilitation needs of the Small Scale Industry (SSI)
sector particularly. The Economic Division has also stimulated private sector initiative
for SSI cooperation with countries in Africa and South East Asia.
The Economic Division has been contributing to crisis management as well as crisis
prevention on a number of trade related problems and issues affecting exports and
imports. Thus for example the problems on account of perceptions about some of the
export sectors using child labour, export of infected Indian wheat, pharmaceuticals, antidumping measures on Indian Basmati Rice and other textile products etc. were sought to
be countered through speedy despatch of information and advice on approaches to be
followed by Indian Missions and briefing concerned foreign delegations and
Ambassadors in India. Target country and issue specific publicity brochures for use by
select Indian Missions are being regularly Updated and brought out. Similarly, on issues
such as the problem of azo-dyes in India's textiles exports, policy regarding handling,
export and import of hazardous waste, attempts to use environmental and phyto-sanitary
and other regulations to restrict India's exports, the issue of dual use technology, relevant
inputs are obtained, analysed and provided to the concerned. Similarly emerging patterns

with regard to restrictive and protectionist policies of some target countries and trade
blocs are monitored and strategies devised to best cope with non-tariff barriers of various
kind.
As part of the 50th Anniversary Celebrations of the Indian independence, the Economic
Division in consultation with Indian Missions, identified a large number of projects
including seminars,
-103>
exhibitions, product specific roving expos, bringing out of publicity brochures etc. in
order to project India's economic and industrial achievements and potential.
The Economic Division was actively associated in providing inputs and international
perspectives as well as politico-economic assessments in deliberations of various joint
Business Councils/Joint Commission Meetings. It was also actively involved in finalising
the establishment of Indo-Israel Business Alliance.
The activities of the Technical Cooperation (TC) Division include administration of: (a)
India Technical & Economic Cooperation (ITEC) Programme, (b) Special
Commonwealth African Assistance Plan (SCAAP), (c) Small Scale industries
Cooperation Programme under G-15, (d) Technical Cooperation amongst Developing
Countries (TCDC), (e) disaster relief Supplies, and (f) the Special Volunteer Programme
(SVP).
The ITEC Programme handles cooperation with developing countries, other than with
India's immediate neighbours with whom there are individual bilateral Technical
Assistance Programmer. The ITEC Programme is administered on a Government to
Government and bilateral basis and covers around 100 countries. These include countries
in Africa, South-East Asia, Central Asia, West Asia, Latin America as well as in Eastern
Europe including Russia. The ITEC Programme has five major components training
(both Civilian and military); preparation of feasibility studies and provision of
consultancy services; implementation of projects; deputation of experts abroad and study
tours to India. Basic data pertaining to ITEC is at Appendices VIII to XV.
The SCAAP covers only the provision of technical training in India exclusively for
Commonwealth African countries (numbering 17). Both the SCAAP and ITEC
Programmes have identical norms.
During 1996-97, 1305 slots were allocated for training of foreign nominees in civilian
institutions spread over 68 regular courses under ITEC and SCAAP. Out of them 603
slots were utilised in areas such as audit and accounts banking, diplomacy, manpower
planning, parliamentary studies, poultry, rural development, small scale industries,
standardisation etc. There has been increasing demand for high-tech courses in fields
such as computers, software, maintenance of biomedical equipment, flow process
technology etc.
-104>

Major beneficiaries of ITEC/SCAAP Programmes have been African countries. Now
East European and Central Asian countries have also started participating in increasing
numbers.
The TC Division also acts as the nodal point for organising training for nominees of
friendly countries in defence institutions in India. These slots are offered either under
ITEC programme reciprocal or ora self-financing basis. On an average 250 slots are
offered under ITEC programme and 100 under the Self-Financing Scheme. Courses range
from prestigious ones at the National Defence College, Defence Services Staff College
and the Indian Military Academy to short term technical ones in the Army, Navy and Air
Force Training Centres.
Under the ITEC Programme, India collaborates with partner countries for undertaking
industrial projects. Such projects are focussed to share India's developmental experience
and expertise acquired in the past five decades in critical areas like agriculture, small
scale industries, dairy farming, vocational training, solar energy, information technology
etc. Among major projects executed during the year were the computerisation of
Senegalese Prime Minister's office and setting up of solar photovoltaic plants in Syria and
Oman. India also organised artificial limb fitment camp in Uzbekistan and supplied
containerised hot water boilers to Kazakhstan, ten thousand bicycles and agricultural
machinery to Surinam and mud block and tile manufacturing equipment to Egypt.
Projects under execution include solar photovoltaic plants in Mali and Costa Rica.
The execution of feasibility studies and offer of consultancy set-vices to partner countries
fall within the ambit of ITEC Programme. Such activities help identify areas for
expanding economic and commercial relations between India and the partner countries.
During the year, a pre-feasibility study in Sierra Leone for reconstruction of the railways
was undertaken. At Mali's request, a feasibility study for setting up of a poultry vaccine
laboratory in Mali has been completed and the necessary follow up action for setting up
of the project is under consideration. Feasibility studies for computerising the
Organisation of African Unity (OAU) Secretariat in Ethiopia and for cooperation in the
field of agriculture with five West African countries viz. Ghana, Ivory Coast, Senegal,
Togo and Central African Republic were also completed. Feasibility studies for
rehabilitation of major roads and for setting up Bal Bhavan in Mauritius are under
preparation.
-105>
At the specific request of partner countries, Indian experts are sent on deputation abroad
under ITEC Programme to assist in a broad range of technical and developmental sectors.
At present, 25 Indian experts from various disciplines such as agriculture, planning,
engineering, medical teaching, management, small scale industries, geology,
telecommunication etc. are working in Cambodia, Ghana, Guyana, the Kryghz Republic,
Laos, Mauritius, Seychelles and Uzbekistan.
During 1996-97, India continued extending help to the countries afflicted with natural

calamities like floods, droughts hurricane etc. Relief supplies were sent to Cuba, Niger,
Laos, Sudan, Seychelles, Bangladesh, Burkina Faso, Comoros, Guinea, Costa Rica,
Djibouti, Iraq, Uzbekistan etc.
Under the auspices of G-15 and the South-South Cooperation framework, India has
offered at the level of the Prime Minister and at the request of African Heads of
State/Government to develop small scale industries in identified developing countries. In
this context Memoranda of Understanding were signed with Senegal and Zimbabwe
during the G-15 Summit in November 1996. Each of these major projects entails an
expenditure of Rs 18 crores.
The TC Division has also been involved in a new Umbrella Programme involving
technical cooperation among developing countries being coordinated by the Council of
Scientific and industrial Research and the United Nations Industrial Development
Organisation.
-106>
11.Trade and Investment Promotion
The Ministry of External Affairs has since the 1980s accorded priority in its diplomatic
efforts to projecting India's economic and commercial interests with foreign countries.
Initially, these efforts were focussed primarily on promoting and attracting investments
from the Indian diaspora. However, with the announcement of the country's economic
liberalisation programme increased emphasis was placed on attracting global foreign
direct investment while progressively integrating India's economy with the global
economy. The Ministry of External Affairs' economic promotional efforts, both through
its network of Missions and Posts abroad as well as at Headquarters, has been
increasingly focussed on trade and investment promotion.
Following Government's decision to entrust the work of investment promotion to Indian
Missions/Posts, a nodal officer was designated in each Mission. The Ministry has
translated the need for making persistent efforts for mobilising and promoting foreign
investments into India into a charter of ditties and responsibilities for these designated
officials both at Headquarters and its Missions. A manual of instructions for such officers
had been brought out as early as 1978. After considerable in-house research and in
consultation with the Indian Institute of Foreign Trade guidelines for efficient functioning
of these officers, in the changing environment, were revised and updated.
For promoting investments, the Missions continued to play a multi-dimensional role:
image building, investment promotion, dissemination of information, investment support
services, investment
-107>
related services and publicity. All these efforts are effectively coordinated and form
major inputs. The shifting emphasis of each particular function differed from country to
country depending upon nature of exchanges, contacts, interactions and the extent of the
local Government's role in the economic and commercial sector. Interaction was

maintained with related key Ministries of the local Government such as Industry,
Commerce, Finance and Foreign Affairs as well as sector specific Ministries such as
Agriculture, Petroleum, Mines, Science and Technology, Environment, Electronics and
Telecommunications, to name a few. Contacts were maintained with the apex chambers
of commerce, trade associations, export promotion councils and commodity boards.
The special emphasis on the sector specific approach was continued in collaboration with
the concerned Ministries and industry associations. Close coordination with the apex
chambers of commerce and co-opting the private sector in such forums were the key
components of investment promotion efforts. The Ministry was represented on the
Foreign Investment Promotion Board (FIPB) by the Secretary (Economic Relations). it
played its due role in supplying the FIPB with global feedback and information
pertaining to expeditious decision-making.
The Ministry played a positive and participatory role assisting in the efforts of the
Foreign Investment Promotion Council (FIPC) in organising seminars, meetings,
conferences and one to one interactions abroad. The aim was to make India's foreign
policy regime as competitive and effective as that of other competitive and emerging
economics.
Investment promotion seminars in important business centres in Europe such as
Germany, Belgium, Japan, USA and the Gulf were organised by the concerned Missions
and Posts. In the latest such seminar organised in Brussels on 25 & 26 November 1996,
Minister of State for Commerce led a 39-member delegation comprising of the Chairmen
of Foreign Investment Promotion Board (FIPB) and of Foreign Investment Promotion
Council (FIPC), senior Government officials conversant with the sectors of interest to
European investors and important CEOs from the private sector.
The Ministry interacted with all the apex trade and industry associations in India and with
the state governments in its efforts to
-108>
energise and synergise interaction of the States and the Central Governments and specific
industries with interested foreign investors.
The Ministry was also closely involved, along with Missions and Posts abroad ' in
various investment promotion seminars organised in India by other Ministries, as well as
apex chambers and other economic organisations. Prominent among these were:
(a) "Destination India" Summit organised by the Foreign Investment Promotion Board,
Ministry of Industry in conjunction with the Federation of India ' n Chambers of
Commerce and industry in New Delhi in September 1996.
(b) UN-ESCAP Ministerial Conference on infrastructure and the World Infrastructure
Forum, organised by the Ministry of Surface Transport in New Delhi in October 1996.

(c) The World Economic Forum Meeting organised by Confederation of Indian Industry
in October 1996.
(d) The Vth International Energy 'Conference organised by the Ministry of Petroleum and
Natural Gas in Goa in December 1996.
(e) Aero-India-96 organised by the Ministry of Defence in Bangalore in December 1996.
(f) INDIA INTECHMART for the Southern Region organised by the Ministry of Industry
in collaboration with UNIDO from 19-22 March 1997 in Bangalore.
(g) Asia Society's VIIIth Annual Corporate Conference organised by Confederation of
Indian Industry in New Delhi in March 1997.
External Economic Publicity
The Ministry, in conjunction with the Indian Mission in Brussels, coordinated
Government of India's participation in a two-day seminar organised in Brussels by the
European Union in November 1996. In addition to the general presentation on the new
business environment in India, sectors chosen for, special focus were Food Processing,
Chemicals and Petrochemicals, Light Engineering and Electronics.
In September 1996, the Investment Promotion Unit (IPU) published, in collaboration
with a professional management
-109>
consultant, 500 copies of an updated brochure, "India Means Business-Perspectives " for
distribution at the "Destination India" Summit inaugurated by the Prime Minister. This
brochure was extremely well received and in November 1996 IPU published an
additional 19,500 copies for distribution through Indian Missions and Posts abroad.
In addition to information on the economic profile of the Indian economy, these
brochures contained the very latest information on trade, investment, the financial sector,
the size of the market, opportunities in specific sectors, regulatory environment,
incentives for foreign investment, banking and finance, the Indian tax system, company
law and accounting.
Considering the extremely positive response to the flier, "Opportunity India", presenting
the salient features of India's economic reforms programme and various advantages as a
country to invest in, IPU produced a German version. Other country-specific fliers for
USA, UK, France and Japan are under preparation.
A set of 8 sector specific brochures and 4 region specific brochures are being prepared in
collaboration with a reputed economic consultancy organisation. The sectors to be
covered are agro-processing and packaging, chemicals, pharmaceuticals, textiles,
electronics and electronic components, automobile ancillaries and tourism-related
infrastructure.

information on the Indian economy and the business environment was made available on
floppy diskette with the IPU linking up with the Centre for Monitoring Indian Economy
(CMIE), one of India's premier economic research organisations. The material was
constantly updated.
All this material was produced with a view to distributing it to targeted audiences of
foreign businessmen through Indian Missions and Posts abroad, economic ministries and
apex chambers of commerce. They incorporated inputs received from virtually every
single ministry in the Government of India involved in investment promotion.
Special efforts were made in coordination with the External Publicity Division and
Missions abroad to reach out to business journalists in target countries and arrange their
visits to India in
-110>
order to enable them to see at first hand the changes in the business environment and
report on it in the local media of these countries. The visit in November 1996 by a team
of Japanese journalists, representing one of the most prestigious financial dailies, was a
case in point.
-111>
12. Policy Planning and Research
The Policy Planning and Research Division of the Ministry performed its role of
preparing briefs and background papers on important topics and issues on the evolving
international situation. These covered issues of longer term relevance to broad foreign
policy objectives. The Division prepared analytical position papers for Ministry's
interaction with other agencies.
The Division continued to serve as a nodal point for interaction with the joint Intelligence
Committee (JIC), the University Grants Commission (UGC) and its affiliates and the
Area Study Centres (ASC) located in various universities and Specialising in research on
various regions of the world.
The Division made funds available to scholars and institutions in different parts of the
country for conducting seminars and conferences on topical foreign policy issues,
participation in conferences abroad and undertaking studies and research projects.
The subject of these seminars and conferences covered the Indo- ASEAN Dialogue,
bilateral relations with Australia, polity and economy in West Asian countries and their
interaction with the South Asian states in the post Cold War period, emerging trends in
Indo-Latin American relations, Indo-Turkmenistan strategic dialogue, recent
developments in Afghanistan and their regional implications, Indo-German dialogue on
security issues, emerging conflicts and tensions in the development process in Asia and
causation and suggested remedies, need for new perspectives, in Indo-Maldive relations,
fifty years of Indian Foreign Policy and the road ahead,

-112>
Indo-Egypt dialogue and emerging conflict & tension of development process in Asia.
The studies covered regional strategic and defence subjects. Support was provided to
Indian scholars and experts for attending meetings of the Working Groups and Steering
Committee of CSCAP, the second track in the ASEAN Regional Forum.
The Centre for Advanced Study of India at the University of Pennsylvania, USA is also
given an annual recurring grant by the Division. As part of its interactive function, the
Division took the initiative in promoting exchanges with official and non- official visiting
experts and projected India's views and perceptions on important issues.
The Division continued to edit and publish the Annual Report of the Ministry. The
Report served as a compendium of India's interaction with the rest of the world in the
political, economic and Cultural fields, including the views of the government on various
facets of international relations.
The Division rendered all possible assistance to the territorial divisions as well as Indian
Missions abroad whenever any specific information or document on international
relations was required. The Research Wing examined the depiction of India's
international boundaries in foreign publications. Cases of incorrect depiction were taken
up with the concerned government or the publisher through Indian Missions abroad for
necessary corrective measures. The Division also scrutinised foreign publications
containing maps depicting India's external boundaries before these were imported into the
country and offered its views to the Ministries dealing with such matters. it coordinated
the supply of mapsheets to various Government and semi-Government agencies for use in
their official work with the Survey of India and the Ministry of Defence. The Research
Wing dealt with requests from research scholars for access to the records of the Ministry.
in support of research, the Policy Planning Division's Library has modern information
technology equipment and rich resource material, with over one hundred thousand books
and a large selection of maps, microforms and official documents. The Library subscribes
to 600 periodical titles. It has an in-house computer system with twelve terminals, two of
which support data entry and retrieval. it has CD-ROM databases on foreign affairs and
Current affairs. The
-113>
Library is also equipped with a CD-ROM drive, a microfilm/fiche reader printer, a plain
paper photocopier, a VTR and colour monitor and a laser printer with Desk Top
Publishing (DTP) software. This has enabled better presentation of publications and
documents of the Division. Documentation/Bibliographic Services as well as other
library operations and services have been computerised, using an integrated library
software package. Information on all books, maps, documents and selected periodical
articles received in the Library since 1986, as well as publications pertaining to pre-1986
period and in active use, are available on-line through each terminal in the main Library
as well as in the Ministry's headquarters in South Block. Library information can also be

accessed on-line through remote 'login'via dial-up mode. All new documents received in
the Library-books, maps microforms, selected articles from periodicals-are being fed into
the in-house computer system to create a database on foreign affairs. Using this database
and CD- ROM Databases, the Library provides Current Awareness Service and
Bibliographical and Reference Services. in addition, the Library regularly puts out tile
monthly publication the Chronicle of Events, an abstract of selected periodical articles,
Foreign Affairs Documentation Bulletin and Recent Additions, an annotated list of
publications added to the Library. Library users including research scholars are welcome
to access the on-line computer-based information in the Library in different databases,
including CD-ROM Databases, and the Foreign Affairs Information Retrieval System
(FAIRS). Photocopying and Computer Print-out facilities are also available to all Library
users including research scholars.
During 1996-97 the Division completed work on the compilation of a Compendium of
India's Bilateral Treaties and. Agreements for the period 1971-80 and 1991, within the
project of compiling a comprehensive compendium of India's Bilateral Treaties and
Agreements.
-114>
13. External Publicity
During the year, the External Publicity Division (XP Division) projected India's views
and concerns on national and international issues and acquainted public opinion abroad
with developments in India in all spheres, particularly those which have a bearing on
India's foreign policy and security. In addition to countering negative trends, the External
Publicity Division and Missions and Posts abroad worked in unison to enlarge areas of
positive perception about the country while attempting to build up greater awareness of
and understanding for its policies and values. Some focus areas included: India's millenial
history and its rich Civilisation; its diverse and profound religious and philosophical
traditions; its democratic and secular political culture and institutions, its pluralistic,
tolerant and accommodative social ethos; its wide experience in nation building; its
impressive economic and technological achievements and its colossal market potential.
Audio-visual and print material was used to reinforce the country's positive image and the
media was regularly kept informed about issues that impinge on India's national interests.
In its key function as the office of the official spokesman of the Government of India on
all matters pertaining to India's external affairs, the External Publicity Division strove to
orient the domestic and international media on India's foreign policy perspectives and on
topical issues through regular briefings and public relations efforts. 160 Press Releases
and Statements were issued by the Division in 1996. The "Foreign Affairs Record", a
compilation of visits, agreements and significant diplomatic developments, is being
brought
-115>
out on a monthly basis. The Division's news dissemination function also included news
bulletins sent out to India's Missions and Posts abroad on a twice-daily basis and a
newspaper clipping service on external affairs coverage from the national media for

Indian missions and for senior officials of the Ministry.
The Division commissioned or procured articles, publications, feature films and
documentaries, transparencies, photographs, floppies and other publicity material for
distribution to the Missions and Posts on a regular basis and on special commemorative
occasions such as independence Day 1996 and Republic Day 1997. Eleven new
documentary programmes were acquired from the Government and independent sources
and were telecast on foreign television networks through Indian Missions. Over 40
Missions arranged telecasts on the occasion of independence Day 1996. Indian Missions
also brought out special supplements in local newspapers on the occasion. Documentaries
on "Buddhism", "Ritwik Ghatak-The Name of a River", "Qawwali", "INDIA 5555",
"Paintings by Tagore" and "Museums of India" have been commissioned and are at
various stages of completion. Ten documentary films commissioned by the XP Division,
"Magic in the Making" "Nauka Charitramu (Trinity of Carnatic Music) "100 Years of
Cinema", "Vibrant Stage", "Contemporary Indian Art", "Pop Music Scene", "India
Business Overview", "Our Music, Our Instruments", "Kuchipudi Revisited" and "Our
Novels in English" in Betacam were completed and received for circulation. A special
educational documentary for children consisting of six episodes entitled "Across India"
was completed and would be circulated next year. This covers some general aspects of
India. The documentary "Magic in the Making" was recognised as an outstanding entry at
the Pusan Film Festival in South Korea.
The XP Division extended its support to festivals organised abroad such as the New York
Film Festival, "India Week Celebrations" in Khartoum and Baghdad, the Sydney Film
Festival, Shyam Benegal Films Festival in Toronto, and "A Tribute to Satyajit Ray's
work" in Cape Town and in Gaza. in additions approximately 33 Film Festivals were
organised by various Missions for which films were supplied from the Division's Library.
The Directorate of Film Festivals (DFF) was also assisted in organising Film Festivals
abroad. A number of commercially successful Hindi films and a few regional films by
renowned directors such as Mani Ratnam and Arvindan were
-116>
acquired. Approximately 500 audio cassettes of Hindustani Classical Music (vocal as
well as instrumental) brought out by "Music Today" were sent to various Missions on
request. The audio-visual equipment requirements of Missions/Posts were processed in
respect of video projectors, satellite dish antennae, TV/VCRs and other sundry items. To
augment the Mission's efforts in the area of photo publicity work 4700 duplicates,
photographs and transparencies were despatched to various Missions and more than 6700
prints were acquired from the Press Information Bureau. The Division also acquired 285
new transparencies for publicity purposes.
Books, magazines, journals, newspapers and periodicals in different languages for use in
the Missions' libraries and for distribution to local dignitaries, opinion makers as well as
academic institutions were supplied to Indian Missions and Posts abroad. Seventy-seven
new titles were purchased. A revised and updated version of "India: Continuity in
Change" was brought out while "India: A Dynamic Democracy", which is in great

demand for its utility, was revised and is under print. A Turkish version of this
publication was printed for distribution by the Mission in Turkey. Booklets on Prime
Minister's speeches at the 11th Non- Aligned Summit at Cartagena and the Sixth G-15
Summit at Harare, Minister of External Affairs's speeches at the 51st Session of the
UNGA and on India's Foreign Policy Objectives were printed for distribution to our
Missions. Statements by India on CTBT (1993-96) and India's Role in the UN (English
and French versions) were also published.
Foreign journalists based in India were assisted by the XP Division in getting
accreditation and visas. XP Division also coordinated with other Government Ministries,
Departments and State Governments to process and facilitate proposals for making
documentary programmes by foreign producers in India. Approximately 300 such
proposals were approved and cleared during 1996. As part of the annual exercise of
inviting foreign journalists to acquaint themselves first-hand with India, XP Division
hosted the visit of 36 journalists from Sri Lanka, New Zealand, Indonesia, Namibia,
Poland, Oman, Czech Republic, Latvia, Romania, Ireland, Bhutan, Nepal, Bangladesh,
Pakistan and China. Assistance was also extended to a number of foreign journalists who
visited India on their own. These visits generated goodwill and facilitated the projection
of a balanced of India abroad. As the nodal agency
-117>
responsible for media arrangements for incoming visits of Heads of State and
Government, the XP Division facilitated Coverage of events in India by the
accompanying media teams. Similarly, the XP Division was involved in making
arrangements for Indian journalists during visits by the President, the Vice-President, the
Prime Minister and the Minister of External Affairs to foreign countries. Media centres
were set and manned by the Division during VVIP visits abroad and at Summit meetings
such as the G-15 Summit at Harare and the FAO Food Summit in Rome held in 1996.
The XP Division assisted in setting up Media Centres during various international
conferences held in India.
The demand for the Ministry's publication, "India Perspectives", printed in ten
international languages (including Hindi) continued to grow. Fifty-three thousand copies
of this monthly magazine containing a lively mix of articles on all facets of life in India
accompanied by colourful illustrations and visuals were distributed through Indian
Missions and Posts abroad. This journal also sought to highlight the impressive strides
India has made in the fields of science and technology and the steps being taken to
globalise the country's economy. Two special issues of this journal were brought out in
the months of March and October 1996. While the first commemorated the 125th birth
anniversary of Mahatma Gandhi-the Father of the Nation, the latter emphasised India's
commitment to UN ideals.
The Division continued to monitor, with the help of the information wings of Indian
Missions abroad, international media coverage on India and issues of special interest, to
enable it to respond appropriately to recognisable trends and distortions in the shape of
suitable corrective action. Of special importance in this Connection were the international

perceptions and reportage on the progress of India's economic reform process,
developments relating to India's relations with neighbouring countries, human rights,
Kashmir, the future of the UN, the Non-Aligned Movement, disarmament issues and
bilateral relations with individual countries. Promotion of Doordarshan's new
international service and monitoring of All India Radio's External Service were followed
Lip.
Several new publicity and promotional steps were taken by the XP Division to explain,
interpret and project India's foreign policy objectives. These included the setting LIP of
MEA's Home Page on
-118>
INTERNET which contains a wealth of information on the country; use of modern
publicity techniques and professional public relations; lobbying and advertising agencies;
diversification and augmentation of channels of communications and mass media
including projection through satellite television; and broad basing of publicity by
involvement of non-governmental and professional agencies. India's foreign and
economic policies and specific initiatives in both areas were well received. The policy of
transparency combined with new initiatives on Kashmir, regional cooperation and human
rights issues enhanced India's international image in the media and amongst the public
abroad.
-119>
14. Protocol
During the period, Heads of the Diplomatic Missions of the following twenty two
countries presented their credentials to the President of India:
1. United Kingdom
2. Ethiopia
3. Kuwait
4. Mauritius
5. Russian Federation
6. Indonesia
7. Kyrghyz Republic
8. France
9. Uganda
10. Singapore
11. Sudan
12. Burkina Faso
13. Hungary
14. Peru
15. Malaysia
16. Republic of Korea
17. European Commission 18. Poland
19. Laos
20. Philippines
21. DPR of Korea
22. Pakistan

During the period from I April 1996-31 March 1997, Heads of the Diplomatic Missions
of the following twenty one countries left India on completion of their assignment:

1. Kuwait
2. Indonesia
3. Mauritius 4. Russian Federation
5. Hungary
6. Singapore
7. France
8. Sudan
9. Malaysia
10. Peru
11. Morocco 12. Republic of Korea
13. Laos
14. Saudi Arabia
15. Philippines 16. Czech Republic
17. Uzbekistan 18. DPR of Korea
19. Pakistan 20. Nigeria
21. Tanzania
-120>
During the same period, there were numerous visits by VVIPs to India at the level of
Head of State/Government, Deputy Head of State, Foreign Minister and other
distinguished personalities. Details are at Appendix XVI. During the period, there were
outgoing visits by the President, the Vice-President and the Prime Minister of India.
Details are at Appendix XVII
The Conference Cell in the Protocol Division of the Ministry is also responsible for
organising international conferences. The Conference Cell also extends logistic support
and provides consultancy services to other Ministries/Departments of the Government of
India in organising international conferences. A list of conferences/meetings organized
by the Conference Cell and conferences organised by other Ministries/Departments,
where the Cell extended assistance is at Appendix XVIII.
-121>
15. Passport and Consular Services and Indians Overseas
During 1996, twentythree Regional Passport Offices/Passport Offices in India issued
1,912,785 passports. Miscellaneous services like renewal, change of name, additional
pages, inclusion of child's name, emigration clearance not required (ECNR) stamps
amounted to 422,730. Detailed figures of receipts and passports issued/services provided
for the year are at Appendix XIX. The statement showing the revenue and expenditure
figures of the Regional Passport Offices and Passport Offices during the year is at
Appendix XX.
The Ministry's efforts have been directed at simplification of passport procedures and
streamlining of the working of Passport Offices so that prompt and efficient passport
services are expeditiously provided to the public. Working of Passport Offices is
regularly monitored to assess their working and remedial action taken immediately to
ensure that they function smoothly and pendency does not build up.
During the year 1996, a number of changes were introduced in procedures to provide

quicker and better services to the public. These were: (i) option to have passports valid
for either 10 years or 20 years, GO automatic re-issue of full validity passports without
prior police verification after expiry of 10 year/20 year validity, (iii) automatic issue of
full validity passports to Indian nationals residing abroad by Indian Embassies/consulates
after expiry of 10 year validity of their current passports, (iv) photocopies of passport
-122>
application forms to be henceforth accepted to eliminate long queues and Consequent
harassment to the public and (v) expansion of the list of officers authorised to issue
Verification Certificates to include General Managers and above in Public Sector
Undertakings of the Government of India and officers of the rank of Colonel and above
in the Army and their equivalents in the Navy and Air Force.
Steps were initiated to open new Passport Offices at Ghaziabad, Pune, Thane and
Vishakhapatnam. A number of Passport Collection Centres were also planned,
particularly in the North-Eastern States i.e. Arunachal Pradesh, Meghalaya, Mizoram,
Nagaland and Tripura. A Monitoring Cell has been set up in the Central Passport
Organisation headquarters for speedy redressal of complaints. This cell has been provided
with two telephones and two fax machines, operative during working hours and
supervised by a Public Relations Officer, directly under the charge of the Chief Passport
Officer. Passport Advisory Committees are being set up.
in order to improve the productivity of Passport Offices care is taken to ensure that the
working environment and space available is conducive to their smooth functioning. The
Ministry has been pursuing proposals for the purchase of land and completed buildings
with a view to providing adequate space for Passport Offices.
Visa stickers have been introduced to ensure security of the visa stamp.
The Ministry places great emphasis on consular work in Indian Missions abroad. The
Missions are sensitive to the problems of Indian nationals living and working abroad.
Assistance is provided to Indian nationals in settling disputes with their sponsors,
arranging repatriation of destitute Indians and maintaining contact with Indian nationals
who are jailed in foreign countries for violation of local laws. There is a large Indian
community in the Gulf whose problems relate essentially to non-fulfilment of contractual
obligations, poor working conditions, ill treatment and arrest for illegal stay. Indian
Missions regularly take up these grievances with the governments in the countries of their
accreditation for an amicable solution of the problems.
About 60,000 Indian nationals returned to India from UAE under an amnesty scheme of
the UAE Government which expired on 31 October 1996 for foreigners residing illegally
in that country.
-123>
Indian Missions in Abu Dhabi and Dubai issued over 45,844 Emergency Certificates to
these persons in a very short period of time to enable them to leave UAE before the

expiry of the amnesty period. The Government also arranged for additional flights
through Air India and Indian Airlines to facilitate the return of Indian nationals.
-124>
16. Administration and Organisation
Minister of External Affairs Shri Pranab Mukherjee, and both Ministers of State Shri R L
Bhatia and Shri Salman Khurshid, relinquished charge of their offices on 16 May 1996.
Shri Sikander Bakht took over as Minister of External Affairs on 16 May 1996 and
relinquished his office on 1 June 1996. Shri I K Gujral took over as Minister of External
Affairs on 1 June 1996.
During the year 1996-97, new Missions have been opened in Zagreb (Croatia) and Port
Moresby (Papua New Guinea). A Consulate Genera I in Sao Paulo (Brazil) has also been
opened. The Mission in Kabul was temporarily closed in September 1996 due to the
disturbed security environment.
Presently Government of India have 157 resident Diplomatic Missions/Posts and other
offices abroad. The total strength of the Indian Foreign Service, the IFS(B), interpreters
and the Legal & Treaties cadre is 3581. This includes some posts on the budget of
Ministry of Commerce as well as those posts which are temporarily held in abeyance or
ex-cadred. The details are at Appendix XXII. The details of officers qualified in different
foreign languages is at Appendix XXIII. A statement showing appointments in various
groups in the Ministry and data on reservations during the year 1996 may be seen at
Appendix XXIV.
A list of Heads of Missions who took over charge from April 1996 to January 1997 can
be seen at Appendix XXV.
The Establishment Division is responsible for non-personnel administration of the
Ministry including properties both moveable
-125>
and immovable, in the offices of the Ministry and its subordinate offices in India and in
Missions and Posts abroad.
Over the last few years, the Ministry has been vigorously pursuing a policy to acquire and
construct more properties in India and abroad with a view to minimising its rental
liabilities and to situating its offices and residences in permanent locations. Properties
were purchased in Johannesburg (Chancery complex), Wellington (Chancery complex),
Houston (Consul General's residence) and Bangkok (officers' apartments).
The existing condition of the government owned properties in Singapore and Tokyo were
assessed and proposals were considered to redevelop these obsolete and under-utilised
properties on a self-financing basis.
The Riyadh Construction Project (Chancery, Embassy Residence and 44 residences) was
successfully completed, enabling the Mission to move to the newly constructed buildings

in June 1996. A plot of land was purchased in the prestigious Tiergarten Strasse in Berlin
for construction of a Chancery complex. Necessary planning and approvals were
processed to enable timely construction of the Mission's building upon shifting of the
capital to Berlin. The contract for the Indira Gandhi Centre for Culture in Mauritius was
awarded and construction work started on the project. Other projects of the Ministry have
completed the planning and approval process. These are at Moscow, Beijing, Abu Dhabi,
Doha, Gaborone, Islamabad, Kathmandu, Dhaka, Muscat, Minsk and Brasilia. Projects in
India under active consideration included the projects for Videsh Bhawan in New Delhi,
ICCR in Calcutta, and apartments in Papankala and the Foreign Service Institute in New
Delhi.
in pursuance of the Ministry's policy to house Regional Passport Offices (RPOs) in
Government owned buildings, active efforts were made to complete necessary formalities
to acquire land and start construction of the buildings for Passport Offices as well as staff
residences within the Constraints of availability of funds for the purpose. In this regard,
land has already been acquired for Passport Offices at Ahmedabad, Lucknow,
Kozhikode, Bhubaneshwar, Trichy, Goa (Panaji), Hyderabad, Chandigarh, Cochin,
Chennai, Bangalore and Jaipur. In Ahmedabad, construction has already begun. in
Chennai, the construction is at an advanced stage. For construction
-126>
of the RPO office at Calcutta, action is underway for de- requisitioning of the property
offered to the Ministry by the State Government. The Jammu Development Authority is
being approached for offering some sites for the construction of the Passport Office and
staff residences in Jammu. Preliminary estimates for the Goa project have been received
in the Ministry.
During this financial year, first phase of the pilot project of computer networking was
implemented with E-mail addresses being allotted to individual officers in South Block.
The Indian Missions abroad were also authorised to go in for local E-mail connectivity.
The E-mail facility is currently operational in South Block in all the Divisions of the
Ministry, thereby facilitating quicker and cheaper exchange of communications.
Additional hardware was purchased and installed in various offices of the Ministry and
almost all the work in various Divisions relating to word processing/data-base is now
being done on computers. Proposals for Computerisation received from Indian missions
abroad, including those from newly opened Missions during the current financial year,
were also processed and Clearances conveyed.
-127>
17. Foreign Service Institute
The Foreign Service Institute (FSI) greatly expanded its activities during 1996-97. While
all the regular programmes were held, there was a significant increase in the scope and
content of each course as well as in the actual number of courses held.
The courses held during the year included: (i) Professional Course in Diplomacy and
International Relations for Indian Foreign Service Probationers (1995 and 1996 batches);

(ii) Basic Professional Course for IFS(B) personnel posted abroad; (iii) Professional
Course for Foreign Diplomats; (iv) Familiarisation Programme for Resident Foreign
Diplomats; (v) Induction Course for Freshly Recruited Personal Assistants; (vi)
Computer Course; (vii) Language Courses; (viii) Hindi Typing Course for MEA officials;
and (ix) Orientation Course for Non-MEA Officers.
The most important part of FSI's work is the basic Course on Diplomacy and
International Relations conducted for the Probationers of the Indian Foreign Service. The
training programme for the 1995 batch of IFS Probationers, which started in January
1996, culminated with a valedictory function on 6 January 1997. The training programme
for the 1996 batch of IFS Probationers started from 7 January 1997. The basic objective
of this course is to provide comprehensive training to the newly recruited IFS officers,
not only in traditional areas of diplomacy, international relations, political reporting and
protocol but also in several related fields that are growing in importance such as national
and international security, the international economic environment, management of
challenges in the changing global scenario and investment promotion.
-128>
The training programme for the 1995 batch of IFS Probationers comprised of 25
modules. Each of the 25 modules dealt with an important area of work related to foreign
policy and diplomacy. The most comprehensive module related to India's foreign policy,
with 31 sections covering almost every aspect of our external relations. Details are at
Appendix XXVIII.
In keeping with the special emphasis in recent years on economic diplomacy, the module
on "International Economic Relations and Commercial Diplomacy" was strengthened,
with 16 separate sections focusing on India's economic reforms, the international
economic environment, the role of Embassies in trade and investment promotion,
techniques of commercial negotiations, management challenges in the changing global
scenario and international finance and Capital markets.
A new module entitled "New Areas of International Relations" highlighted some nontraditional areas of diplomacy, such as Environment, Energy, Refugees, Narcotics,
Terrorism and Human Rights.
The module on "Defence and Security", apart from focusing on vital security issues like
NPT, CTBT and MTCR, also covered India's defence policy, the state of the armed
forces, developments in defence technology and the security of the border areas.
An additional module on "Special Diplomatic Skills" emphasised negotiating skills,
communication skills, use of information Technology, development of leadership skills
and "espirit de corps".
Another new module called "Diplomatic Exercises" introduced the latest techniques of
training. These included management concepts applicable to MEA and the conduct of
Foreign Policy; Crisis Management; Lateral Thinking and Simulation Exercises.

Apart from these additional modules, there was a good deal of emphasis on field visits to
acquaint Probationers with different areas of the Country.
Another feature introduced for the first time in the year under review was the "SAARC
Darshan" comprising visits to Member States of SAARC. The 3 SAARC Countries
visited this year were Bhutan, Bangladesh and Sri Lanka, for a period of around one
week each. The visits were useful and would be included in future training
-129>
programmes as well. The initiative has also led to other countries looking at ways and
means of reciprocating the gesture and to having constructive contacts with officer
trainees of the various countries visited.
The intensive programme and the increased emphasis on various emerging aspects of
international diplomacy has seen forging of new linkages with other training institutions
in the country such as the College of Defence Management and the Administrative Staff
College of India, both in Hyderabad.
FSI is attempting to build further on these linkages with the objective of developing midcareer training programmes for IFS officers serving at Headquarters.
Three Basic Professional Courses (BPCs) were held. Officials in the Ministry of External
Affairs up to the rank of Section Officers under orders of posting abroad attend this
Course. The emphasis is on a Mission's administration, establishment and finance,
accounts, passport, visa and consular work. Officials are also familiarised with the use of
computers and given a basic course in the foreign language of the country of posting.
This year, the BPC also included for the first time lectures on Indian foreign policy,
external publicity, trade and. investment promotion so that all officials posted in Missions
abroad have the larger picture in view and work towards contributing towards the total
team effort.
The Professional Course for Foreign Diplomats (PCFD) has been organised by the FSI
from 1992 onwards. During 1996-97, a total of 5 PCFDs were held, of which two were
devoted solely to middle level and senior South African diplomats. Each course is
designed to cover areas which are most relevant to the training needs of the foreign
diplomats. Some of the areas covered relate to diplomacy, international relations, regional
focus on specific regions, international law and international organisations, international
economic relations and commercial diplomacy, defence and security, diplomatic practice
and protocol, representational skills and cultural diplomacy. There is a special focus on
India and on taking the foreign diplomats to various centres of economic, industrial and
cultural importance in the country so that they get to understand something of India's
achievements in various fields and its heritage. Participation in the PCFDs has been
growing. In 1996-97,
-130>

the PCFDs saw participation by foreign diplomats from 58 countries.
An Induction Course for newly recruited Personal Assistants was conducted in
September-October 1996. It covered areas such as administration, establishment and
finance as well as Computer appreciation.
There was a special focus in 1996-97 on computer skills and making training facilities
available not just as part of regular training programmes for probationers and officials
proceeding abroad, but also for officers and personnel serving at Headquarters at all
levels. 'These courses were organised in the Computer Laboratory at the Foreign Service
Institute as well as at recognised professional institutes .
In addition, orientation programmes were organised for non-MEA officers proceeding on
posting abroad. During 1996-97, FSI strengthened contacts with other Foreign Service
Training Institutions abroad and exchanged its experiences in training programmes and
techniques. There were visits to FSI by Director of the Bandarnaike Diplomatic Training
Institute (BDTI), Sri Lanka and Director of the Institute of Foreign Affairs, Thailand.
Both visits were useful in exchanging experiences and strengthening ties. FSI also
deputed 2 lecturers to BDTI at its request to give lectures to participants in training
programmes there.
The Foreign Service Institute is a member of the Association of Directors and Deans of
Diplomatic Academies and Institutes of international Relations (ADDAIR). Dean (FSI)
participated in the annual ADDAIR meeting at Ankara in September 1996. The meeting
is an important mechanism for maintaining and intensifying contacts with other
diplomatic training institutes abroad.
The Foreign Service Institute also functioned as a think tank on important issues relating
to India's external relations. During 1996-97, there were several "interface" meetings
organised by FSI, where the Foreign Secretary, Dean (FSI) and other senior officials in
MEA exchanged views on a regular basis with leading specialists on important foreign
policy issues.
FSI has plans to hold a series of seminars on "Indian Foreign Policy: Agenda for the 21st
Century" and will be publishing several papers on the subject.
-131>
18. Implementation of Official Language Policy and
Propagation of Hindi Abroad
The Ministry continued to be actively engaged in propagation f Hindi abroad through
Indian Missions/Posts. Standard Hindi literature, comprising books in Hindi on Indian
art, history, literature, language, religion and philosophy were sent to Indian
Missions/Posts abroad for their use in the libraries and to be used as gifts to educational
and voluntary organisations engaged in teaching of Hindi. Besides, the Missions/Posts
abroad have been promoting Hindi literature through organising special Hindi classes,
Hindi film shows, seminars and competitions in various schools, Colleges, institutions

and organisations. Hindi text books, audio Cassettes and Hindi dictionaries were sent to
selected Missions/Posts.
The most significant event of the year was the organisation of the Fifth World Hindi
Conference from 4-8 April 1996 in Trinidad and Tobago. The Government of India were
represented by a high level delegation. On this occasion, India organised various cultural
activities, book-Cum-photo and computer exhibitions and sent Cultural troupes. To mark
the occasion, a souvenir was brought out containing the works of eminent Hindi scholars
and writers from all over the world. At this conference, 17 Hindi scholars were honoured,
of which 5 were from India.
During the year, various competitions in Hindi were organised at Delhi as well as in
Indian Missions abroad.
-132>
19. Cultural Relations
Administration
The Vice-President of India assumed Presidentship of the Indian Council of Cultural
Relations (ICCR) with effect from 8 August 1996. The Statutory Bodies of the Council,
viz., the General Assembly, the Governing Body, the Finance Committee Have also been
reconstituted for a period of 3 years from 23 December 1996.
Scholarships and Welfare of International Students
one of the important activities of ICCR was the continued implementation of its
scholarship programme. The Council administers about 1000 scholarships annually under
its various scholarship schemes for studies in graduate, post-graduate and doctoral
programmes as well as for pursuing professional Courses such as medicine, engineering,
pharmacy and accountancy. The thrust of the scholarship programme is towards
developing nations, with Special focus on neighbours in South Asia. A total of 1026 new
scholarships were offered this year to students from 60 different countries.
Last year the Council enhanced the stipend and other allowances of international students
under the various scholarship schemes offered by it to bring them on par with
scholarships offered by the University Grants Commission. The Ministry also revised the
terms and conditions of scholarships under the TCS Colombo Plan and Aid-Nepal
Scheme respectively.
-133>
As part of the general welfare of international students, the ICCR organised various
activities throughout the year to familiarise international students with the political,
economic, social and cultural milieu of India, besides helping them to make friends
through shared experiences. These activities included Organisation of the Annual
Meeting of Students' Advisors, holding Of Summer camps, Organisation of orientation
programmer and launching of a news letter "At Home in India".

Visitors Programme
As part of its effort to foster and strengthen cultural relations and mutual understanding
between India and other countries the Council facilitated exchanges of scholars,
intellectuals, academicians and artistes. The details are at Appendices XXIX to XXXII.
Performing Arts
The major highlights of the programmes organised abroad by the Council during the year
include the "Days of Indian Culture" in Russia during September 1996, the "Days of
Indian Culture" in Vietnam during October 1996 and a major manifestation of Indian
Culture in Bangladesh during November 1996.
The "Days of Indian Culture" in Russia organised from 16-28 September 1996 in
Moscow and eleven other cities of Russia were inaugurated by Russian Prime Minister V
C Chernomyrdin and Indian Human Resource Development Minister Shri S R Bommai
oil 16 September 1996 at the prestigious Maly Theatre in Moscow. They featured cultural
performances involving '106 artistes, an exhibition of Indian contemporary art, an
exhibition Of Indian handicrafts, a book exhibition, a writers workshop, a festival of
Indian films and a seminar on "Perspectives of Social Changes in Russia and India".
The "Days of Indian Culture" held in Vietnam from 7-17 October 1996 were inaugurated
by Vietnam Deputy Minister of Culture and Information Nguyen Trung Kien. The
programme included performances of classical music and dance involving 21 artistes, an
exhibition of Indian saris and a festival of Indian films.
A major manifestation of Indian Culture in Bangladesh titled "Utsav-The India Festival"
was organised from 18-30 November 1996. The Utsav featured cultural performances
involving nearly 140 Indian artistes, an exhibition of contemporary women painters,
-134>
an exhibition of Indian handicrafts and a writers workshop. The festival was inaugurated
by Bangladesh Minister for Post & Telecommunications Mohammed Nasim and the
Indian Human Resource Development Minister Shri S R Bommai on 18 November 1996
at the Osmani Memorial Hall in Dhaka. Besides Dhaka, cultural performances were also
arranged in Chittagong, Rajshahi and jessore.
During the period from April 1996 to March 1997, the ICCR received 17 cultural troupes
from abroad (Appendix XXXIII) and sponsored the visit of 55 cultural troupes to
countries in Asia, Europe, South America, North America and Africa (Appendix
XXXIV). In addition, special programmes for VIPs were arranged (Appendix XXXV).
Exhibitions
During April-December 1996 the ICCR organised 6 exhibitions in its Ajanta Art Gallery.

These included an exhibition of paintings by Mexican Artist Eduard Nunez Valbuena and
an exhibition entitled "Vision of the World Egg" by well known Swedish Artist Violet
Tengberg. A list of these exhibitions is at Appendix XXXVI. The ICCR organised India's
participation in the 6th International Children's Art Exhibition in the Republic of Korea
and an art exhibition in Athens. Details are at Appendix XXXVII.
Seminars
in collaboration with the Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry, the
ICCR organised a SAARC Economic Cooperation Conference of experts from the
SAARC countries from 19-21 November 1996.
The ICCR also provided limited support to the following conferences: G) International
Seminar "The Muse and the Minorities" held at India International Centre from 20-22
September 1996, GO International Conference on "Cultural Diversity and Indigenous
Knowledge Systems" organised by the Indira Gandhi Rashtriya Manav Sangrahalaya in
Bhopal from 27-30 September 1996, (iii) International Seminar on "Study of Persian
Language and Literature in India" organised by the Department of Persian Studies, Delhi
University from 21-23 December 1996, (iv) XVIIth Indian Folklore Congress held in
Trivandrum from 23-25 December 1996, (v) 7th International
-135>
Conference on "Maharashtra: Society and Culture" from 2-6 January 1997 at Pune.
Jawaharlal Nehru Award
As before, the ICCR provides the secretariat for the Jawaharlal Nehru Award for
International Understanding. The 1994 Jawaharlal Nehru Award was conferred on Prime
Minister of Malaysia Dr Mahathir bin Mohamad for his forthright enunciation of the
views of the developing nations and his tireless campaign for a more equitable, humane
and just world.
Maulana Azad Memorial Lecture
Since 1958, the Council has been organising an annual lecture series in the memory of
ICCR's Founder Presidents Maulana Abul Kalam Azad. The 31st Maulana Azad
Memorial Lecture was delivered by a distinguished diplomat, writer and thinker Shri P N
Haksar, on 4 January 1997. The subject of the lecture was "Looking Towards the 21st
Century".
Maulana Azad Essay Competition
The ICCR annually organises an essay competition for citizens of SAARC countries
below the age of 30 years. The essay competition is held in three languages namely,
Hindi, Urdu and English. The first prize winners for the year 1994-95 competition were
given a certificate and cash award of Rs 25,000 at a ceremony at Rashtrapati Bhavan on

11 November 1996 by the President of India.
The topics for the 1995-96 Essay Competition were "Maulana Azad: Dharam Ki
Avdharana" (Hindi), "Maulana Azad Ka Tasavi-ir-e-Din" (Maulana Azad's Interpretation
of Religion) (Urdu), "Globalisation: Economic, Social and Political Challenges for South
Asia" (English).
Indian Cultural Centres Abroad
To strengthen cultural ties and promote greater awareness of India's culture abroad, the
Council has established cultural centres in Georgetown (Guyana), Jakarta (Indonesia),
Moscow (Russia), Port Louis (Mauritius), Paramaribo (Surinam), Cairo (ARE), Berlin
(Germany), London (UK), Johannesburg and Durban (South Africa), Tashkent
(Uzbekistan) and Almaty (Kazakhastan). These centres have libraries, reading rooms and
organise lectures, symposia, exhibitions,
-136>
dance and music performances, screening of films and publication of news bulletins.
Some of the centres also run classes for Indian music, dance, yoga and languages. For
this purpose teachers are deputed by the Council. The centres develop and maintain
contacts with a wide cross-section of local citizens, particularly students, teachers,
academicians, policy makers and cultural personalities.
During the current financial year, a new cultural centre in Port of Spain, Trinidad and
Tobago was made operational.
Visiting Professors and Chairs of Indian Studies Abroad
The ICCR deputes visiting Professors abroad to teach Indology, Indian languages and
other related subjects. The deputation of Professors is principally clone under the bilateral
cultural exchange programmes and where specific institutional arrangements exist with
ICCR. ICCR presently has on deputation 15 Professors as in the list at Appendix XXXIX.
Library
An annotated catalogue of Maulana Azad's personal collection of rare books and
manuscripts, which are housed in the ICCR, was prepared and printed in book form in
three volumes for the use of scholars and researchers.
Publications
As before, the ICCR brought out seven quarterly journals in different languages-" Indian
Horizons" and "Africa Quarterly" (English), " Gagananchal" (Hindi), "Papeles de la
India" (Spanish), "Rencontre aver I' Inde" (French), " Thaquafat-ul- Hind" (Arabic). A
new German Quarterly "Indien in der Gegenwart" commenced publication this year.

On the occasion of the Fifth World Hindi Conference held in Trinidad and Tobago in
April 1996 the Council brought out a special issue of the Hindi quarterly "Gagananchal".
The following were the other publications brought out by the ICCR:-(i) "Satya Ki Khoj",
a Hindi translation of selected speeches and writings of Czech President Vaclav Havel
and "Mulakat", a translation of his play, (ii) " The Perennial Tree", a compilation of
select papers presented at the international Symposium on Indian Studies organised at
Kovalam in December 1994, (iii) "Directory of
-137>
Cultural Organisations in India" (Revised edition), (iv) "India- sus Danzas Clasicas"
(India-Her Classical Dances) (Spanish) by Ms Myrta Barvie, (v) "El Cacique de la
Paquena Colina", Spanish translation of "The Headman of the Little Hill" by Dr K
Shivarama Karanth, (vi) "Cuentos de la India", Spanish translation of "Stories from
India" edited by Shri K Natwar Singh. The ICCR is also bringing out a revised edition of
"Readings from India" by Shri G N S Raghawan.
The ICCR participated in a number of national and international book fairs.
-138>
APPENDICES
Ministry of External Affairs-List of Divisions
Specialised and Support Divisions
1 Administration Division
2 Bureau of Security
3 Coordination Division
4 CPV & 01 Division
5 Economic Division
6 Establishment Division
7 External Publicity Division
8 Finance Division
9 Foreign Service Institute
10 Investment Publicity Unit
11 Legal & Treaties Division
12 MER Division
13 Policy Planning & Research Division
14 Protocol (including Conference Division)
15 Special Kuwait Cell
16 SAARC Division
17 Special Unit
18 UN Division
Territorial Divisions

1 Africa Division
2 AMS Division
3 BSM Division
Central Asia Division
5 East Asia Division
6 Europe East Division
7 Europe West Division
8 Gulf Division
9 IPA Division
10 LAC Division
11 Northern Division
12 Southern Division
13 WANA Division
-141>
APPENDIX-II Division-wise List of Countires
Ministry of External Affairs-Division-wise List of Countries and Regions
AFRICA DIVISION
1 Angola
2 Benin

16 Gabon
17 Gambia

3 Botswana

18 Ghana

4 Burkina Faso

19 Guinea
20 Guinea
Bissau
21 Kenya

36 Sierra Leone

22 Lesotho

37 South Africa

23 Liberia

38 Swaziland

24 Madagascar
25 Malawi
26 Mali
27 Mauritius

39 Tanzania
40 Togo
41 Uganda
42 Zaire

5 Burundi
6 Cameroon
7 Cape Verde
Islands
8 Central
African
Republic
9 Chad
10 Comoros
11 Congo
12 Cote d'Ivoire
13 Equatorial
Guinea
14 Eritrea
15 Ethiopia

31 Nigeria
32 Rwanda
33 Sao Tome &
Principe
34 Senegal
35 Seychelles

28 Mozambique 43 Zambia
29 Namibia
30 Niger

44 Zimbabwe

AMS DIVISION
1 Canada

2 United States
of America

3 The Bahamas

3 Myanmar

4 Sri Lanka

BSM DIVISION
1 Bangladesh
2 Maldives

CENTRAL ASIA DIVISION
1 Azerbaijan
2 Kazakhstan
3 Kyrghyzstan

4 Tajikistan
5 Turkey

6 Turkmenistan
7 Uzbekistan

-142>
EAST ASIA DIVISION
1 China
2 Hong Kong
33 Japan

4 Mongolia
5 North Korea
6 South Korea

7 Taiwan

10 Hungary
11 Latvia
12 Lithuania
13 Former
Yugoslav
Republic of
Macedonia
(FYROM)
14 Moldova

15 Poland
16 Romania
17 Russia
18 Slovak
Republic

EE DIVISION
1 Albania
2 Armenia
3 Belarus
4 BosniaHerzegovina
5 Bulgaria
6 Croatia
7 Czech
Republic
8 Estonia

19 Slovenia
20 Ukraine
21 Yugoslavia
(FYR-Serbia and
Montenegro)

9 Georgia

EW DIVISION
10 Germany,
Federal Republic 18 Malta
of
2 Austria
19 Netherlands
3 Belgium
11 Greece
20 Norway
4
12 Holy See"
21 Portugal
Commonwealth The
5 Cyprus
13 Iceland
22 San Marino
6 Denmark
14 Ireland
23 Spain
7 European
15 Italy
24 Sweden
Union
8 Finland
16 Liechtenstein 25 Switzerland
26 United
9 France
17 Luxemberg Kingdom of
Great Britain
1 Andorra

GULF DIVISION (INCLUDING HAJ CELL)
1 Bahrain

4 Oman

2 Iraq

5 Qatar

3 Kuwait

6 Republic of
Yemen

7 Saudi Arabia
8 United Arab
Emirates

-143>
IPA DIVISION
1 Afghanistan

2 Iran

3 Pakistan

1 Anguilla

14 Dominican
Republic

27 Panama

2 Antigua &
Barbuda

15 Ecuador

28 Paraguay

LAC DIVISION

3 Argentina

16 El Salvador

4 Barbados

17 Grenada

5 Belize

18 Guatemala

6 Bolivia

19 Guyana

7 Brazil
8 Cayman
Islands

20 Haiti
21 Honduras

9 Chile

22 Jamaica

10 Colombia
11 Costa Rica
12 Cuba
13
Commonwealth
of

23 Netherland
24 Mexico
25 Montserrat

29 Peru
30 St
Christopher and
Nevis
31 St Lucia
32 St Vincent
and the
Grenadines
33 Surinam
34 Trinidad &
Tobago
35 Turks and
Caicos Islands
36 Uruguay
37 Venezuela

26 Nicaragua

NORTHERN DIVISION
1 Bhutan

2 Nepal

SOUTHERN DIVISION
1 Australia

9 Nauru

6 Kiribati
6 Kiribati

10 New
Caledonia
11 New Zealand
12 Palau
13 Papua New
Guinea in South
Pacific
14 Philippines
14 Philippines

7 Laos

15 Singapore

8 Malaysia

16 Society

2 Brunei
3 Cambodia
4 Fiji
5 Indonesia

17 Solomon
Islands
18 Tavalu
19 Thailand
20 Tonga
21 UN Trust
Territories
22 Vanuatu
23 Vietnam
24 Western
Samoa

Islands
-144>
WANA DIVISION

1 Algeria
2 Arab Maghreb
Union
3 Djibouti
4 Egypt
5 Israel
6 Jordan

7 League of
Arab States

13 SADR
(Sahrawi Arab
Democratic
Republic)

8 Lebanon

14 Somalia

9 Libya
10 Mauritania
11 Morocco
12 Palestine

15 Sudan
16 Syria
17 Tunisia

-145>
APPENDIX-III Major International Conferences/Meetings Major
International Conferences/Meetings/Seminars etc. organised
by Inter-Gov ernmental Organisations at which the
Government of India was represented in 199 6-97
S.
TITLE OF CONFERENCE
NO.
Meeting of the States Parties to LIN
1
Conference on the Law of the Sea
Meeting of the International Seabed
2
Authority-UN Conference on Law of
the Sea
52nd Session of UN Human Rights
3
Commission
International Workshop on the Global
4
Environment Facilityxx
4th Session of the Commission on
5
Sustainable Development
6
7
8
9

VENUE

DATE

New York

4 to 8 March 1996

Kingston

11 to 22 March
1996

Geneva

7 to 17 April 1996

11 and 12 April
1996
18 April to 3 May
New York
1996
24 April to 5 May
UNCTAD-IX Conference
Pretoria
1996
Meetings of Inter-Governmental Panel
30 April to 2 May
Bangkok
Climate Change (IPCC)
1996
20th Antarctica Treaty Consultative
29 April to 10
Utrecht(Netherlands)
Meeting
May 1996
Meeting of the Inter-Governmental
Washington
15 to 17 May
New Delhi

10
11
12
13

Committee on Global Ocean Observing
System
23rd Regional Conference of FAO
Samoa
HABITAT-II Conference
83rd Session of International Labour
Conference
The Bureau Meeting of the Inter
Governmental Council of the General
Information programme of UNESCO

1996

Istanbul

14 to 18 May
1996
3 to 14 June 1996

Geneva

4 to 20 June 1996

Paris

10 and 11 June
1996

Bangkok

24 to 26 June
1996

Geneva

4 to 20 June 1996

VENUE

8 to 19 July 1996

Western

146>

14
15
16
17
18
19

20

21
22
23
24
25

Meeting of the Inter-Governmental
Regional Committee of Education in
Asia and Pacific
The International Labour Conference of
ILO
2nd Session of Conference of
Parties(COP) to the UN Framework
Convention on Climate Change
5th Meeting of States Parties to the UN
Conference on the Law of the Sea
Meeting of the Second Session of the
International Seabed Authority
Regional Inter-Governmental Consul
tations on Global Environment
Outlook(GEO)
Inter-Sessional Seminar Under Inter
Governmental Panel on Forests
sponsored by CSD-UN
13th Meeting of the Open Ended
Working Group on the Montreal
Protocol
World Congress against Commercial
Sexual Exploitation of Children
2nd Meeting of the SBSTTAConvention on Biological Diversity
9th Inter-Governmental Negotiating
Committee on Convention to Combat
Desertification
World Solar Summit

New York
Kingston

24 July to 2
August 1996
5 to 16 August
1996

Kathmandu

25 and 26 July
1996

Helsinki

19 to 21 August
1996

Geneva

26 to 29 August
1996

Stockholm
Canada

27 to 31 August
1996
2 to 6 September
1996

New York

3 to 13 September
1996

Harare

16 and 17

September 1996
26

27
28

29th Session of the Executive Council
of Inter-Governmental Oceanographic Paris
Commission
3rd Meeting of the Conference of
Parties to the Convention on Biological Buenos
Aires Diversity
WIPO Governing Bodies Meeting

24 September to 4
October 1996
4 to 15 November
1996

Geneva

23 September to 2
October 1996

Jakarta

17 to 19 October
1996

Bangkok

3 October 1996

Washington

8 to 10 October
1996

Bangkok

7 to 11 October
1996

147>
29
30
31
32

33
34
35
36
37
38

14th Meeting of Ministers of Health of
Countries of South East Asia Region
11th Session of WMO Regional
Association-II (Asia)
Global Environment Facility Council
Meeting
3rd Meeting of the Committee on
Environment and Sustainable
Development
2nd Meeting of International
Conference on Ozone Protection
Technologies
2nd Meeting of Range States of
Siberian Cranes
267th Session of Governing Body of
ILO
World Food Summit
13th Session of the Sub-Committee of
Experts on Transport of Dangerous
Goods Meeting
ILO/UNCTAD/Joint Workshop on
Human Resource Development

14 to 18 & 21 to
23 October 1996
Bharatpur(India)
Geneva
Italy
Geneva
Manila

39

ESCAP Workshop on Gender Issues

Bangkok

40

Meeting of the Subsidiary Bodies of
UN Framework Convention on Climate Geneva
Change

41

51st Session of UNGA

42

10th Session of the Inter-Governmental New York

New York

4 to 7 November
1996
7 to 22 November
1996
13 to 17
November 1996
2 to 13 December
1996
2 to 6 December
1996
10 to 12
December 1996
9 to 13 December
1996
SeptemberDecember 1996
6 to 17 January

Negotiating Committee on
Desertification

1997

-148>
APPENDIX-IV Meetings Conferences held under the aegies of
NAM
Meetings/Conferences held under the aegis of the Non-aligned Movement
(NAM) d
uring 1996-97
S. NO. TITLE OF CONFERENCE

VENUE

DATE

1 NAM Ministerial Committee on Methodology
16 May 1996

Cartagena

14 to

2 Vth Conference of Ministers of
6 September 1996
Information of the Non-Aligned Countries
(COMINAC-V)
-149>

Abuja

2 to

(Nigeria)

APPENDIX-V Treaties/Conventions/Aggreements concluded or
renewed by India
Treaties/Conventions/Agreements concluded or renewed by India with
other coun
tries in 1996
S. NO. TITLE OF CONVENTIONS/
TREATIES/AGREEMENTS
ETC

DATE OF
SIGNATURE/
ADOPTION

DATE OF
RATIFICATION/
ACCESSION OR
ACCEPTANCE

DATE OF
ENTRY
INTO
FORCE

MULTILATERAL
1. Amendment of Articles 6 and 22 4.4.1995
of the International Telecommunications Satellite Organisation
(INTELSAT) Operating Agreement.

6.1-1996

2. Protocol on Environmental
Protection to the Antarctic
Treaty, 1959.

2.7.1992

20.3-1996

3. ILO Convention No. 147 concerning Minimum Standards in
Merchant ships.

13.10.1976

26.9.1996

4. International Tropical Timber
Agreement, 1994.

26.1.1994

2.11.1996

BILATERAL

26.9.1997

Bangladesh
5. Treaty between the Government
12.12.1996
of the Republic of India and
the Government of the People's
Republic of Bangladesh on Sharing
of the Ganga/Ganges Water at
Farakka.

12.12.1996

Brazil
6. Joint Indo-Brazilian
Declaration.

27.1.1996

27.1.1996

7. Agreement on Indo-Bhutan
Survey Collaboration Projects.

22.3.1996

22.3.1996

8. Agreement between the Government of the Republic of India
and the Royal Government of
Bhutan regarding the Tala
Hydroelectric Project.
-150>

5.3.1996

5.3.1996

9. Agreement between the Royal
Government of Bhutan and the
Government of the Republic of
India regarding the Dungsum
Cement Plant in Bhutan.

5.3-1996

5.3.1996

18.1.1996

18.1.1996

11. Cultural Agreement between
31-1.1996
the Government of the Republic
of India and the Government
of the Kingdom of Cambodia.

31-1.1996

Bhutan

Cambodia
10. Memorandum of Understanding
on Economic and Technical
Cooperation between the Government of the Republic of
India and the Government
of Cambodia.

Canada
12. Memorandum of Understanding
between the Department of
Industry of Canada and the
Ministry of Communications
of India on Cooperation in
Telecommunications.

11.1.1996

11.1.1996

13. Agreed Minutes to review Air
Services Matters between the
Government of India and the
Government of Canada.
Central African Republic

14.8-1996

14. Agreement regarding Creation
of the joint Commission for
Cooperation between the
Government of the Central
African Republic and tile
Government of the Republic
of India.

16.5-1996

14.8.1996

Comoros
15. Protocol between the Ministry 24.7.1996
External Affairs of India and the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the
Islamic Republic of Comoros on
Political, Trade, Economic, Cultural,
Scientific and Technical Cooperation.
-151>

24.7.1996

Cyprus
16. Agreement on Tourism
Cooperation between the
Government of the Republic
of India and the Government
of the Republic of Cyprus.

7.11.1996

Czech Republic
17. Protocol of Consultation
the Ministry of External
Affairs of the Republic of
India and the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs of the Czech
Republic.

11.10.1996

11.10.1996

18. Agreement between the Republic 11.10.1996
of India and the Czech Republic
for the Promotion and Protection of Investments.
19. Agreement between the Government of the Republic of
India and the Government of
Czech Republic on Cooperation
in the Fields Of Culture,
Education and Science.

11.10.1996

Denmark
20. Agreement between the Gov-

6.9-1995

12.1.1996

28.8.1996

ernment of the Republic of
India and the Government of
the Kingdom of Denmark
concerning the Promotion
and Reciprocal Protection of
Investments.
Finland
21. Protocol on Consultations
between the Ministry of
External Affairs of India
and the Ministry for Foreign
Affairs of Finland.

26.11.1996

26.11.1996

Haiti
22. Memorandum of Understanding
27.9-1996
between the Government of the
Republic of India and the Government
of the Republic of Haiti on the
Establishment of Formal Diplomatic
Relations.
-152>

27.9.1996

Hong Kong
23. Air Services Agreement between 10-10-1996
the Government of the Republic
of India and the Government of
Hong Kong.

10.10.1996

Israel
24. Agreement between the Government of the Republic of
India and the Government of
the State of Israel for the
Promotion and Protection of
Investments.

29.1.1996

25. Agreement of Mutual Cooperation between the National
Small Industries Corporation,
India and the Small Business
Authority of Israel.

28.11.1996

26. Umbrella Agreement between
the State of Israel and the
Republic of India on Cooperation in the field of
Industrial and Technological
Research and Development.

30.12.1996

27. Agreement on Technical
Cooperation between the

30.12.1996

24.12.1996

18.2.1997

28.11.1996

Government of the Republic
of India and the Government
of the State of Israel.
Japan
28. No. ID-P107 Loan Agreement
for Dhauliganga Hydroelectric
Power Plant Construction
Project between the Overseas
Economic Cooperation Fund,
Japan and National Hydroelectric Power Corporation Ltd.

25.1.1996

23.5.1996

29. No. ID-P108 Loan Agreement for 25.1.1996
Anpara Power Transmission
System Project (II) between
The Overseas Economic Cooperation Fund, Japan and the
President of India.
-153>

25.1.1996

30. No. ID-PI09 Loan Agreement for 25-1.1996
Banglore Water Supply and
Sewerage Project between The
Overseas Economic Cooperation
Fund, Japan and the President
of India.

25.1.1996

31. No. ID-P110 Loan Agreement for 25.1.1996
Urban Water Supply and Sanitation Improvement Program
between The Overseas Economic
Cooperation Fund, Japan and
Housing and Urban Development
Corporation Limited.

25.1.1996

32. No. ID-P111 Loan Agreement for 25-1.1996
Attappady Wasteland Comprehensive Environmental Conservation Project between The
Overseas Economic Cooperation
Fund, Japan and the President
of India.

25.1.1996

33. No. ID-PI12 Loan Agreement for 25.1.1996
Gujrat Afforestation and
Development Project between
The Overseas Economic Cooperation Fund, Japan and the
President of India.

25.1.1996

34. No. ID-P113 Loan Agreement for 25.1.1996
Kurnool-Cuddapah Canal
Modernization Project between The
Overseas Economic Cooperation Fund,

25.1.1996

Japan and the President of India.
Korea
35. Agreement between the Government of the Republic of
India and the Government of
the Republic of Korea on the
Promotion and Protection of
Investments.

26.2.1996

1.5.1996

7.5.1996

36. Agreement on the Establishment 26.2.1996
of a joint Commission between
the Government of the Republic
of India and the Government of
the Republic of Korea.
-154>

26.2.1996

37. Agreed Minutes relating to the 31.7.1996
operation of air services
between the Government of
the Republic of India and
the Government of the
Republic of Korea.

31.7.1996

Mongolia
38. Agreement between the Govern- 16.9.1996
ment of the Republic of India
and the Government of Mongolia
on Trade and Economic Cooperation.

16.9.1996

39. Agreement between the Govern- 16.9.1996
ment of the Republic of India
and the Government of Mongolia
in the Fields of Geology and
Mineral Resources.

16.9.1996

40. Agreement between the Govern- 16.9.1996
ment of the Republic of India
and the Government of Mongolia
on Cooperation in the Field of
Agriculture.

16.9.1996

41. Protocol on Cooperation bet17.9.1996
ween the Ministry of External
Affairs of the Republic of
India and the Ministry of
External Relations of Mongolia.

17.9.1996

Nepal
42. Treaty between His Majesty's
12.2.1996
Government of Nepal and the
Government of India concerning
the Integrated Development of

the Mahakali River including
Sarada Barrage, Tanakpur Barrage
and Pancheshwar Project.
43. Agreement between the Republic 12.2.1996
of India and His Majesty's
Government of Nepal for Construction of 22 (twenty-two)
Bridges on the Kohlapur-Mahakali Section of the Mahendra
Raj Marg.
-155>
44. Agreement between His
17.2.1996
Majesty's Government of
Nepal and the Government of
India concerning the
Electric Power Trade.

12.2.1996

Netherlands
45. Agreement between the
Republic of India and the
Kingdom of the Netherlands
on Promotion and Protection
of Investments.

6.11.1995

24.9.1996

1.12.1996

Norway
46. Protocol on Consultations
between the Ministry of
External Affairs of India
and the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs of Norway.

23.5.1996

23.5.1996

Oman
47. Memorandum of Understanding
on Joint Cooperation for
Combating Crime.

5.10.1996

48. Memorandum of Understanding
between the Ministry of
Agriculture in the Republic
of India and the Ministry
of Agriculture and Fisheries
in the Sultanate of Oman in
the field of Agriculture and
Allied Sectors.

5.10.1996

49. Agreement between the Government of the Republic of
India and the Government of
the Sultanate of Oman on
Cooperation in the Fields
of Science and Technology.

5.10.1996

5.10.1996

Poland
50. Programme of Cultural and
7.10.1996
Educational Exchanges between
the Government of the Republic
of India and the Government of
the Republic of Poland for the
years of 1997-1999.
-156>

1.1.1997

51. Agreement between the Government of the Republic of
India and the Government of
the Republic of Poland for
the Promotion and Protection
of Investments.

7.10-1996

52. Protocol of Consultations
between the Ministry of
External Affairs of the
Republic of India and the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
of the Republic of Poland.

7.10.1996

7.10.1996

53. Memorandum of Understanding
26.2.1996
between the Ministry of NonConventional Energy Sources,
Republic of India and the
Department of Energy, Republic
of Philippines on Enhanced
Cooperation in the field of
Renewable Energy.

26.2.1996

Philippines

Russian Federation
54. Memorandum of Understanding
for Enchanced Cooperation
in the field of Renewable
Energy between the Ministry
of Non-Conventional Energy
Sources, Government of the
Republic of India and the
Ministry of Fuel and Energy
of the Russian Federation.

4.3.1996

55. Agreement between the Government of the Republic of
India and the Government of
the Russian Federation on the
installation of direct telephone line with security code
between the residence of the
Prime Minister of India in
Delhi and the Kremlin in

30.3.1996

30.3.1996

Moscow.
56. Programme of Cultural, Scientific and Educational
Exchange between the Republic
of India and the Russian
Federation for the years
1996-1997.

30.3.1996

30.3.1996

57. Agreement on Tourism Cooper3.10.1996
ation between the Government
of the Republic of India and
the Government of the Republic
of Seychelles. Slovak Republic

3.10.1996

Seychelles
-157>

58. Agreement between the Government of the Republic of
India and the Government of
the Slovak Republic on Cooperation in the spheres of
culture, art, education,
science, tourism, sports
and mass media.

11.3.1996

59. Air Services Agreement between 9.10.1996
the Government of India and
the Government of the Slovak
Republic.

9.10.1996

60. Agreement between the Govern- 9.10.1996
ment of the Republic of India
and the Government of the
Slovak Republic on Cooperation in Science & Technology.
Slovenia
61. Protocol on Consultations
between the Ministry of
External Affairs of the
Republic of India and the
Ministry for Foreign Affairs
of the Republic of Slovenia.

23.8.1996

23.8.1996

62. Memorandum of Understanding
in the field of Health
Cooperation between the
Republic of India and the
Republic of Sudan.

13.10.1996

13.10.1996

63. Cultural Exchange Programme

9.8.1996

9.8.1996

Sudan

between the Government of
the Republic of India and
the Government of the
Republic of Sudan for the
years 1996-97-98.
Tanzania
-158>
64. Memorandum of Understanding
between the Government of
the Republic of India and
the Government of the United
Republic of Tanzania on
Technical Cooperation in the
field of Posts &
Telecommunications.

12.12.1996

12.12.1996

65. Agreement between the Government of the Republic of
India and the Government of
the Kingdom of Thailand on
the Maritime Boundary between
the Two Countries in the
Andaman Sea from Point 7 to
the Trijunction Point
(Point T) between Thailand,
India and Myanmar.

27.10.1993

17.1.1996

66. Agreement between the Ministry of Human Resource Development of India and the
Ministry of Education of the
Kingdom of Thailand for the
Exposition of the Holy Relics
of the Lord Buddha and a
Photographic Exhibition on
the Buddhist sites and
shrines in India.

18.10.1996

18.10.1996

4.7.1996

4.7.1996

8.1.1996

8.1.1996

Thailand

Tunisia
67. Cultural Exchange Programme
between the Government of
the Republic of India and
the Government of the
Republic of Tunisia for
1996-1998.
United Kingdom
68. Agreement between the Government of the Republic of
India and Government of the

United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland
on Cooperation in Science and
Technology.
United Mexican States
-159>
69. Agreement on Tourism Cooperation between the Government
of the Republic of India and
the Government of the United
Mexican States.

28.3.1996

70. Memorandum of Understanding
in the field of the Telecommunications between the
Secretariat of Communications
and Transport of the United
Mexican States and the
Ministry of Communications of
the Republic of India.

20.2.1996

United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
71. IND/96/003 Technical Assistance through Tokten, UNIstar
and TCDC Umbrella programme.

10.1.1996

10.1.1996

72. Agreement between the Gover7.12.1996
nment of India and the Government of Yemen on Cooperation
in the Scientific and
Technical Fields.

7.12.1996

73. Agreed Minutes of the Second
Session of the Indo-Yemen
joint Committee for Economic,
Scientific and Technical
Cooperation.
-160>

7.12.1996

Yemen

7.12.1996

APPENDIX-VI Full Powers Issued durng 1996
Full Powers Issued during 1996
S. NO. CONVENTIONS/TREATIES
FULL POWER
1. Full Powers in favour of Shri Manmohan Singh, Finance
25.1.1996
Minister to sign the Convention between the Republic
of India and the State of Israel for the Avoidance of
Double Taxation and for the prevention of Fiscal

DATE OF

Evasion with Respect to Taxes on Income and on Capital.
2. Full Powers in favour of Shri V S Ramamurthy,
23.2.1996
Secretary, Department of Science & Technology to sign
the Agreement on Scientific and Technological Cooperation between the Government of the Republic of India
and the Government of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam.
3. Full Powers in favour of Shri Anil Baijal, joint
9.5.1996
Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation & Tourism
to sign the Air Services Agreement between the
Government of Kenya and the Government of the
Republic of India.
4. Full Powers in favour of Shri G K Mishra, Chairman,
16.8.1996
Central Board of Direct Taxes and ex-officio Special
Secretary to the Government of India to sign the
Protocol to the Convention between the Government of
India and the Government of New Zealand for the
Avoidance of Double Taxation and the Prevention of
Fiscal Evasion with Respect to Taxes on Income.
5. Full Powers in favour of Shri C P Ravindranathan,
18.10.1996
Ambassador of India to Philippines to sign the Protocols
on the Establishment of
(i) Diplomatic Relations
(ii) Consular Relations between the Republic of India and
the Republic of Marshall Islands.
6. Full Powers in favour of Shri N K Saxena, Charge
24.12.1996
D'Affaires, Embassy of India, Phnom Penh, Cambodia to
sign the Agreement between the Government of India and
the Royal Government of Cambodia on the joint Commission
on Trade, Economic, Scientific and Technological
Cooperation.
-161>

APPENDIX-VII Instruments of Ratification issued during 1996
Instruments of Ratification issued during 1996
S. NO. CONVENTION/TREATY
INSTRUMENT

1. Agreement between the Government of the Republic of
India and the Government of the Italian Republic on
the Promotion and Protection of Investments, signed on
23.11.1995 at Rome.

DATE OF

12.1.1996

2. Cultural Agreement between the Government of Jamaica
and the Government of the Republic of India, signed
at Kingston on 20.3.96.
3. Trade Agreement between the Government of the Republic
of India and the Government of the Republic of Cote
D'Ivoire, signed at New Delhi on 17-2.1993.

14.8.1996

26.8.1996

4. Agreement between the Government of the Republic of
India and the Government of the Slovak Republic on
cooperation in the spheres Of Culture, art,
education, science, tourism, sports and mass media,
signed at New Delhi on 11.3.1996.

26.8.1996

5. Treaty between His Majesty's Government of Nepal and
the Government of India concerning the Integrated
Development of the Mahakali River including Sarada
Barrage, Tanakpur Barrage and Pancheshwar Project,
signed at New Delhi on 12.2.1996.

27.11.1996

6. United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification in 29.11.1996
those Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or
Descrtification, Particularly in Africa, signed at
Paris on 14.10.94.
7. Agreement on Scientific and Technological Cooperation
10.12.1996
between the Government of the Republic of India and the
Government of the Republic of Tunisia, signed, it Tunis
on 17.10-1995.
8. Agreement between the Government of the Republic of
India and the Government of the State of Israel for
the Promotion and Protection of Investments.
-162>

24.12.1996

APPENDIX-VIII Training imparted under ITEC
Training imparted under ITEC in 1996 in various disciplines to
civilian trainees

S.NO.

NAME OF COUNTRY

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11

Afghanistan
Albania
Armenia
Azarbaijan
Antigua & Barbuda
Belarus
Belize
Bulgaria
Cambodia
Cuba
Czech Republic

2
7
4
1
2
3
2
2
8
13
1

12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29

Comoros
Dominica
Ethiopia
Eritrea
Georgia
Guyana
Hungary (Croatia & Bosnia)
Haiti
Indonesia
Iraq
Jamaica
Jordan
Kazhakistan
Kyrgyzstan
Laos
Latvia
Lebanon
Lithuania

2
3
13
3
1
8
2
2
15
22
4
11
14
9
11
2
2
7

-163>

30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50

Madagascar
Malaysia
Mexico
Moldova
Mongolia
Mozambique
Oman
Panama
Peru
Philippines
Palau
Poland
Russia
Slovak Rep.
St. Kitts & Nevis
Sudan
Surinam
Syria
St. Vincent
Tajikistan
Thailand

10
4
4
6
11
2
7
2
1
2
2
1
27
1
2
33
7
15
1
10
8

51
52
53
54

Trinidad & Tobago
Turkmenistan
Turks & Gaicos Island
Ukraine

10
14
1
4

55
56
57
58
59
60

Uzbekistan
Venezuela
Vietnam
Yemen
Romania
Papua New Guinea

18
1
31
4
8
4

-164>

APPENDIX-IX Training under Special Commonwealth African Assistance Plan
Training under Special Commonwealth African Assistance Plan (SCAAP) i 1996 in
various disciplines
S. NO.
NAME OF COUNTRY
1
Burkina Faso
1
2
Benin
1
3
Botswana
10
4
Gambia
4
5
Ghana
46
6
Guinea Bissau
1
7
Ivory Coast
4
8
Kenya
15
9
Lesotho
5
10
Mauritius
32
11
Mali
2
12
Namibia
2
13
Nigeria
7
14
Niger
6
15
Rwanda
1
16
Senegal
1
17
Seychelles
1
18
Sierra Leone
43
19
Swaziland
1
20
Tanzania
38
21
Uganda
71
22
Zambia
22
23
Zimbabwe
21
24
South Africa
5
-165>
APPENDIX-X Foreign participation at 36th NDC course
Foreign participation at the 36th National Defence College
(NDC) Course, New Delhi in 1996

S. NO.

COUNTRY

SLOTS

ARRANGEMENTS

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
TOTAL

Australia
Bangladesh
Cuba
Ghana
Greece
Indonesia
Iran
Kenya
Kazakhistan
Malaysia
Nepal
Nigeria
Oman
Palestine
ROK
Sri Lanka
Tanzania* (Sri Lanka)
U.A.E.
U.K.
U.S.A.
20

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
2

Reciprocal
ITEC-I
ITEC-I
SFS
-dITEC-II
SFS
SFS
ITEC-I
SFS
SAP
SFS
SFS
ITEC-II
SFS
SAP

1
1
1

SFS
Reciprocal
SFS

* Tanzania cancelled the slot at the last moment clue to tragedy in the nominee 's family
& the vacated slot allotted to Sri Lanka
-166>
APPENDIX-XI Foreign participation at 52nd DSSC
Foreign participation at the 52nd Defence Services Staff College (DSSC) Cours e,
Wellington in 1996
S. NO. COUNTRY
ARMY NAVY AIR FORCE TOTAL CATEGORY
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13

Australia
Bangladesh
Ghana
Indonesia
Kenya
Malaysia
Mauritius
Nepal
Nigeria
Oman
Palestine
Rep. of Korea
Sri Lanka

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

1
1
1
1
1
1

1
1
1

1
2
1
1
1
2
1
1
1
1
1
1
3

SFS
ITEC-T/ReclITEC-II
ITEC-II
SFS
SFS
ITEC-II
SAP
SFS
SFS
ITEC-I
SFS
SAP

14
15
16
17
18
19
20
15
-167>

Tanzania
Thailand
U.A.E.
U.K.
U.S.A.
Guyana
Yemen
6

1
1
2
1
1
1
7

28

1
1
1
1
-

1
1
2
3
2
1
1

ITEC-I
SFS
SFS
Reciprocal
SFS
ITEC-II
ITEC-II

APPENDIX-XII List of countries to which experts were deputed under ITEC
List of countries to which experts were deputed from India under ITEC Program me
during 1996
S.NO.
COUNTRY
FIELD
1
Ghana
Eye Specialist
2
-doMedicine
3
Guyana
Engg.
4
- do Metallurgy
5
-doEngg.
6
-doAgriculture
7
Kyrghyzstan
English Teaching
8
- do -do9
Mauritius
Legal Metrology
10
- do Eng
11
- do Management
12
- do Ayurveda/Siddha
13
Seychelles
Medicine
14
- do Military
15
- do Military
16
Uzbekistan
Indian Chair
17
Zambia
Military
18
- do - do -168>
APPENDIX-XIII Countries to which Relief Supply was sent in 1996
Countries to which Relief Supply was sent in 1996
S.No.
1 Supply of medicines to Lebanon
2 Supply of milk powder/baby food to Lebanon
3 Cash assistance to Mongolia in the wake of forest fire
disaster
4 Supply of medicines to Myanmar
5 Supply of milk powder/baby food to Iraq

AMMOUNT IN
THOUSANDS
1711.5
995
1700
343
2500

6 Supply of 56 MT tea to Iraq by TTCI, Calcutta-payment
of
fourth and last instalment sent to Iraq
7 Supply of 500 MT rice to Sierra Leone by the PEC
8 Supply of 500 MT rice to Comoros by NAFED
9 Supply of handpumps/spray pumps to Zambia by
KWPL, Bangalore
10 Supply of 1000 MT wheat FOB Bombay to North
Korea
by NAFED
11 Supply of milk powder/baby food, medicines, tents to
Bangladesh for tornado victims
12 Supply of medicines to Seychelles
13 Supply of 100 MT rice to Seycelles by NAFED
14 Supply of medicines to Guyana through DGHS
15 Supply of medicines to Sudan through DGHS
16 Supply of medicines to Niger through DGHS
17 Supply of medicines to Liberia through DGHS
18 Supply of medicines to Djibouti through DGHS

446
7668
8085
869

6242.5
4031
1210
1282
1116
570
1283
410
387

-169>
APPENDIX-XIV Projects-completed or under process during 1996-97
Projects-completed or under process during 1996-97
Burkina Faso

Demonstration farms to be operated by Indian farmers

Cambodia

An artificial limb fitment centre installed and
commissioned in July 1996

Costa Rica

A photo-voltaic solar energy plant under execution
by CEL

Egypt

Assistance to set up mud block and tile manufacturing
Plant in June 1996

Ghana

A mobile eye clinic for use in rural areas supplied in
September 1996
Four hundred water pumps for Ghana and two hundred for
Liberia supplied in April 1996
Supply of artificial limbs to Ghana under process

Kazakhastan

A containerised hot water boiler was supplied during
September 1996

Kyrghyzstan

Setting tip of a mini-dairy plant in Kyrghyzstan under
process

Mali

15 tool kits were supplied in June-July 1996

200 handpumps supplied in June-July 1996
A proposal for supply of 200 diesel pumps under process
Supply of photo-voltaic solar system to Mali under
execution
A project for supply of drilling rig and agricultural
equipment (manual rickshaws and handweeders) is under
process
Mauritius

Remote Sensing Centre under execution by ISRO

Mongolia

A Vocational Training, Centre named after Shri Rajiv
Gandhi established and handed over by India's Vice
President during his visit in September 1996

Oman

A photo-voltaic solar system formally inaugurated by
India's President during his visit to Oman in October
1996

Senegal

Computerisation of Senegalese Prime Minister's office
in Dakar completed in August 1996

-170>
Syria

A facility for manufacturing photo-voltaic
cells and modules is under execution by CEL

Uzbekistan

An artificial limb fitment camp was held over
one month in September 1996

Zimbabwe

A Rural Automatic Exchange donated jointly by
Indian Telephone Industries and
Telecommunication Consultants India Limited
was handed over by India's Prime Minister to
Zimbabwean President during the G-15 Summit
in Harare in November 1996. The transportation
and handling only borne out of ITEC Funds

-171>

APPENDIX-XV Feasibility Studies
Feasibility Studies
Mali
A two member team from IVRI/ICAR visited Mali from 28 September-7
October 1996
to conduct feasibility study for setting up a Poultry Vaccine
Laboratory in Mal
i.
Sierra Leone
A two member team from IRCON visited Sierra Leone from 28 September7
October 19
96 to conduct pre-feasibility study for reconstruction of railway

system in Sie
rra Leone.
Senegal, Ivory Coast, Ghana, CAR, Togo
A three member team from Gujarat Tractors Corporation Limited visited
Senegal,
Ivory Coast, Ghana, Central African Republic and Togo during JulyAugust 1996 t
o explore possibilities for mutual cooperation in the field of
agriculture.
Organisation for African Unity (OAU)
An expert from NIC was deputed to conduct feasibility study for
computerisation
of OAU Secretariat in Addis Ababa in August 1996.
-172>

APPENDIX-XVI Vip visits to india 1996-97
VIP Visits to India during 1996-97
Heads of State, Deputy Heads of State, Heads of Government
1 Prime Minister of Mauritius
August 1996
2 President of Finland
November 1996
3 President of China
1 December 1996
4 Deputy President of South Africa
December 1996

14 to 19
25 to 28
28 November to
3 to 7

5 President of Kazakhastan
December 1996

9 to 11

6 Prime Minister of Bangladesh
December 1996
7 First Prime Minister of Cambodia
December 1996

9 to 12

8 Prime Minister of Malaysia
December 1996
9 President of Israel
5 January 1997
10 Prime Minister of the United Kingdom
January 1997
11 Prime Minister of Trinidad & Tobago
4 February 1997
12 President of Cyprus
February 1997

16

19 to 22

29 December 1996 to

9 and 10

23 January to

10 to 15

13 President of Namibia
February 1997

13 to 18

14 Prime Minister of Bangladesh
February 1997

14 to 16

15 President of Senegal
February 1997

16 to 19

16 President of Turkmenistan
February 1997
-173>

25 to 26

17 President of Philippines
March 1997

2 to 5

18 Prime Minister of Ethiopia
March 1997

5 to 9

19 Prime Minister of Vietnam
March 1997

7 to 9

Visit of Foreign Ministers and others
1 Foreign Minister of Sri Lanka
June 1996

19 to 21

2 Foreign Minister of Turkmenistan
July 1996

10 to 14

3 Foreign Minister of Nepal
August 1996

12 to 14

4 Foreign Minister of Uzbekistan
August 1996

19 to 23

5 British Secretary of State for Foreign &
August 1996
Commonwealth Affairs

28 to 30

6 Foreign Minister of SADR
September 1996

8 to 15

7 Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign Minister of
September 1996
Luxembourg

9 to 13

8 Foreign Minister of Iran

17 October 1996

9 Foreign Minister of Australia
October 1996

19 to 23

10 Secretary General of ASEAN
October 1996

20 to 29

11 Deputy Prime Minister of Tajikistan

26 October 1996

12 British Shadow Foreign Secretary
4 November 1996
13 Foreign Minister of Bangladesh
November 1996
14 Foreign Minister of Sri Lanka
December 1996
15 Secretary General of ASEAN
-174>

31 October to

8 to 13

13 to 21

18 December 1996

16 Foreign Minister of Maldives
December 1996

18 to 20

17 Foreign Minister of Pakistan
December 1996

18 to 21

18 Foreign Minister of Bangladesh
December 1996

18 to 23

19 Foreign Minister of Bhutan
December 1996

18 to 23

20 Foreign Minister of Nepal
December 1996
21 Foreign Minister of Canada
January 1997
22 Foreign Minister of Germany
January 1997
23 Foreign Minister of Portugal
February 1997

19 and 20

7 to 15

22 to 24

6 to 10

24 Foreign Minister of Belgium
February 1997

16 to 19

25 Foreign Minister of Denmark
February 1997

16 to 19

26 Foreign Minister of Costa Rica
5 March 1997
27 Foreign Minister of Venezuela
March 1997
28 Foreign Minister of Bangladesh
March 1997
29 Secretary General of Commonwealth
March 1997
-175>

27 February to

2 to 5

11 to 13

17 to 20

APPENDIX-XVII Visits Abroad of Presidents,VP and PM of
India

Visits Abroad of the President, Vice-President and Prime Minister of India
1 Vice-President to Mongolia
14 to 22 September 1996
2 President to Oman, Poland, Slovakia, Czech Republic and
Italy

3 to 17 October 1996

3 Vice-President to Iran

22 to 27 October 1996

4 Prime Minister to Zimbabwe (G-15 Summit)

2 to 6 November 1996

5 Prime Minister to Rome (World Food Summit)

15 to 19 November 1996

6 Prime Minister to Dhaka

6 and 7 January 1997

7 Prime Minister to Davos, Switzerland (World Economic
Forum) & Mauritius

31 January to 5 February
1997

8 Prime Minister to Moscow

24 to 26 March 1997

-176>
APPENDIX-XVIII The Meetings organised by conference cell
since April 1996
The meetings organised by the Conference Cell since 1April 1996 are as follows:
S.No.
DATE

CONFERENCE

1 Third Meeting of Inter-Governmental Group on
October 1996
Trade Liberalisation

25 and 26

2 Seventh Meeting of Committee on Economic
October 1996
Cooperation

28 and 29

3 ASEAN-India Joint Cooperation Committee
November 1996

4 Programming Committee, Standing Committee and
December 1996
Council of Ministers Meeting of SAARC

13 to 15

14 to 20

5 ASEAN-India ISIS Dialogue
and 25 January 1997

In addition, the Conference Cell also provided assistance to other
Ministries/

24

Departments of Government of India in organising international
conferences. The
Conference Cell particularly provided assistance for the following
conferences:
1 UN-ESCAP Ministerial Conference and WTF Asia '96
October 1996
Forum, New Delhi

23 to 31

6 to 8

2 International Energy Conference, Goa
December 1996
-177>

APPENDIX-XIX Number of fresh/miscellaneous applications
received and the number of passports
Number of fresh/miscellaneous applications received and the number of passports
issued and the number of services rendered during the calendar year 1996
S.NO.OFFICE
FRESH
APPLICATIONSMISCELLANEOUSSERVICES

189516
77106

126400
90156
209835
11792
44001
191752
73600

NUMBER
OF
APPLICATIONS SERVICES
RENDERED
RECEIVED
26139
26409
27556
27644
6016
5630
5907
4780
1245
1285
15046
14534
17235
16009
27149
26216
22887
23227
37725
39598
8317
7730
1196
1274
31709
32075
9697
13076
15651
15129
926
992
26973
30050
10267
10048
62229
60069
1732
1693
4613
6151
41277
39087
23742
22513

1987355

1912785

427723

NUMBER OF NUMBER OF NUMBER OF

1

AHMEDABAD

2
3
4
5
6
7

BANGALORE
BAREILLY
BHOPAL

8

9
10
11
12
13
14

15
16
17
18

19
20
21
22
23

APPLICATIONSPASSPORTS
RECEIVED
ISSUED
126536
127760
105905
102248
33394
36341

19697

BHUBANESHWAR7683
CALCUTTA
63883

CHANDIGARH
CHENNAI
COCHIN
DELHI
GOA
GUWAHATI
HYDERABAD
JAIPUR
JALANDHAR
JAMMU
KOZHIKODE
LUCKNOW
MUMBAI
NAGPUR
PATNA
TRICHY
TRIVANDRUM

99379
140512
84710
142804

TOTAL

15875
8335

190722
48272
95861
12531
140574
103497
222007
12107

47159

18979
7029
62367

98946
134158
83107
140904
14279

8169
176649
47441
95667
10495

422730

-178>
APPENDIX-XX Statement showing the Revenue and Expenditure Figures of Passport
Offices
Statement showing the Revenue and Expenditure Figures of Passport Offices/ Regional
Passport Offices during 1996
S.NO. OFFICE
REVENUE EARNED EXPENDITURE INCURRED
(RS) (RS)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23

AHMEDABAD
BANGALORE
BAREILLY
BHOPAL
BHUBANESHWAR
CALCUTTA
CHANDIGARH
CHENNAI
COCHIN
DELHI
GUWAHATI
HYDERABAD
JAIPUR
JALANDHAR
JAMMU
KOZHIKODE
LUCKNOW
MUMBAI
NAGPUR
PANAJI(GOA)
PATNA
TIRUCHIRAPALLI
TRIVANDRUM

46144271.40
38273650.00
12822151.00
7628648.00
2743258.00
23633904.00
34582981.00
50161850.00
31623104.00
53324216.00
3020677.00
64501518.00
17090457.00
35459851.99
4465605.00
50266942.00
33164721.00
90005590.00
4128707.00
7276020.00
15853185.00
64296111.00
28134165.00

8523746.00
10331583.00
3897462.00
1980963.00
1146795.00
3736803.00
7924899.00
8452576.00
9171602.00
15156849.00
1491776.00
14582885.00
6262815.00
6767736.00
1238355.00
10452583.00
8924610.00
18376295.00
1353956.00
1418720.00
3082470.00
7179788.00
6809885.00

TOTAL
718601583.39
158265152.00
-179>
APPENDIX-XXI Consular Data for 1996
Consular Data for 1996
1 Number of Attestations
2 Number of Indians repatriated at Government Cost*
3 Number of Indians arrested abroad*
4 Number of deaths of Indians reported to the Ministry*
5 Number of foreigners arrested in India"
6 Number of foreigners died in India"
7 (i) Number of requests for extradition received by
Government of India from abroad
(ii) Number of requests for extradition from Government

281945
320
20488
3559
12828
378
4

of India to Foreign Governments
2
8 Number of lost/damaged passports cases received*
13620
*Figures are for cases reported
**Figures made available by Ministry of Home Affairs
-180>
APPENDIX-XXII Cadre strength at Headquarters and Missions/Posts abroad during
1996-97
Cadre strength at Headquarters and Missions/Posts abroad during 1996-97 (including
Posts budgeted by Ministry of Commerce and held in abeyance/ex-cadred)
S.NO.

CADRE/POST
HEADQUARTERS

POSTS AT POSTS AT TOTAL
MISSIONS

1.

IFS
Grade I*

5

21

26

2.

Grade II

4

30

34

3.

Grade III

26

116

142

4.

Grade IV

38

95

133

5.

Jr. Admn. Grade/Senior Scale

14

166

180

6.

(i) junior Scale
(ii) Probationers reserve
(iii) Leave reserve
(iv) Deputation reserve
(v) Training reserve

3
27
15
19
7

30
-

33
27
15
19
7

IFS (B)
7.

(i) Grade I
(ii) Deputation reserve

59
6

82
-

141
6

8.

(i) Grade II/III
(ii) Leave reserve
(iii) Deputation reserve
(iv) Training reserve

100
30
16
25

172
-

272
30
16
25

9.

(i) Grade IV
(ii) Leave reserve
(iii) Deputation reserve

252
60
55

409
-

661
60
55

10.

(i) Grade V/VI

385

196

581

(ii) Leave reserve
(iii) Deputation reserve

60
14

-

60
14

(i) Gr. II of Cypher Cadre
(Cypher Assistant)

58

139

197

(ii) Leave reserve

23

-

23

12. (i)
Private Secretary
(ii) Leave reserve 14

36
-

197
14

233

11.

-181>
13.

(i) Personal Assistant
(ii) Leave reserve
(iii) Training reserve(Hindi)
(iv) Deputation reserve

157
33
10
12

194
-

351
33
10
12

14.

Stenographer (Gr.III)

42

77

119

15.

Interpreters' cadre

8

27

35

16.

L&T Cadre

17

-

17

TOTAL
1630
1951
3581
* Including temporary upgradation of one post from Grade II to Grade I
-182>
APPENDIX-XXIII List of Officers qualified in various foreign
languages
List of Officers qualified in various foreign languages
NUMBER OF OFFICERS
S.NO. COMPULSORY FOREIGN LANGUAGE
1.

Arabic

86

2.

Bhasa Indonesia

10

3.

Burmese

01

4.

Chinese

51

5.

Dutch

01

6.

French

85

7.

German

34

8.

Gorkhali

01

9.

Hebrew

01

10.

Hungarian

01

11.

Italian

05

12.

Japanese

20

13.

Kazakh

01

14.

Kishwahili

10

15.

Malay

01

16.

Nepali

03

17.

Persian

17

18.

Portuguese

16

19.

Russian

72

20.

Serbo-Croatian

03

21.

Sinhalese

02

22.

Spanish

57

23.

Swedish

01

24.

Thai

02

25.

Tibetan

02

26.

Turkish

05

27.

Ukrainian

01

28.

Vietnamese

01

Note: The numbers exclude Language Trainees
-183>
APPENDIX-XXIV Statement showing data on recruitment
made in various groups in the Ministry

Statement showing data on recruitment made in various groups in the Ministry
of External Affairs and Reserved Vacancies filled by Scheduled Castes/Scheduled
Tribes/OBCs during the year 1996 (Provisional)
GROUP TOTAL NO. OF VACANCIES
NUMBER OF VACANCIES
RESERVED
UNRESERVED
SC
ST OBCS
Group 'A' 19

3

1 5

10

Group 'B' 70

11

1 25

33

Group 'C' 97

14

10 25

48

Group 'D' 16
-184>

3

1 3

9

APPENDIX-XXV Names of Ambassadors/High Commissioners
of India abroad who have taken charge
Names of Ambassadors/High Commissioners of India abroad who have taken charge
from April 1996
S NO COUNTRY
CAPITAL
AMBASSADOR/
DATE OF
HIGH COMMISSIONER APPOINTMENT
1 Argentina

Buenos Aires Nigam Prakash

27.8.96

2 Belarus

Minsk

Smt Madhu Bhaduri

06.8.96

3 Belgium

Brussels

C Dasgupta

26.6.96

4 Brazil

Brasilia

Ishrat Aziz

11.6.96

5 Chile

Santiago

Ram Mohan

11.8.96

6 China

Beijing

V K Nambiar

09.9.96

7 Cuba

Havana

V P Singh

04.12.96

8 Finland

Helsinki

Smt Kamlesh Kumar

06.9.96

9 Greece

Athens

G S Bedi

12.12.96

10 Madagascar

Antananrivo

Dr Prabhakar Jha

18.5.96

11 Malaysia

Kuala Lumpur P S Sahai

02.10.96

12 Netherlands

The Hague

Prabhakar Menon

17.7.96

13 Norway

Oslo

J Daulat Singh

16.01.97

14 Papua New Guinea Port Moresby V S Verma

26.4.96

15 Portugal

Lisbon

S K Bhatnagar

07.8.96

16 Qatar

Doha

R L Narayan

18.12.96

17 South Africa

Pretoria

Gopal K Gandhi

01.7.96

18 Sweden

Stockholm

Sushil Dubey

15.11.96

19 Trinidad & Tobago Port of Spain I V Chopra

06.8.96

20 Tunisia

Tunis

R C Shukla

05.8.96

21 Turkey

Ankara

R M Abyankar

16.7.96

22 U S A

Washington

Naresh Chandra

15.4.96

23 Yemen

Sana'a

K R Sinha

19.12.96

24 Vietnam

Hanoi

Aftab Seth

22.01.97

25 Yogoslavia

Belgrade

S K Mathur

16.01.97

-185>
APPENDIX-XXVI Revenue Expenditure of the Ministry of
External Affairs during the Financial yr 1996-97
Revenue Expenditure of the Ministry of External Affairs during the Financial Year
1996-97
BUDGET ESTIMATES 1996-97
(IN CRORES OF RUPEES)
Headquarter

69.77

Missions and Posts

515.00

Central Passport and Emigration Organisation

50.25

Foreign Service Training Institute

0.40

Special Diplomatic Expenditure

200.00

International Conferences/Meetings

1.95

Entertainment Charges

12.00

Contribution to International Organisations (including UN)

26.75

Grant-in-Aid to ICCR

25.00

Evacuation of Indians due to War/Civil Disturbance

0.10

Other Miscellaneous items

22.60

Miscellaneous General Service (Loss by Exchange)

0.01

Payment to Shipping Corporation of India for Charter Operations
between Madras-Port Blair sector

0.53

Payment to Indian Airlines for Charter Operations between
Madras-Port Blair sector

0.01

Aid to Other Countries
Aid to Bangladesh

1.00

Aid to Bhutan

115.00

Aid to Nepal

46.00

Aid to Sri Lanka

8.00

Aid to Maldives

13.00

Aid to Cambodia

0.00

Aid to Myanmar

10.00

Aid to other developing countries

30.00

Aid to African countries

6.52

TOTAL REVENUE EXPENDITURE

1153.89

-186>
APPENDIX-XXVII Expenditure on Indian Missions/Posts abroad

and Headquarters of the Ministry
Expenditure on Indian Missions/Posts abroad and Headquarters of the Ministry of
External Affairs in 1996-97
The estimated expenditure on the Headquarters Organisation of the Ministry during the
current financial year (1996-97) is expected to be Rs 69-77 crores which is 6.05 per cent
of the total estimated revenue expenditure of the Ministry. Out of this Rs 16-75 crores
will be on Salaries, OTA and Wages, Rs 16.12 crores on Travel Expenses, Rs 17.83
crores on Office Expenses, Rs 10.50 crores on Advertising and Publicity and Rs 8.26
crores on Rent, Rates, Taxes, Rs 0.31 crore on miscellaneous items.
The total estimated expenditure on Indian Missions/Posts is expected to be Rs 515.00
crores during the current financial year which works out to 44.63 percent of the total
revenue expenditure of this Ministry. Out of this, an amount ofRs 229.92 crores is for
Salaries (including Foreign Allowances), OTA and Wages,Rs 51.46 crores for Travel
Expenses (Transfer Passages/Home Leave Passages and Local Tours), Rs 97.07 crores
for Office Expenses, Rs 12.22 crores for Advertising and Publicity and Rs 124.33 crores
for Rent, Rates, Taxes as well as for Repairs and Maintenance of Government
owned/rented accommodation in Missions abroad. Average expenditure per Mission
abroad (including Publicity), works out to Rs 3.32 crores.
The remaining 49.32 per cent of the estimated revenue expenditure of the Ministry is
being incurred on various Aid programmes, for neighbouring and other developing
countries including ITEC programmes, Aid to African Countries, SAARC and SCAAP
Programmes, contribution to United Nations Organisation and other International bodies,
Passport Organisations, Entertainment Charges, Grant-in-Aid to Indian Council for
Cultural Relations and other miscellaneous items.
In the Capital Section there is a total provision of Rs 62.03 crores in RE 96-97, out of
which Rs 57.00 crores are for construction and purchases of properties. Rest of the
amount represents loan component to countries like Bangladesh etc.
-187>
APPENDIX-XXVIII Training programme for IFS Probationers
Training programme for IFS Probationers
Module 1 International Relations
Module 2 Introduction to Diplomacy
Module 3 Regional Focus
Module 4 Indian Foreign Policy
Module 5 International Law

Module 6 New Areas of International Relations
Module 7 International Organisations
Module 8 Defence and Security
Module 9 International Economic Relations and Commercial Diplomacy
Module 10 Diplomatic Practice and Protocol
Module 11 Special Diplomatic Skills
Module 12 Representational Entertainment and Decor
Module 13 Culture and Diplomacy
Module 14 Diplomatic Exercises
Module 15 Ministry of External Affairs
Module 16 Point Counter-Point
Module 17 Technical Skills
Module 18 Languages
Module 19 The Constitutional Structure
Module 20 Attachment with the Armed Forces
Module 21 Bharat Darshan
Module 22 Pradesh Darshan
Module 23 Seemant Darshan
Module 24 SAARC Darshan
Module 25 Assignments & Evaluation
-188>

APPENDIX-XXIX Outgoing Visitors Programme (nonperforming) 1996-97
Outgoing Visitors Programme (non-performing) 1996-97
S. NO.

NAME OF VISITOR

COUNTRY

PERIOD

1 Dr B K Bhattacharya
Additional Principal
Deshbandhu College
New Delhi

USA

4 to 7 April 1996

2 Professor Rajiv Verma
Head Department of English
University of Delhi
Delhi

Poland

12 to 14 April 1996

3 Smt Sarmila M Bhatt
Lecturer
Lady Sri Ram College
New Delhi

Poland

4 Smt Ira Bhaskar
Professor of English
Gargi College, Delhi

Poland

5 Shri Bhupatlal Pandhi
Magician
Nagpur

USA

6 Smt Chandra Pandhi
Assistant
Nagpur

USA

7 Dileep Ratanlal Saraf
Assistant
Nagpur

USA

8 Dr Sadhana Naithani
Centre of German Studies &
Folklore Centre for German
Studies
Jawaharlal Nehru University
New Delhi

China

9 Professor Shail Kumari
Reader
Miranda House
Delhi

China

22 to 28 April 1996

10 Vidwan R K Padmanabha
Advisor Music Section
Sri Lalitkala Academy Trust
Centre of Performing Arts
Mysore

USA

15 to 19 May 1996

11 Professor Ravinder Kumar
Director
Nehru Memorial Museum
& Library
New Delhi

Jordan

4 & 5 May 1996

12 Professor Varyam Singh
Centre of Russian Studies
Jawaharlal Nehru University
New Delhi

Bishkek

6 to 18 May 1996

S. NO.

PURPOSE

1 To attend the VIth World
Shakespeare Congress at
Los Angeles
2 To participate in the

12 to 14 April 1996

-do-

14 to 22 April 1996

-do-

14 to 22 April 1996

-do-

REMARKS
50% Travel
grant

-do-

Conference of "Images of
India in film and literature in
English" organised by the
University of Lodz
3

-do-

-do-

4

-do-

-do-

5 To participate in the VIth
World Deaf Magicians
Festival in Rochester
New York

Magicians
Delegation

6
-do-189>

-do-

7 To participate in the VIth
World Deaf Magicians Festival
in Rochester New York

Magicians
Delegation

8 To participate in the
Symposium of the International Society for Folk
Narrative Research in Beijing

50% Travel
grant

9 To attend the 13th International Ramayana Conference
at Shenzen University
10 To attend the 25th International Conference of
American Musical Instrument
Society, University of South
Dakota

-do-

11 To participate as a Speaker
in a Seminar on Mahatma
Gandhi organised by the
Indian Embassy Amman in
Collaboration with the Royal
Institute of Inter-faith Studies
12 Visited Bishkek in connection
with translation of Kyrghyz
Epic "Manas" into Hindi
-190>
13 Sheikh Saleem Ahmed
Honorary Secretary
Abdur Rahim Khan-eKhanan Memorial Society
New Delhi

USA

15 to 29 May 1996

14 Shri Surendran Nair
Artist
Baroda

UK

22 May to 2 June 1996

15 Shri P Srinivasan
Artist
Varman Art School
Madras

-do -

16 Smt Monica Sanyal
1996
President Shivalik
Society for Arts and
Culture Dehradun

USA

11 May to 29 July

17 Rajan Devendra Nath Verma
1996
President International
Centre for Cultural
Relations Bombay

Spain

24 May to 12 June

13 To deliver lectures on Sufi
1996
traditions in India organised
at the University of Maryland,
Georgia Institute of Technology Atlanta and University
of Kansas Missouri.

-do -

Germany

12 June to 12 July

14 To participate in the exhibition of Contemporary South
Indian Paintings and Sculpture
"The New South" organised
by Global Heritage London
15

-do -

16 Exhibition of her paintings
organised by the Gandhi grant
Memorial Centre Washington

50% Travel

17 To participate in the International Theatre Festivals at
Allicante and Paderborn
-do-191>
18 Professor Nissim Ezekiel
Poet and Playwright
Bombay

France

28 to 31 May 1996

19 Professor Sumit Sarkar
Department of History
University of Delhi
Delhi

France

3 to 5 June 1996

20 Professor Romila Thapar
Retired Professor of History
Jawaharlal Nehru University
New Delhi

France

-do -

21 Professor Mohammad
Ishaq Khan
Department of History
Kashmir University
Srinagar

France

-do -

22 Shri Ravi Shankar Rao
1996
Bangalore

UK

13 June to 1 August

23 Professor Anand Mohan Bhalla
Department of English
Rajdhani College
Raja Garden
New Delhi

Hong Kong

18 to 22 June 1996

18 To participate in the colloquium on "Indian Literature
in English: From Narayan to
Rushdie" organised jointly by
the Indian Embassy and the
British Council
19 To participate in a Seminar
"Time as a Historical Construct"
at the Ecole des Hautes Etudes
des Sciences Sociales" Paris
20

-do -

21

-do -

22 To participate in the Aberdeen
International Youth Festival

50% Travel
grant

23 To participate in the International Multi Disciplinary
Conference organised by the
University of Hong Kong and
the Beijing Foreign Studies
University
-192>

-do -

24 Smt Sangeeta Luthra Sharma
Lecturer
Department of History
St Stephen's College
Delhi

UK

6 to 27 July 1996

25 Dr Saryu Doshi
Neela House
M L Dahanukar Marg

Ireland

16 July to
16 August 1996

Bombay
26 Shri Arvind Kumar Krishn
Allahabad

UK

9 to 27 July 1996

27 Dr Gauri Bhattacharya
Department of Vocal Music
Rabindra Bharati University
Calcutta

New
Zealand

12 to 15 July 1996

28 Dr Manisha Sen
Reader
Department of Applied
Psychology
University of Bombay
Bombay

Canada

24 July to
13 August 1996

24 To attend the Workshop on
History at the University of
Cambridge

50% Travel
grant

25 To assist the Chester Beatty
Library on Jain Manuscripts
in the Indian collection
26 Visited UK in connection with
the publication of the Oxford
Illustrated History of Indian
Literature

-do -

27 To participate as a folk
musicologist at the Conference
"Trading with our lives"
organised by Corso New
Zealand Association for International Relief Rehabilitation
and Development held in
Christ Church, New Zealand

-do -

28 To participate at the International Council of
Psychologists
Convention at Alberta, Canada
-193>

-do -

29 Dr Saryu Kalekar
Ex Vice Chancellor
Chandigarh

Kenya

2 to 5 August 1996

30 Smt Mohini Trikha
Sculptor & Painter
New Delhi

USA

18 August to
17 September 1996

31 Professor Ram Gopal Bajaj
Acting Director
National School of Drama
New Delhi

Denmark

15 to 22 August 1996

32 Professor (Dr) Sitansu Ray
Department of Tagore Music
Viswa Bharati University
Santiniketan

Netherland

19 to 24 August 1996

33 Smt Kavita Singh
Art Historian
New Delhi

Denmark

21 to 24 August 1996

34 Dr Rajkumar Hans
Department of History
M S University
Baroda

Denmark

-do -

29 Adjudicator in the Kenya
Music Festival, Nairobi
30 To participate in an exhibition at Vedanta Gallery of
Chicago and Vedanta II
Gallery at Elk Grove,
Chicago
31 To attend the International
Theatre Festival organised
by the National Theatre
School, Copenhagen.
32 To participate & deliver a
lecture on "Tagore-Einstein
Conversation: Reality and the
Human World, Causality and
Chance" at the Fifth Conference of the International
Society for the Study of
European Ideas at Utrecht

50% Travel
grant

33 To attend the 14th European
Conference on Modern South
Asian Studies at Copenhagen
University.
34 To participate in the 14th
European Conference on
Modern South Asian Studies
in Copenhagen, Denmark
-194>
35 Professor Baladas Ghosal
Jawaharlal Nehru University
New Delhi

Indonesia

26 to 28 August 1996

36 Dr Shashi Joshi
Fellow, Nehru

UK

31 August 1996

Memorial Museum & Library
Teen Murti House
Jawaharlal Nehru University
New Delhi
37 Dr Neeta Jha
Reader
L N Mithila University
Kameshwarnagar
Darbhanga

Sweden

20 to 31
August 1996

38 Professor (Dr) Amlan Datta
Former Vice Chancellor
Viswa Bharati University
Santiniketan

Germany

31 August to
1 September 1996

39 Padamsree Amitabha
Choudhury
Noted Tagore Researcher
Calcutta

Germany

-do -

35 To attend a Seminar on "The
Cultural and Social Dimensions of Market Expansion"
at Goethe Institute Jogyakarta
36 Visit to the UK in connection
with a research project
"Caste and Power Texts of
Resistance Domination:
Policies of Affirmative and
class in London, UK and
positive discrimination in race
and class" in London, UK
37 To participate in the First
ever Maithili Conference
organised by the Stockholm
University

50% Travel
grant

-do -

38 To participate in the celebration of the 75th anniversary
of Tagore's visit to Germany
39

-do -

-195>
40 Smt Surekha Panandikar
Convenor
Association of Writers
and Illustrators for Children
New Delhi

Netherlands

12 to 16
August 1996

41 Shri C Rajamohan
Strategic Affairs Editor
The Hindu

Uzbekistan
&
Tajikistan

22 to 29
September 1996

New Delhi
42 Smt Maya Govind
Poet
Bombay

UK

14 & 15
September 1996

43 Professor Gopi Chand Narang
Writer
New Delhi

Norway

7 to 9
September 1996

44 Shri Kamaleshwar
Writer
New Delhi

Norway

-do -

45 Shri Himansu Joshi
Writer
Delhi

Norway

-do -

46 Shri Shamshad Maqbool
Husain
Renowned Artist
New Delhi

USA

2 to 14
September 1996

Kenya

23 to 28
September 1996

40 To participate in the 25th
Congress of International
Board on Books for the Young
(IBBY) in Groningen
41 To deliver lectures on India's
foreign policy
42 To participate in the Kavi
Sammelan in Birmingham
and London organised by
UK Hindi Samiti
43 To participate in IndoNorwegian Writers Conference
organised by the Sahityik
Vichar Sabha, Oslo
44

-do -

45

-do -

46 To co-curate the exhibition of
Contemporary American Art
held at National Gallery of
Modern Art New Delhi in
January-February 1997
-196>
47 Shri Vidya Nand Singh
Director
Govt Museum and Art Gallery

Chandigarh
48 Professor Dilip Kumar Sinha
Vice Chancellor
Visva Bharati
Santiniketan

UK

17 to 24
September 1996

49 Smt Vijaya Rajan
Chairperson
Crafts Council of India
Chennai

Morocco

16 to 20
September 1996

50 Dr Saradindu Mukherjee
Department of History
Hansraj College
University of Delhi
Delhi

USA

10 to 13
October 1996

51 Dr Vedagya Arya
Roorkee

USA

4 to 6
October 1996

52 Professor K R Singh
Centre for West
Asian & African Studies
Jawaharlal Nehru University
New Delhi

Seychelles

25 to 31
October 1996

47 To participate in the meeting
of the International Docutation Committee (CIDOC)
and the International Council
of Museums in Nairobi
48 To participate in the Conference organised to mark
75 years of the founding of
Visva Bharati University at the
Tagore Centre UK
49 To attend the meeting of
General Assembly of World
Crafts Council and the 20th
Asian Assembly of World Crafts
Council at Fez
50 To present a paper in the
Annual Conference of the
Oral History Association at
Philadelphia
51 To participate in the International Conference on
Indus-Sarasvati Age
52 To deliver a lecture on the
History of the Indian Ocean
from the Indian Ocean stand-

50% Travel
grant

point at the Eleventh Edition
of the Creole Festival held in
Victoria, Seychelles
-197>
53 Professor Sharat Kumar
Mukherjee
and Mrs Vijaya Mukherjee
Bengali Writers & Poets
Calcutta

USA

First week of
October 1996

54 Dr G Mishra
Senior Lecturer
Radhakrishnan Institute for
Advanced Study in Philosophy
University of Madras
Chennai

USA

31 October to
3 November 1996

55 Shri Jiwan Pani
Delhi

USA

17 October to
31 December 1996

56 Qari Mohd Abdul Qayoom
Shakir
Hyderabad

Bangladesh

21 to 27
November 1996

57 Dr C Panduranga Bhatta
Reader and Head in charge
Department of Sanskrit
Pondicherry University
Pondicherry

Japan

5 & 6
November 1996

53 To deliver lectures at the
University of Washington

50% Travel
grant

54 To participate in the Eighth
International Congress of
Vedanta held at Miami
University, Dayton, Ohio,
USA

-do -

55 To give a lecture in the field
of Indian Music and dance
organised by Indo-American
Friendship Society
56 To participate in the VIth
International Qirat Recitation
Conference
57 To participate in an international Conference on the
Great Religions of Asia at
Kyoto
-198>

APPENDIX-XXX Incoming Visitor Programme (nonperforming) 1996-97 (ICCR)
Incoming Visitor Programme (non-performing) 1996-97 (ICCR)
S. NO.

NAME OF PERSON

COUNTRY

PURPOSE

1 Viviene Taylor
Director
Southern African Development Education and
Policy Research Unit
(SADEP), University of
the Western Cape

South Africa To participate in the
technical workshop in
Bangalore of the Southern
HDR of the UN

2 Oleg S Kuzin
Chief Editor
St Petersburg Vedemosti
and his wife

Russia

To collect material for a
series of articles on
India

3 Patrick Pillay
Minister of Education and
Republic of Seychelles
along with his daughter

Seychelles

To identify Indian Institutions for placement
from Seychelles in Professional and Vocational
Courses

4-8 5-member Chinese delegation Yin Shoushi VicePresident of the China
Federation of Literary
and Art Circles

China

To interact with prominent
Indian artists in the field

Professor Zhou Guozhen
Jindezhen Ceramic Institute Jiangxi Province

China

-do -

Professor Li Deli
Central Academy of arts
and Design, Beijing

China

-do -

S. NO.

PERIOD

1 15 to 25
May 1996
2 21 to 31
August 1996
3 30 August to
8 September 1996
4-8 4 to 18
September 1996
-do -do -

REMARKS

-199>
Gu Peifang
Chief of the Division of
Asian Affairs External
Liaison Department of
the China Federation of
Literary and Art Circles

China

Zhang Xihai
China
English-Chinese translator

To interact with prominent
Indian artists in the field

-do -

9 Dr Philippe Regnier
Switzerland
Director
Modern Asia Research Centre
Geneva

To contact key national
institutes in India with a
view to evolving programmes
of cooperation in the fields
of teaching, training and
research about India.

10 Bapsi Sidhwa
Houston

USA

To participate in the International Seminar "The Muse
and the Minorities", New
Delhi

11 Meena Alexander

USA

12 Mzalenda Kibunjia
Curator of Antiquities
Sites & Monuments
National Museums of
Kenya Nairobi, Kenya

Kenya

13 Dr D Munjeri
Executive Director
The National Museum of
Monuments, Harare

Zimbabwe

4 to 18
September 1996
-do 9 6 to 22
September 1996
10 19 to 22
September 1996
11

-do -

12 27 to 30
October, 1996
13
-do -200>

-do To participate in an International Conference of
Ethonographic Museums
organised by the National
Museum of Man, Bhopal
-do -

14 George Mudenda
Keeper of Ethnography
The Moto Moto Museum
Zambia

Zambia

To participate in a International Conference of
Ethonographic Museums
organised by the National
Museum of Man, Bhopal

15 Professor Kenneth Waltz
Professor of Political
Science University of
Berkeley California and
his wife

USA

To meet eminent people for
interaction/dialogue and to
give a series Of lectures in
the different institutions/
universities

16 Professor William Sweet
Department of Philosophy
St. Francis Xavier University Canada

Canada

To meet professors/intellectuals in the field of
Philosophy for exchange of
views

17 11-member delegation of
Lady Monks

Bhutan

For pilgrimage to Buddhist
Shrines in India

18 Abdul Hamid Chabra

Sri Lanka

To particiate in the 30th
Anniversary celebrations of
the Press Council of India

19 K P C De Alwis

Sri Lanka

-do -

20 S Dammulla

Sri Lanka

-do -

21 R Gunasingham

Malaysia

-do -

22 Dr B B Madhukar
National Poet
Mauritius & his wife

Mauritius

To meet eminent Indian poets
and writers

23 Istvan Toth
Eminent Photographer
Hungary

Hungary

Photo project to cover diverse aspects of India

14 27 to 30
October 1996
15 14 November to
3 December 1996
16 13 to 24
November, 1996
17 11 to 26
November 1996
18 16 to 17
November 1996
19

20

-do -

-do -

21

-do -

22 14 November to
2 December 1996
23 14 November to
2 December 1996
-201>
24 Nana Nyonwah Panyin III
Chief of Dompim Pepesa
Ghana and his wife
Ghana

Ghana

25 Omar Badslia
Distinguished Writer
Artist and Art Organiser based in Cape town

South Africa Photography project for documenting people of the
towns and villages of
Gujarat

26 Ramesh Jayaram
Director Libraries and
Museums Directorate of
City Council of Johannesburg and his wife

South Africa To meet the Gandhian
scholars/visit institutions
associated with Gandhiji

27 Hassim Seedat
Gandhian Scholar and
his wife

South Africa To give lectures/talk on
"Mahatma Gandhi in South
Africa" and to visit some
academic institutions, sites
connected with Gandhiji
besides meeting a few
Gandhian Scholars

28 Daniella Kaneva
Bulgarian TV Special
Correspondent and Mr
Popav, Photographer

Bulgaria

To visit Historical monuments for Video Recording

29 Arkadiy Gladilovk
Editor-in-Chief
"Slovo Kyrgyzstan"

The Kyrgyz
Republic

To familiarise himself with
political events, current
affairs, economic issues and
issues related to Science
and Technolog

30 Ramesh Nath Pandey
Member of Parliament
and King's Nominee to
the National Assembly

Nepal

To meet eminent persons
academics and intellectuals
on foreign policy

24 26 November to
8 December 1996
25 23 November to
14 December 1996
26 5 to 19

To meet eminent persons for
discussions about development in the field of education and industry

December 1996
27 9 to 24
December 1996
28 10 to 17
December 1996
29 13 to 21
December 1996
30 30 December 1996 to
4 January 1997
-202>
31 Dr Gushkova
Indologist
Moscow

Russia

32 Dr Eugenia Vanina
Indologist
Moscow

Russia

33 Dr Ihab El-Cherif
Writer
Damascus

Syria

To take photographs of
historical monuments and
public life of India for his
book on India to be brought
out in Arabic

34 Bertie Ahern
MP Irish Parliament and
Leader of the Opposition
Party Fianna Fail and Ms
Celia Larkin

Ireland

To meet counterparts

35 Dr Kavouras Pavlos
A scholar in social and
cultural anthropology
university of Athens

Greece

To visit organisations specialising in the field of
social and cultural anthropology and to give lectures
at the National School of
Drama, IGNCA & MS University
Baroda

36 5-member Women's delegation
a) Abdullaeve Nargiza
Specialist Women's
Committee

Uzbekistan

To meet representatives
of women's organisations and
Indian women entrepreneurs

b) Tursunova Lobar
Administrative Secretary
Republican Women's Information
Centre
31 2 to 6 January 1997

To particiate in the 7th
International Conference on
Maharashtra Society and
Culture
-do -

-do -

32

-do-

33 7 December 1996 to
10 January 1997
34 7 to 13
January 1997
35 3 to 24
January 1997
36 6 to 20
January 1997
-do-203>
c) Firuza Kabulova
Manager Computer Centre
Tumaris

To meet representatives of
women's organisations and
Indian women entrepreneurs

d) Noroboeva Shrofat
Deputy JHokim for Women's
Affairs Surkhandarya
Provionce

-do-

e) Makhamatova Sharopat
Head of Women's Section
Khokimiat Syrdarya

-do-

37 Dr Jan Riechow
Head of the Department
Music & Music Culture of
WDR Radio Koln and Mrs.
Riechow

Germany

To attend the Thyagaraja
festival and interact with
leading musicians for the
Indian music programmes of
the Radio Koln

38 Gellert Gobar Kis
Chairman, Committee
Rights Minorities and
Religious Affairs Hungarian Parliament

Hungary

To meet his counterparts

39 Hon'ble Dasho Sonam
Tobgye, Chief Justice,
High Court Thimphu

Bhutan

To visit places of pilgrimage

40 Venerable Lopon Pema La
Head Lama of Nyingmalung
Monastery Bhmthang

Bhutan

For pilgrimage

41 Alphaji Ibrahim Mohammadu Nigeria
Maccido
Sultan of Sokoto
6 to 20
January 1997

To meet his counterparts

-do -do 37 16 to 31
January 1997
38 9 to 23
February 1997
39 3 to 16
February 1997
40 3 to 18
February 1997
41 Early March 1997
-204>
42 5-member Delegation led
by Kemelovna Djungaracheva Vice Prime
Minister of the
Government of the
Kyrgyz Republic

The Kyrgyz
Republic

43 Zbigniev Kaniewski
Chairman Indo-Polish
Parliamentary Group
Zofia Kuratowska
Deputy Marshal of
the Senate (Upper
House of Polish
Government) and her
husband Grzegorz
Jaszunski Journalist

Poland

44 Hon'ble R Roy McMurtry
Chief justice of Ontario

Canada

-do-

45 Dr C R Whittaker
Eminent historian of
classical Rome

UK

-do-

46 Dr Abdurrahman Nahdlatul
Ulma (NU) Jakarta

Indonesia

-do-

47 A Tweedie
Chairman Edinburg Mela

UK

-do-

42 March 1997
43 8 to 15
March 1997
44 March 1997

To meet their counterparts

-do -

45

-do-

46

-do-

47 -do-205>

APPENDIX-XXXI Orientation grant for the year 1996-1997
(ICCR)
Orientation grant for the year 1996-1997 (ICCR)
S. NO.
NAME OF PERSON

COUNTRYPURPOSE

1

Dr Amara Ranatunga
Head of the Institute of
Aesthetic Studies and
Senior Lecturer Kelaniya
University Colombo

Sri Lanka To do research in
Indian Classical
Music

2

Dayaratna Ranatunga
Director (Music Unit)
Sri Lanka Broadcasting
Corporation Colombo

Sri Lanka -do-

3

Dr Ratna Handurukande

Sri Lanka

Sri Lanka To do research at
Bhandarkar
Oriental
Research Institute,
Poona and Adyar
Library and
Research,
Madras

Pandit Amardeva

Sri Lanka

Professor of Sanskrit
Department of Classical
Languages
University of Peradeniya

4

Musician, eminent
Sri Lankan composer,
singer and Mrs Wimla
Amardeva, a well-known
folk singer, composer and
dance teacher
REMARKS

To meet faculty
members of the
Bhatkhande
Institute of Music
&
study tour to
Shantiniketan &
Lucknow
&mbsp;

1

One month orientation
grant plus

internal travel in
September 1996
2

-do-

3

One month orientation
grant in

October 1996 plus
internal travel
(train fare)
4

One month orientation
grant
November 1996

-206>

5

Dr Magda Manousha

Israel

Serouji
Lecturer
Haifa, Israel
6

Rokeya Sultana

Bangladesh

A well-known Bangladeshi
painter
7

Shamsudeen
Scholar
West Indies

8

Dr Nikoloz Kenchoshvili
Georgian Indologist

To study the status
of of women in
Indian
society

For pursuing
research
at the College of
Art
New Delhi

To do research
work
on Tracing the
& Tobago
roots
of the Indian
Immigrant to Trinidad who
had migrated
between
1845 and 1917
Trinidad

Georgia

To give lectures in
Indian universities/
institutions on

subjects pertaining
to Indo-Georgian
cultural links and
study
the similarities
5

Orientation grant for three
months from September to
December 1996

6

2 months orientation grant
14 October to 13 December
1996

7

Orientation grant for six
months from 31 August to
28 February 1997

8

3 months orientation grant
January-March 1997

-207>
APPENDIX-XXXII Logistic Support from April-December 1996
(ICCR)
Logistic Support from April-December 1996 (ICCR)
NAME OF PERSON
COUNTRY
S. NO.
1

2

Division, Media
Development
Department, Tokyo and
Tomohide
Terai Programe
Production
Department Cultural
Programmes
Division, Tokyo

Six 55-Member Soka
Gakkai International Youth Cultural
Delegation, Tokyo
2-Member delegation
Koichiro
Fukuyama Cultural
Promotions
with organising exhibition on Buddha and
broadcasting of a
series on Buddha from
April 1998

PURPOSE

Japan

Goodwill visit

Japan

Visit to Indian
Muse-

ums in
connection

3

28-Member children's
delegation Pakistan

of Karachi Grammar
School

Indian school chil-

To interact
with

dren and visit historical places of and
mosques
PERIOD
1 31 July to 9 August 1996
2 21 to 27 August 1996
3 13 to 20 December 1996
-208>
APPENDIX-XXXIII Incoming Cultural Delegations from AprilDecember 1996 (ICCR)
Incoming Cultural Delegations from April-December 1996 (ICCR)
1 The Council, in collaboration with the Max Muller Bhavan, organised performance
by the 11-Member " Pretty-Ugly" dance company from Germany on 4 April 1996 at Sri
Ram Centre, New Delhi. Besides Delhi, the Company presented performances in
Madras, Bombay and Calcutta.
2 The Council and the Embassy of Spain organised the performance by a Spanish
Flamenco Ballet Group led by Blanca Del Rey on 21 May 1996 at Siri Fort
Auditorium, New Delhi.
3 The Council, in collaboration with the Indira Gandhi National Centre for
Arts(IGNCA) and Delhi Tourism Development Corporation (DTDC), sponsored the
visit of the 17-Member "Marionette Puppet Theatre" group from Sweden of which
Michael Meschek was the Artistic Director. The group presented two shows on 2 and 3
September 1996 at Dilli Haat, New Delhi. The group also presented two shows in
Calcutta.
4 The Council and the Embassy of Mexico invited a 5-Member dance group "AralaIsland of Her Heart" choreographed by Regina Quintero from Mexico. The
performance in Delhi was organised on 18 September 1996 at India International
Centre (IIC) Auditorium, New Delhi. Besides Delhi, the group also visited Chandigarh,
Calcutta and Bombay and performed there.

5 Under the Cultural Exchange Programme with Portugal, the Council in collaboration
with the Embassy of Portugal presented a Puppet Show by a 5-Member Santo Aleixo
Puppet Group on 29 September 1996 at Tagore Hall, Azad Bhavan New Delhi.In
addition to the public show the group also presented a programme at Salwan Public
School New Delhi for school children.
6 The Council in collaboration with the Italian Embassy Cultural Centre presented a
piano concert by 3-Member group led by M Campanella from Italy on 7 October 1996
at Tagore Hall, Azad Bhavan New Delhi.
7 Under the Indo-Austrian Festival the Council extended financial support in presenting
performances by the following performing groups in Delhi in collaboration with the
Austrian Embassy and the India International Centre at the IIC auditorium.
(a) a 6-Member Dance Group consisting of Radha Anjali (Bharatanatyam), Bert
Gstettner and Zdeno Dhlos (Austrian Contemporary Dance)
(b) 2-Member "Vienna Shadow Puppet" Group led by Klaus Behrendt.
In addition a two day workshop by Dance and Puppet group was also conducted at
Tagore Hall on 9 and 10 October and 13 and 14 October 1996 respectively.
-209>
8 The Council, in collaboration with the Max Mueller Bhavan, presented the
performance by a 9-Member "Musica Antiqua-Koln" on a cost sharing basis. The group
presented their concert in Delhi on 25 October 1996.
9 Under the Cultural Exchange Programme, a 23-Member Dance Group from South
Africa presented a play "Ahimsa-Ubuntu" in Delhi on 26 October 1996 at the Kamani
Auditorium. Besides Delhi, the group presented one show each in Bombay, Ahmedabad
and Madras.
10 The Council hosted the visit of a 16-Member Folk Dance Group "Skaz Ensemble"
from Russia to participate in the Dussehra Festival at Kullu. Besides their participation
in Kullu the Group presented their performances in Chandigarh, Delhi and Lucknow as
well.
11 Under the "Indo-Australia New Horizons" the Council extended logistic support for
presentation of the various events presented by the performing groups from Australia.
12 A musical evening of folk songs by Pete Seeger the legendary folk singer from the
United States, accompanied by his grandson Tao Rodrigues was arranged in November
1996 at Siri Fort Auditorium. Ustad Amjad Ali Khan was the Chief Guest on the
occasion. Pete Seeger also performed in Varanasi, Calcutta, Thiruvananthapuram and
Bangalore.

13 A Music Concert by the Polish String Quartet was arranged by ICCR which was
led by Jadwiga Kotnowska, a young outstanding Flautist, who has performed
extensively in Poland and other parts of the world. The performance was held on 19
November 1996 at the Mini Siri Fort Auditorium New Delhi.
14 Santoor Recital by Dr Bee Seavers, a German Musicologist accompanied by an
Indian Tabla Player on 30 November 1996 at Tagore Hall, New Delhi.
15 A Musical concert by the "Netherlands Trio": Rian De Waal (Piano), Henrik
FLodding (Cello) and Christiaan Bor (Violin) was presented on 19 December 1996 at
the IIC auditorium.
16 A 22-Member Theatre Group from Iran visited India from 6-20 December 1996 to
perform a mystical play with a contribution of dance, movement, chanting and poetry
by Attar Hafiz and Molana at New Delhi.
17 The Council organised the concert tour of a Musical Trio from Netherlands-Rian De
Waal (Piano), Harro Ruijsenaars (Cello) and Christiaan Bor (Violin) during 9-21
December 1996 which performed in Delhi, Chennai, Thiruvananthapuram and Calcutta.
18 Under the Indo-Sri Lankan Cultural Exchange Programme (CEP), the ICCR hosted
the visit of a 19-Member cultural group from Sri Lanka during December 1996. The
group performed in Delhi besides performances in Lucknow and Jabalpur.
-210>
19 Under the Indo-Iran CEP, the ICCR hosted the visit of a 22-Member theatre group
from Iran which performed a play based on the Sufi mystical poem the "Seven Abodes
of Love" from Iran. Apart from Delhi, the group performed in Hyderabad and Mumbai.
-211>
APPENDIX-XXXIV Outgoing Performing Delegations from AprilDecember 1996 (ICCR)
Outgoing Performing Delegations from April-December 1996 (ICCR)

S.NO. COUNTRY TYPE OF GROUP

1

France

2

Nepal

PERIOD

EXPENDITURE
CEP/
(IN RS) OUT. CEP

Padma Tawalkar group
April 1996
Rs 1.5 Lakhs
Khayal Singer x 3
Bombay
Amjad Ali Khan
4 to 6 April 1996 Rs 3 Lakhs
Sarod Master x 5

3

Morocco

4

Thailand

Madhvi Mudgal x 7
Odissi Group
Dr Padma
Subramanyam
Bharatanatyam Group
from Madras x 15

13 to 15 April
1996

Rs.45,000/-

20 to 30 April
1996

Agency Work

REMARKS
1 To give performances at the exposition of Indian Culture and an exhibition entitled
"18th Century French Adventure in the India of Maharajas" at the Theatre of Chambery
2 Special concert organised by the Indian Embassy in Kathmandu in honour of His
Majesty the King of Nepal.
3 To give a performance at the request of Mission for Charity Show
4 To participate in the Festival of India, Thailand
-212>
Monika Newsan
18 April April 1996
Rs 34,000/Bharatanatyam Dancer
Renu Bassi
6 Morocco Kathak Dancer
24 to 28 April 1996
Rs 4 Lakhs
New Delhi x 5
Pandit V G Jog
7 Singapore Violinist
21 to 31 May 1996
Rs 5 Lakhs
Calcutta
Shobha Naidu x 5
8 UK
21 to 31 May 1996
Rs 5 Lakhs
Kuchipudi Dance Group
12-member Mask Dance
9 Singapore Group from Sikkim
26 to 30 May 1996
Rs 5 Lakhs
(Govt of Sikkim)
Budhadev DasGupta
30 May to 15 June 1996
Rs 40,000/10 UK
Esraj Player
5 Bharatanatyam dance at the function for installation of Bust of Mahatma Gandhi
5 Panama

6 To participate in the "Indian Expo" in Morocco
7 To perform at the invitation of Nrityalaya Aesthetics Society Singapore
8 At the invitation of Ms Anne Hunt Director, World Circuit Arts, London for performances at the Indian Festival of Southern Culture
9 To give a performance at inauguration of Singapore Arts Festival, Singapore

10 To perform at cultural events on Tagore organised by Maison des Culture du Monde
-213>
Rabindra Sangeet Singers
Republic of
5 to 12 May
11
x 5; Dance (Traditional) &
Rs 6 Lakhs
Korea
1996
Music
Sanjukta Panigrahi
14 June to 15
Rs 5 Lakhs (Travel
12 Australia
Odissi Dance Group x 6
July 1996
Grant)
Bhubhaneshwar
Ustad Alla Rakha,
5 to 10 June
Rs 1.20 Lakhs (Travel
13 Israel
Fazal Qureshi,
Grant)
1996
Ustad Sultan Khan
Dr Gopal Shankar Mishra
9 to 30 June
14 Germany
Rs 20,000/Veena and Sitar
1996
Player from Banaras
Penaz Masani
14 to 18
15 Mauritius
Rs 4 Lakhs
Ghazal Singer x
6 June 1996
Bombay
11 Celebration of 135th birth Anniversary of Tagore
12 Invitation received from Federation of Indian Association of Victoria
13 To perform at Israel Festival, Israel
14 To give performances cum lectures/work- shops at the invitation of the Liaden
Museum Stuttgart, Germany (50% Travel Grant)
15 To perform at the invitation of the President of Mauritius for Mega Concert-A Charity
Show to raise funds for eradication of polio in the Islands of Indian Ocean Region,
Mauritius
-214>
10-member Bharatanatyam
Dance Group from Bombay
and 5-member group Professor T N 2 to 7 July 1996
Rs 10 Lakhs
16 France
Krishnan
Violinist from Madras
10-member Children's
30 July to 5 August Rs 5 Lakhs
Group of Delhi Public
17 France
1996
CEP
School, New Delhi led
by S. Chona Principal
Gulabi Sapera and
D.P.R of
Rs 10 Lakhs
School, New Delhi led
18
April 1996
Korea
CEP
Nizamuddin Langa
Rajasthani Music Group

19 France

10-member Children's
Group of Delhi Public
School, New Delhi led
by S. Chona Principal

30 July to 5 August Rs 5 Lakhs
1996
CEP

20 Sri Lanka
12-member Pung Cholam August 1996 Rs 5 Lakhs
and Dhol Cholam from
Manipur
21 Hungary
Durga Arya
16 August to Rs 4 Lakhs
Kathak Group 6 September 1996
New Delhi
22 Kenya
Jagjit Singh x 3
14 to 19
Rs 1 Lakh
Ghazal Singer
August 1996
16 To participate in the Festival of D'Nates
17 To give a performance at the International Youth Talent Festival
18 To participate in April Spring Friendship Art Festival" in Pyong Yang
19 To participate in the Women Arts Festival in Durban and performances in other
countries in the region
20 To perform in the "SAARC Drum and Dance Festival" in Colombo, Sri Lanka
21 To participate in "Naturexpo" in Budapest
22 To give a performance at the "Made in India" show in Nairobi, Kenya
-215>
23
music group from
Rajasthan
24
Turkey
Cyprus

Bhutan

Gulabi Sapera folk
dance/

12 to
19

Lok Chand

2 to 20 Rs 10 Lakhs

Rs 3 Lakhs

August 1996
Syria
Folk Dance
Group
from West
Bengal

August 1996

25

UK

V P Dhananjayan

and Mrs Dhananjayan

September 1996 (Travel Grant)

26

Russia

Cultural Groups of

August-

Rs 1 Lakh
T.G.

16 to
28

Rs 90 Lakhs

(150 Artistes)
September 1996
1 Ustad Zakir Hussain x 8
2 Ritu Samhar
(a) Madhavi Mudgal x 3
(b) Preeti Patel x 4
(c) Bharti Shivaji x 3
(d) Saswati Sen x 4
(e) Leela Samson x 3
(f) V Ravi Shankar x 3
3 Uday Jadugar
Magic Group x 4
4 Parvati Khan x 13
5 Bhoomika, Modem
dance x 14
6 Subha Mudgal
Hindustani Vocal x 4
7 Bihu x 12 from Assam
8 Raghunath Seth-Flute x 4
23 Independence Day Celebrations Thimpu,Bhutan
24 TO participate in the International Amity Festival and also perform in Turkey and
Cyprus
25 Two Travel Grants in connection with theproject "Hidden Forces"-London, UK
26 To perform for "Days of Indian Culture"
-216>
9 Prof T N KrishnanViolin x 5
10 Aavishkar-Folk
dance from
Gujarat x 15
27

USA

by Guru Kelucharan
Mahapatra,
Bhubaneshwar x 8

20 November

Odissi Dance
Group led

10 September Rs 6 Lakhs (8
to
TGS)

Renu Bassi
Kathak

13 to 16

1996

28

Republic

of Korea

dance group x
September 1996
5

Harwinder Bajwa
Bhangara group x 12
29

Switze-

Smt Aruna

15 to 22

Rs 2.5 Lakhs

Sayeerarn

TG

rland

Carnatic
Vocal x

4 September 1996

30

UK

Ustad Sabri Khan 5 September
Rs 86000 TG
x2
to

30 October
1996
31

Oman

5-member Kathak 29 September
Rs 2 Lakhs
Group
to

by Ms Aditi Mangal
3 October
Das
1996
New Delhi
27 To perform at the Centre for World Music and Related Arts, USA
28 Asia Week celebration in Pusan
29 To perform at the invitation of the Association for Classical Indian Music, Zurich,
Switzerland
30 To perform at the invitation of Sonia Sabri, Birmingham, UK
31 To give a performance in connection with the State visit of the President of India to
the Sultanate of Oman
-217>
32 Iraq
Bahrain
UAE
33 Germany
Ireland
Belgium
Switzerland
Netherlands
United Kingdom
34 Vietnam

35 Sri Lanka

36 South

Maya Rao, Folk Dance
group from Bangalore

30 September to Rs 10 Lakhs
14 October 1996

Singh Bandhu x 5
Hindustani Vocalist

16 September to Rs 12 Lakhs
7 October 1996

1 Pt Bhajan Sopri x 3
(Santoor)
2 Kathak dance group of
Rohini Bhate x 11
3 Pung Cholam (Drums of
Manipur) x 6
4 Craftsman x 2
Shovana Narayan
Kathak Dancer x 6
New Delhi
U Srinivas x 4

7 to 17
October 1996

Rs 27 Lakhs CEP

29 September to Rs 3.5 Lakhs CEP
3 October 1996 (Item no
1.29 of draft CEP)
18 to 24
Rs 2 Lakhs TG

Africa

Mandolin Player
Madras

September 1996

32 To participate in Babylon International Festival in Iraq & the Basra Festival in Syria
33 To give performance organised by Indian Missions in the countries listed
34 To give performances in "Days of Indian Culture/Indian Manifestation" in Vietnam
35 To give performances
36 To give a performance at the invitation of Mr Mahalingam Kolapan, Exective
Director of the Institute of Art & Culture, Pretoria, South Africa
-218>
37 Nepal

Rahmat Khan Langa

3 to 7

Folk Dance & Music

October 1996

Rs 4 Lakhs

group of Rajasthan x12
38 Bhutan

Sonal Mansingh x 7

24 October to

Odissi Dancer, New Delhi

5 November 1996

Kathakali Dance Group

9 October to

Mexico

of Kerala Kala Mandalam

6 November 1996

Panama

(11-members)

39 USA

Rs 5.5 Lakhs

Rs 18 Lakhs

El Salvador
Nicaragua
Peru
40 Belgium

Six musicians

41 Turkmenistan Pop Music group of

42 Seychelles

15 to 31 October 1996 Rs 5 Lakhs

25 October to

Gautam Roy Chowdhary

6 November 1996

4-member group of

17 October to

Rs 5 Lakhs

Rs 3 Lakhs

Mauritius

Mohan Bhatt Nanu,

1 November 1996

Rajsthan Puppet
43 Mauritius

12-member Purulia Chhau

6 to 14

Rs 6 Lakhs

group of Shri Satish

November 1996

Mahto, West Bengal
37 To give performances in Nepal
38 To give performances in Bhutan
39 To participate in the Cervantino Festival and to perform in "India Week" organised
by Missions chain
40 To interact and present joint performances with Belgian musicians
41 To participate in the 5th anniversary celebrations of Independent Turkmenistan
42 To participate in the Creole Festival in Seychelles & Mauritius
43 To perform at the Dussera Celebrations in Mauritius
-219>
44Pakistan

13-member Calcutta
Puppet Group of Suresh
Dutta

17 to 29
Rs 2 Lakhs
October 1996

Satish Vyas x 2

October to

Santoor Player

November
1996

3-member group of
Andhra
shadow puppet group led
by Dr Leela Upadhyaya
45Australia
New Zealand
46Reunion

Saroja Vaidyanathan

Islands

Bharatanatyam Folk

Madagascar
Kenya

Dance and Music Group
x 15
15-member Dance &
Music
November 1996

47Egypt
from Manipur & Abhik

Rs 1 Lakh
T.G

3 to 18
November
1996

Rs 6 Lakhs

1 to 10

Rs 7 Lakhs

Sarkar (sarod player x 3)
48Japan
15-member Dance and
Music Group
4 February 1996
1 Panchavadyam group x
7
2 Kathak group of
Rajinder
Gangani x 8
49USA

Pandit Hari Prasad

Chaurasia x 3
Pandit Vishwa Mohan
Bhai x 1

26 January to

Rs 10 Lakhs

10 September
Rs 2.5 Lakhs
to

5 November 1996

44 To participate in the International Puppet Festival organised by Rafi Peer Theatre
Workshop & Rafi Peer Group Lahore, Pakistan
45 To perform at the invitation of World Culture Music, Sydney,Australia
46 To perform during Diwali Celebrations in Reunion Islands & subsequent tour of the
region
47 The Indian Cultural Festival at American University, Cairo, Egypt
48 To give a performance at the invitation of the Saitama Prefectures, Japan
49 Indian Music Concert arranged by Centre for the Performing Arts of India,
University of Pittsburg, USA.
-220>
Kathak group of
Vaswati
October 1996

50

Ireland

Denmark
Sweden
Belgium

Mishra. x 11

51

Greece

Turkey
Azerbaijan

Puppet Group led
By N B Sharma

52

France

Artist from
Rajasthan

3 December
Rs 42,00/- 2 T.G.
to

USA

Mrs. Kale x 2

March 1997

7-member
Shadow
October 1996

24 to 28

Rs 4 Lakhs

11 to 22

Rs 7 Lakhs

22 December
1996
53

Rs 2 Lakhs 2 T.
G.

54
New
Zealand

Australia

9-member Daksha
March 1997 Rs 10 Laksh
Seth

Kathak &
Contemporary
Dance group

Rs 2 Lakhs 50%
Kalari Payattu
March 1997
of 8 T.G.
artistes
50 To give performances at the festival "Celebration of Senses"

55

UK

51 To give performances at International Theatre Festival in Greece and thereafter tour
the countries in the region
52 To perform at the invitation of "Theatre Entete" in France
53 India Music Concert being organised by the Centre of Performing Arts of
India,University of Pittsburg,USA
54 To participate in the Festival of Fire
55 To participate in the project "Beyond the Wall"
-221>
APPENDIX-XXXV Cultural programmes by Indian artistes
(ICCR)
Cultural programmes by Indian artistes (ICCR)
1 The Council presented an Odissi Dance Recital by Jyoti Srivastava, disciple o f Guru
Shriinath Raut on 4 April 1996 at Tagore Hall Azad Bhavan New Delhi.
2 A Semi Classical Vocal Recital by Rekha Surya was presented by the Council on 12
April 1996 at Tagore Hall.
3 The Council presented a special programme of Qawali by Aslam Sabri at Rashtra pati
Bhavan on 26 April 1996 in honour of the President of India.
4 A Bharatanatyam Recital by Komala Varadan was presented by the Council on 10 May
1996 at Tagore Hall.
5 A Summer Arts Festival was organised from 20-23 June 1996 at Tagore Hall, whe re
among others Swapna Sundari, Syed Zafar Khan and Shubha Mudgal participated.
6 A four day Cultural Confluence was designed by the Council to offer a variety of rich
classical traditions in Indian Music and Dance. Eminent artistes parti cipated.
7 A Festival of music and dance by Indian artistes was organised by the Council from 2731 August 1996 as part of the Heritage series at Tagore Hall.

8 Sonal Mansingh, Padmabhushan awardee, performed an Odissi dance on 27 August
1996 with the scholar coordinator Shanta Serbjeet Singh; Ustad Sabri Khan, Padm ashree
awardee gave a Sarangi recital on 28 August with the scholar coordinator Professor
Sumati Mutatkar; Leela Samson, Padmashree awardee gave a Bharatanaty am dance
performance on 29 August with Leela Venkataraman as the scholar-coordi nator; Bharati
Shivaji gave a Mohiniattam dance performance on 30 August with t he scholarcoordinater Shri Jiwan Pani and Raja-Radha Reddy, Padmashree awardee s, gave a
Kuchipudi dance performance on 31 August with Shri Ashish Khokar as t he scholarcoordinator.
9 The Council extended logistic support in presenting a Bharatanatyam Recital o n 28
October 1996 at Convention Hall, Ashok Hotel in honour of the delegates at tending the
Conference of the UNESCAP.
10 The Council extended logistic support in presenting a cultural programme by the Folk
Dance Group from UP, Rajasthan and Punjab on 29 October 1996 at the La l Chowk,
Pragati Maidan in honour of the delegates of the 13th ASEB Meeting.
-222>
11 On the occasion of dinner hosted by the Foreign Secretary for the delegates attending
the SAARC Conference in New Delhi, the ICCR presented a Kathak Recita l by Vandana
Kaul at Hotel Taj Palace on 17 December 1996.
12 On the occasion of a dinner hosted by the Minister of External Affairs for t he
delegates attending the SAARC Conference, the ICCR presented a cultural prog ramme
"Jugalbandi" of Bhagayalakshmi (Veena) and Mukesh Sharma (Sarod) at Hyder abad
House, New Delhi on 19 December 1996.
-223>
APPENDIX-XXXVI Incoming Exhibitions from April-December
1996 (ICCR)
Incoming Exhibitions from April-December 1996 (ICCR)
Incoming Exhibitions
1 ICCR, in collaboration with Air India, presented an exhibition of Cartoons by Mario
Miranda, titled "The World" in May 1996.
2 An exhibition of photographs entitled "VISIONS": 50 years of United Nations w as
inaugurated by Smt Usha Narayanan, wife of the Vice-President of India.
3 "INTERNATIONAL PHOTOGRAPHIC ART" an exhibition of photographers were
held fro m 28 August to 3 September 1996.
4 An exhibition of marble sculptures by the well known sculptor G L Narayan fro m
Mumbai was arranged during 6-13 September 1996.

5 An exhibition of paintings entitled "Images of Antipodes" by the Mexican arti st
Eduardo Nunez Valbuena was shown in association with the Embassy of Mexico f rom
23 September to I October 1996.
6 Under the Indo-Swedish Cultural Protocol an exhibition of paintings by the fa mous
Swedish Painter Violet Tengberg entitled "VISION OF THE WORLD EGG" was hel d
in November 1996.
-224>
APPENDIX-XXXVII Outgoing Exhibitions and Films from AprilDecember 1996 (ICCR)
Outgoing Exhibitions and Films from April-December 1996 (ICCR)
Outgoing Exhibitions
1 A collection of contemporary paintings by Indian artists which was loaned to ICCR by
the Lalit Kala Akademi, New Delhi were sent for display at Indian Cultu ral Centres
located in Almaty, Berlin, Cairo, Durban, Georgetown, Jakarta, joha nnesberg, London,
Moscow, Paramaribo, Port Louis and Tashkent.
2 Selected children's paintings obtained from the Shankar's International Child ren's
Competition Society were sent for participation in the "6th International Children Art
Exhibition" held in Republic of Korea.
3 Works by Ved Nayyar and Gogi Sarojpal were sent to Greece for participation i n the
event entitled 'WHERE ARE YOU MY BROTHER?' organised by the art group "Ar tists
Without Frontiers" in May 1996.
4 The Council commissioned and despatched a boat sculpture by noted sculptur B K
Guru for the monument to mark the arrival of Indian Immigrants in Guyana.
5 A replica of the statue of Lord Buddha was sent to Sri Lanka to be installed at the
Tooth Relic Temple (Dalada Maligawa), one of the most sacred worship pla ces for
Buddhists in Sri Lanka at Kandy.
6 The Council sent an exhibition of contemporary paintings, loaned by Lalit Kal a
Akademi, New Delhi for participation in the International Art Festival in Kat hmandu
during December 1996.
7 ICCR also sent a small exhibition of paintings by Children to Kathmandu being the
entry for SAARC Children Paintings Competition in December 1996.
Films
1 A Sri Lankan film festival was held at India International Centre from 18-23 August,
1996 in collaboration with High Commission of Sri Lanka and the India I nternational

Centre.
-225>
APPENDIX-XXXVIII Books sent under presentation scheme
from April-December 1996
Books sent under presentation scheme from April-December 1996
AUSTRALIA 5 copies of "Guru Granth Sahib".
BELARUS 28 books on History and Culture sent for presentation to various Academic
Institute.
BOTSWANA 2 copies of the "Guru Granth Sahib" in Punjabi were sent for presentation
to the Sikh Council in Botswana.
BRAZIL 25 coffee table books.
BELGIUM 30 children's books from Children's Book Trust (CBT) sent for a Poetry
Competition held there.
70 books on India sent for the Library of the University of Ghent,
BURKINA FASO 50 pictorial books on Art, Architecture, Handicrafts, Culture were sent
for display on the occasion of "Information on India Day".
CANADA 14 books on Dr Ambedkar sent for the University of Victoria.
CHINA 868 slides & materials consisting of 22 brochures, 9 video cassettes.
FRANCE 22 brochures, 9 video cassettes, 868 slides.
GHANA 19 French books on India, 10 folders and 4 video cassettes sent for display in
the "India Week" held in Bangui Central African Republic.
35 books on Religion and Culture sent for the Kumasi School.
GUYANA A copy of the "Glimpses of the World History" sent to Indian Cultural Centre
for reference.
HONGKONG 14 coffee table books sent.
HUNGARY 46 books on History & Culture sent for presentation to the Deptt of IndoEuropean Studies, Budapest.
133 books in Hindi sent for the Elete University.
ISRAEL 50 Malayalam books for presentation to the Jewish Community.
IRAN One set of text books on Mathematics from I-XII standard despatched for display
in the First Iranian Mathematics Education Conference.

11 volumes on the Maulana Abul Kalam Azad were sent for presentation to "FARS
Study Foundation Shiraz".
IRAQ 33 books on Science & Technology sent for the University of Technology in
Baghdad.
868 slides brought out by the CCRT sent for Dean College of Fine Arts.
-226>
JAPAN A set of 54 children's books sent for display in the World Children's il lustrated
Book Exhibition.
JORDAN 25 books on India sent for presentation to the Institute of Diplomacy in
Amman.
KAZAKHSTAN A set of 4 books on International Relations despatched.
REPUBLIC OF KOREA 22 books on Rabindranath Tagore sent for display in the
Exhibition on Nobel Prize Literature.
THE KYRGYZ REPUBLIC 44 books on India and its Foreign Policy sent for the
Foreign Office Library.
4 posters on Indian Monuments, 5 photographs of Mahatma Gandhi and 3 paintings sent.
43 books and 5 photographs of Mahatma Gandhi sent for the Humanitus University.
LIBYA 24 books on Rabindranath Tagore and 20 cassettes on Rabindra Sangeet sent for
the Speech Competition on the life message and poetry of Rabindranath Tagore.
5 video cassettes and 45 books on Ghalib sent for the Hindustani Quami Ekta Forum and
the Indian Women Association.
91 books on India despatched for presentation to the Indian Community School in
Tripoli.
MALTA 50 books on India sent for the University of Malta.
MOZAMBIQUE 15 coffee table books sent.
41 books on India sent for the University of Eduardo Mondlane University.
MUSCAT 14 ICCR Publications sent.
MYANMAR 30 panchang and 100 calendars in Bengali sent for distribution to the B
engali speaking community.

NEPAL 28 books on History and Culture sent for presentation to various Academic
Institutions.
PAKISTAN 6 books on Buddha, 5 posters, 6 statues of Buddha sent for display in
Festival of Lights to commemorate the Vesak Day.
PHILIPPINES 4 books on Religion sent to a Philipino National.
PANAMA 31 books (Novels and ICCR Publications) sent for the Panama University.
SEYCHELLES 26 novels by Indian writers for Prison Library in Victoria.
-227>
SLOVAKIA 2 books and one set of video cassettes on dance sent for presentation to a
local school.
SOUTH AFRICA 22 coffee table books and 10 Lalit Kala Folders sent.
SUDAN 92 books on India and Indian culture sent for display in the Exhibition i n
connection with Indian Week.
SWITZERLAND 2 books and one set of video cassettes on dance sent for presentation to
a local school.
TAJIKISTAN 15 coffee table books and 30 ladies scarves sent for presentation during
International Women's Day.
THAILAND 2 copies each of the 20 coffee table books were sent for presentation to the
Thai dignitaries.
TURKEY 221 Urdu books despatched for presentation to various Universities.
TURKMENISTAN 2 books on India sent for presentation to Ms Babaeva, a Turkmen
research scholar.
TRINIDAD AND 20 coffee table books sent.,
TOBAGO 10 copies each of "Discovery of India "and "My Experiment with Truth".
15 posters were sent for the Exhibition during Diwali Celebration Week.
UKRAINE 40 books on Philosophy, Religion and History despatched for presentatio n to
the Institute for Asian and African Studies.
UNITED ARAB 20 coffee table books sent.

EMIRATES 2 sets of five video cassettes on Indian Classical dances.
200 copies of children's books of Children's Book Trust (CBT) sent for presenta tion to
school children.
22 brochures, 9 video cassettes and 868 slides brought out by CCRT.
A set of 13 books on and by Jawaharlal Nehru sent for the Awardees of Painting
Competition.
USA 2 sets of "Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi" of 100 books each for present
ation to the Centre for India Studies, University of Stonybrook, New York and A rsha
Vidya Gurukulum.
-228>
Musical Instruments/Art objects sent under presentation scheme from April-Septe mber
1996 (ICCR)
ARGENTINA 3 musical instruments (Harmonium, a pair of Tablas, Sitar), 10 video
cassettes and CDs sent for presentation to the Chab-Tareb.
TURKMENISTAN 2 sets of musical instruments of a Harmonium, a pair of Tablas & F
lute sent to the Ganga Club, Ashgabat.
GHANA 15 trophies sent for presentation to the Awardees of the Jawaharlal Nehru
Painting Competition.
SWAZILAND 3 musical instruments (One Harmonium, a pair of Tablas, a Sitar) sent for
the National Museum of Swaziland.
NETHERLANDS 3 musical instruments (a pair of Tablas, One Harmonium, a Sitar) se nt
for the Hindustani Music and Dance School in Rotterdam.
NEW ZEALAND 2 musical instruments (Harmonium, a pair of Tablas) sent for the We
llington Hindi School.
POLAND 5 pairs of dolls representing various states of India, 20 Lalit Kala Fol ders, 20
coffee table books despatched.
PAPUA NEW 2 musical instruments (One Harmonium, a pair of Tablas) sent.
GUINEA
SUDAN 2 musical instruments (One Harmonium, a pair of Tablas) sent to the Assoc
iations of Indian Community in Omdurmam and Khartoum
SURINAM One set of 6 costumes for Ram, Ravana, Sita, Surpnakha, Jatayu and Laxm

an sent for presentation to the Mata Gauri Foundation.
BRAZIL 2 sets of musical instruments (One Sitar, a Pair of Tablas, One Mridanga m &
One Vichitra Veena) and 5 video cassettes on Indian Classical Dance sent fo r
presentation to the local cultural organisations to promote Indian Music and Dance.
NEPAL One set of Sitar, a pair of Tablas, Tanpura, One Harmonium and One Flute sent
for presentation to University, Deptt of Music in Kathmandu.
BOTSWANA One set of a Rudra Veena, a Shruti box, a Ghungroo, a Harmonium and a
Mridangam was airfreighted for presentation to School of Bharatnatyam and Music .
BANGLADESH 2 dolls representing India were sent for display in the Internationa l
Dolls Show.
UKRAINE 5 sets each of the costumes of Bharatnatyam and Kathak and 10 sets of g
hungroos were sent for presentation to the various dance institutions in Ukrain e, Georgia
and Armenia.
-229>
APPENDIX-XXXIX Visiting Professors-Chairs of Indian Studies
Abroad (ICCR)
Visiting Professors-Chairs of Indian Studies Abroad (ICCR)
Under various schemes, the ICCR sends abroad Visiting Professors for teaching I
ndology, Indian Language and allied subjects. During the period under report th e
following academics were In position abroad:
1 Dr M Venkateshwar
Visiting Associate Professor of Hindi at University of Sofia, Bulgaria
2 Dr Shashi Mudiraj
Visiting Professor of Hindi at the University of Warsaw, Poland
3 Dr Triloki Nath Singh
Visiting Professor of Hindi at the Indian Cultural Centre, Paramaribo, Surinam
4 Dr S C Kumar
Visiting Professor of Hindi at University of West Indies, Port of Spain, Trinidad and
Tobago
5 Dr N Jayaram

Visiting Professor of Social & Cultural Anthropology at the University of West
Indies, St Augustine Campus, Port of Spain, Trinidad and Tobago
6 Dr V P Mohd. Kunju Matharu
Visiting Professor of Hindi at the State University, Ghent, Belgium
7 Dr Usha Satyavrat Shastri
Visiting Associate Professor of Hindi at the Silpakorn University, Bangkok, Thailand
8 Dr Ramesh Chand Sharma
Visiting Professor of Hindi at the Hankuk University of Foreign Studies, Seoul, Republic
of Korea
9 Dr Anita Ganguly
Visiting Associate Professor of Hindi at the Helsinki University, Finland
10 Dr Kailash Narayan Tiwari
Visiting Associated Professor of Hindi at Ankara University, Ankara, Turkey
11 Dr Geeta Sharma
Visiting Professor of Hindi at Jawaharlal Nehru Cultural Centre, Moscow, Russia
-230>
12 Dr Syed Asghar Wajahat
Visiting Professor of Hindi at the Eotvos Lorand University, Budapest, Hungary
13 Post Vacant
Visiting Professor of Sanskrit at Sorbonne Nouvelle University, Paris, France
14 Dr Rewati Raman Pandey
Visiting Professor of Sanskrit at Mahatma Gandhi Institute, Port Louis, Mauritius
15 Dr K Nachimuthu
Visiting Professor of Tamil at Warsaw University, Warsaw, Poland

-231>


