   java script is required for this page java script is required for this
   page java script is required for this page java script is required for
   this page java script is required for this page java script is required
   for this page

   Sun, February 08, 2015 at 03:12:22 IST Indian Flag
   Ministry of                      Print Content Small Font Medium Font      
    External       MEA Library      Large Font                                
    Affairs,   Ministry of External   * Sitemap                               
   Government  Affairs, Government    * Contact Us                            
    of India         of India         * Feedback                              
                                      * _____________________           [  ]  

     * Home
     * Director's Office
          * Director Lib & Info
          * Library Officers & Staff
     * Journals
          * Current Journals
          * Online Journals
          * CD-ROMs Databases
     * Online Services
          * Business Monitor Online
          * EIU
          * JSTOR
          * Janes Online Services
          * Kessing World News Archive
          * Marketline MDIC
          * Online Service Links
     * Newspapers
          * E-Newspapers
          * Subscribed Print Newspapers
     * Library Bulletins
          * Foreign Affairs Documentation Bulletin
          * Recent Additions
          * Chronicle of Events
     * Alert
          * Book Alert
          * Article Alerts
     * Important Abbrevations

 Annual Reports Prior to 1999                                                                                 
   * Home >   Annual Reports Prior to 1999 >   Annual Report 1986-87                          * Home          
 Annual Report 1986-87                                                                        * Director's    
                                                                                                Office        
                                          CONTENTS                                            * Journals      
 Introduction (iii-xiii)                                                                      * Online        
                                                                                                Services      
 S.No.  CHAPTERS                                                                  Page No.    * Newspapers    
 I. India's Neighbours                                                            1-10        * Alert         
 II. South-East Asia                                                              11-15       * Important     
 III. East Asia                                                                   16-21         Abbrevations  
 IV. West Asia and North Africa                                                   22-26       * Back          
 V. Africa (South of the Sahara)                                                  27-31                       
 VI. Europe                                                                       32-40                       
 VII. The Americas                                                                41-46                       
 VIII. United Nations and International Conferences                               47-76                       
 IX. Foreign Economic Relations                                                   77-80                       
 X. Policy Planning and Research                                                  81-83                       
 XI. External Publicity                                                           84-87                       
 XII. Cultural Relations                                                          88-93                       
 XIII. Indians Overseas                                                           94                          
 XIV. Protocol                                                                    95-96                       
 XV. Passport, and Consular Services                                              97-102                      
 XVI. Administration and Organisation                                             103-106                     
 XVII. Foreign Service Training Institute                                         107                         
 XVIII. Use of Hindi in Official Work                                             108-109                     
 APPENDICES -II> -III>                                                            111-141                     
 INTRODUCTION                                                                                                 
 Peace, disarmament and development continued to be the main thrusts of India's foreign                       
 policy during the year. The principles of non-alignment, the struggle for emancipation                       
 from all forms of colonialism and the promotion of friendship with all countries,                            
 particularly neighbours, continued to inspire its conduct.                                                   
                                                                                                              
 The Non-aligned Movement was naturally an important focus of India's diplomatic efforts.                     
 As Chairman of the Movement till September India strove to expand the areas of consensus,                    
 keep negotiations alive in matters of controversy and suggest a constructive path in                         
 dealing with the major issues facing the world community. India's efforts to advance the                     
 cohesion and sense of purpose of the Movement were widely acclaimed. In preparation for                      
 the Eighth Summit Conference at Harare the Ministerial Meeting of the Co-ordinating Bureau                   
 was held in New Delhi to review progress on political and economic matters. The Harare                       
 Summit summed up the results achieved and laid down the lines of future advance. It                          
 reaffirmed the Movement's concern for a new international economic order, stressed the                       
 need for greater South-South co-operation by approving the Action Programme on Economic                      
 Co-operation drawn up in Delhi in April and endorsed the establishment of a Standing                         
 Ministerial Committee on Economic Relations for a dialogue between the North and the                         
 South.                                                                                                       
                                                                                                              
 As was to be expected, the Harare Summit devoted its main attention to the crisis in                         
 Southern Africa caused by the aggressive racism of the Pretoria regime. An Action for                        
 Resisting Invasion, Colonialism and Apartheid (AFRICA) Fund was established with a                           
 nine-member Fund Committee with India as Chairman to assist the Frontline States and the                     
 liberation movements to resist the onslaughts of the apartheid Pretoria regime. A Summit                     
 meeting of the Africa Fund Committee Member-States was held in New Delhi in January 1987.                    
 The Plan of Action adopted by the Summit delineated seven areas of priority assistance to                    
 the Frontline States, the mobilisation of public opinion and financial resources.                            
 Contributions amounting to US $ 70 million have already been pledged to the Fund which                       
 includes India's own contribution of Rs. 50 crores over a period of three years.                             
 -IV>                                                                                                         
                                                                                                              
 The struggle against apartheid remained a central element of India's foreign policy during                   
 the year. The visits of the Prime Minister to Zambia, Zimbabwe, Angola and Tanzania in May                   
 1986 highlighted the value we attach to bilateral relations with these countries as well                     
 as underline India's solidarity with them in regard to the liberation struggle in South                      
 Africa and Namibia. In its capacity as the then Chairman of the Non-aligned Movement India                   
 co-sponsored, along with the Organisation of African Unity, a World Conference on                            
 Sanctions against racist South Africa in Paris in June 1986. That the evils of racism and                    
 colonialism persist in South Africa due to the sustenance provided by some Western powers                    
 was also made clear by the Prime Minister at the meeting of the Heads of Government of the                   
 seven Commonwealth countries in London in August. The meeting considered the report of the                   
 Commonwealth Eminent Persons Group on South Africa and endorsed a call for sanctions                         
 against the Pretoria regime.                                                                                 
                                                                                                              
 Another prominent focus of India's efforts during the year was the urgent need for                           
 disarmament. In pursuance of the Six-Nation Initiative the leaders of Argentina, Greece,                     
 Mexico, Tanzania, Sweden and India met at Ixtapa in Mexico in August and urged the United                    
 States and the Soviet Union to agree on a moratorium on nuclear weapon testing and                           
 suggested concrete steps to assist in achieving adequate arrangements for verification.                      
 General Secretary Gorbachev announced his full support of this proposal. President Reagan                    
 while declaring that a Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty remained a long-term objective,                         
 indicated that the United States found it necessary to continue nuclear testing and would                    
 not accept the offer of verification.                                                                        
                                                                                                              
 We were, however, glad to observe that at Reykjavik, President Reagan and General                            
 Secretary Gorbachev came very close to reaching agreement that could pave the way for                        
 complete elimination of all nuclear weapons.                                                                 
 The efforts of the six nations continue despite disappointment that repeated conduct of                      
 nuclear weapon tests by the United States has now resulted in the Soviet Union withdrawing                   
 its moratorium and resuming tests. Disarmament issues were also discussed during the visit                   
 to Delhi in November of the General Secretary of the Central Committee of the CPSU, Mr.                      
 Mikhail Gorbachev. The Prime Minister and the General Secretary signed the Delhi                             
 Declaration on principles for a non-violent world free of nuclear weapons. The Declaration                   
 reflects a completely fresh approach in the nuclear world in which non-violence plays a                      
 central role. It is India's hope that the declaration will receive the endorsement of the                    
 international community.                                                                                     
 -V>                                                                                                          
                                                                                                              
 Another area of particular attention during the year concerned relations with South East                     
 Asian and Pacific countries. India's traditionally good relations with the countries of                      
 the Association of South East Asian Nations (ASEAN) received an impetus with the visit of                    
 the Prime Minister to Indonesia and Thailand in October 1986. The mutual desire on the                       
 part of these countries to develop closer bilateral relations with India was manifested in                   
 the spontaneous and extremely warm reception accorded to the Prime Minister during the                       
 visit. The Prime Minister's visit to Australia and New Zealand in October 1986 marked a                      
 fresh stage in India's relations with these countries. New areas of co-operation were                        
 identified and bilateral economic relations are expected to expand in the coming years.                      
 The visit resulted in a determination of all the countries visited and India to look more                    
 towards one another rather than to the outside world.                                                        
                                                                                                              
 In India's immediate neighbourhood regional co-operation in South Asia was an area of                        
 enhanced activity during the year. Several meetings of Ministers, experts and officials                      
 were held, culminating in the Second Meeting of the Heads of Government of the SAARC in                      
 Bangalore in November 1986. It was decided to establish a SAARC Secretariat as well as                       
 technical committees on the prevention of drug trafficking and abuse, and on women in                        
 development. The Heads of Government also decided to co-operate regularly on international                   
 economic issues, to review annually the situation of children in their countries, to                         
 initiate a South Asian broadcasting programme, to facilitate tourism, to co- operate in                      
 educational programmes and to organise a corps for rural development. The SAARC                              
 Secretariat was established in Kathmandu in January 1987. Urgent steps are being taken to                    
 implement the other decisions taken at the Summit Conference in Bangalore for which                          
 purpose India, as current Chairman, has a particular responsibility.                                         
                                                                                                              
 Efforts to improve relations with Pakistan met with negative developments with Pakistan's                    
 continuing assistance to terrorists in India, persistence in their programme to develop                      
 nuclear weapons, their search for sophisticated weapons, including an AWACS type                             
 capability, attempts to raise the Kashmir question at international fora and their                           
 reluctance to develop trade on a non-discriminatory basis. The situation was further                         
 aggravated by the provocative and threatening                                                                
 -vi>                                                                                                         
                                                                                                              
 build-up of Pakistani forces on the Punjab border in January 1987. Talks were initiated by                   
 India to defuse the tension created by these troop movements and a time-table of                             
 withdrawals and further dialogue have been drawn up. India's emphasis throughout this                        
 period was on the need for all differences to be sorted out through peaceful negotiation.                    
                                                                                                              
 With Bangladesh friendly relations were strengthened. In July 1986 President Ershad                          
 visited India in his capacity as Chairman of SAARC. The Joint Committee of experts to                        
 study the common water resources of the two countries is still to complete its work and                      
 has been given an extension till May 1987. The influx of Chakma refugees, however, into                      
 Tripura and their reluctance to return has given rise to problems that need urgently to be                   
 resolved.                                                                                                    
                                                                                                              
 The continuing ethnic crisis in Sri Lanka remains a source of concern. The number of                         
 refugees from that country continues to grow amounting to about 130,000 by the end of                        
 1986. In April 1986 in response to the Sri Lanka Government's desire that India's good                       
 offices be revived Shri P. Chidambaram, Minister of State for Personnel and Administrative                   
 Reforms, visited Colombo and as a result of his discussions with the Sri Lanka authorities                   
 certain proposals emerged. The Government of India felt that these deserved serious                          
 consideration by the Tamil Groups and, on this basis, the TULF resumed negotiations with                     
 the Sri Lanka Government. However, the proposals which emerged did not cover the question                    
 of linkage between the Northern and Eastern provinces. At the time of the SAARC Summit in                    
 Bangalore the Prime Minister and President Jayewardene discussed the issue and as a result                   
 Shri P. Chidambaram and Shri K. Natwar Singh, Minister of State for External Affairs,                        
 visited Colombo for further discussions. New proposals were formulated but the Sri Lanka                     
 Government's adherence to these proposals has been in doubt. The situation since then in                     
 the Tamil areas has taken a turn for the worse and the prospect of resuming negotiations                     
 remains uncertain.                                                                                           
                                                                                                              
 With Nepal and Bhutan relations continued to strengthen in all areas. Several projects                       
 aided by India are under various stages of implementation.                                                   
                                                                                                              
 The visit of the Prime Minister to the Maldives in February 1986 gave fresh impetus to the                   
 close relations with that country. An Agreement on Economic                                                  
 -vii>                                                                                                        
 and Technical Co-operation signed during the visit provides for the establishment of a                       
 Joint Commission to promote bilateral co- operation in the economic and technical spheres.                   
                                                                                                              
 With Burma, existing cordial relations have been strengthened with the signing, during the                   
 official visit of the Minister for External Affairs Shri N. D. Tiwari in December 1986, of                   
 an agreement on the delimitation of the Maritime Boundary in the Andamans Sea, in the Coco                   
 Channel and in the Bay of Bengal.                                                                            
                                                                                                              
 India's bilateral relations with Afghanistan continue to develop satisfactorily. On the                      
 economic front, most of the decisions of the Seventh Indo-Afghan Joint Commission have                       
 been implemented. On the political front, in a stand at once consistent and principled,                      
 India continues to be opposed to both intervention and interference in Afghanistan.                          
 Convinced that there can be no military solution of the Afghan problem, and deeply                           
 interested in the sovereignty, non-alignment and independent status of Afghanistan, India                    
 stands for a political settlement in Afghanistan that takes into account the legitimate                      
 interests of the parties concerned. India thus supports the initiative of the UN Secretary                   
 General.                                                                                                     
                                                                                                              
 The escalation of the military presence of the great powers in the Indian Ocean and the                      
 heightened tension in the area has been a matter of deep concern. India remains firmly                       
 committed to the total elimination of all foreign military presence from the Indian Ocean                    
 region and the complete dismantling of bases and other facilities used by outside powers                     
 in the area.                                                                                                 
                                                                                                              
 India's relations with the three countries of Indo-China retained their high level of                        
 cordiality. The Minister for External Affairs Shri N. D. Tiwari led a high-level                             
 delegation to Vietnam including the Ministers of State for Petroleum and Natural Gas, Shri                   
 Brahm Dutt, for External Affairs Shri K. Natwar Singh and for Expenditure, Shri B. K.                        
 Gadhvi in January 1987. An agreement, in principle, providing for co-operation in the                        
 field of oil between Vietnam and India was signed during the visit. Under the Indian                         
 Technical and Economic Co-operation (ITEC) Programme of this Ministry Indian experts have                    
 been deputed to Laos, Kampuchea and Vietnam. Presently a team of consultants are preparing                   
 feasibility studies on small scale industries in Laos and experts from the                                   
 -viii>                                                                                                       
                                                                                                              
 Archaeological Survey of India are working in Kampuchea on the restoration of the famous                     
 temple of Angkor Wat.                                                                                        
                                                                                                              
 India's stand on the Kampuchean issue was made clear by the Prime Minister during his                        
 visits to Indonesia, Thailand, Australia and New Zealand.                                                    
                                                                                                              
 The efforts of the Government of India to improve relations with the People's Republic of                    
 China and secure a fair and satisfactory settlement of the boundary issue were adversely                     
 affected by the Chinese intrusion into the Sumdorong Chu Valley area of the Tawang                           
 district of Arunachal Pradesh. This development was not in consonance with the                               
 understanding between the two countries to maintain peace and tranquility along the                          
 border. India also rejected the Chinese objection to the conferment of Statehood to                          
 Arunachal Pradesh. While the boundary question remains crucial to full normalisation of                      
 relations, our exchanges with China in the fields of commerce and culture, science and                       
 technology have gradually developed over the year and resulted in a better understanding                     
 of each other's position in regard to the boundary and on other bilateral and                                
 international issues. It is necessary for this dialogue to continue. The Government of                       
 India continues to hope that the principles of peaceful co-existence will guide relations                    
 between the two countries.                                                                                   
                                                                                                              
 Relations with Japan continued to be cordial. Studies and                                                    
 surveys calculated to increase the scope of Japanese assistance and investment have been                     
 initiated. There is also greater mutual recognition of the global and regional roles of                      
 the two countries.                                                                                           
                                                                                                              
 During the visit in March 1986 of the Prime Minister of the Republic of Korea (ROK) an                       
 economic package, comprising increased export of iron-ore, development of the Paradeep                       
 port and ships orders/bulk cargo sharing was decided upon. Subsequent promotional measures                   
 are being adopted to diversify and balance trade between the two countries.                                  
                                                                                                              
 A number of high-level visits between India and the Democratic People's Republic of Korea                    
 (DPRK) have fostered cultural contacts besides exploring possibilities of increasing trade                   
 exchanges.                                                                                                   
 -ix>                                                                                                         
                                                                                                              
 A State Commission has been established in Mongolia to promote bilateral relations with                      
 India in the economic, commercial and other fields.                                                          
                                                                                                              
 In West Asia, India's consistent policy of moral and material support to the people of                       
 Palestine remained unchanged. At the conference of Non-aligned Countries in Harare India                     
 gave full support to the call for an International Peace Conference on the Middle East.                      
 Relations with Jordan were substantially expanded with the visit of their Majesties the                      
 King and Queen of Jordan; and this is particularly noticeable in the economic field.                         
 However, the continuance of the war between Iraq and Iran, both countries having                             
 traitionally warm and friendly relations with India, is a matter of considerable concern.                    
 Efforts to bring about an end to this fractricidal war have, however, not so far met with                    
 success.                                                                                                     
                                                                                                              
 In North Africa, India joined other Non-aligned Countries in demonstrating solidarity with                   
 Libya when, in April, Tripoli was bombed. There was close political co-operation, with                       
 Algeria both bilaterally as well as in the international arena. This was matched by                          
 enhanced trade and economic co-operation.                                                                    
                                                                                                              
 Special efforts were made to intensify relations with the countries of Southern Africa.                      
 The Prime Minister, accompanied by high-powered delegations, visited the Frontline States                    
 of Zambia, Zimbabwe, Angola and Tanzania in May 1986, thus highlighting not only the value                   
 attached to bilateral relations with these countries but also to emphasise India's                           
 solidarity with them in regard to the liberation struggle in South Africa and Namibia.                       
 India entertained visits from President Oliver Tambo of the African National Congress                        
 (ANC) and from President Sam Nujoma of the South West Africa People's Organisation (SWAPO)                   
 in May 1986. During his visit Mr. Nujoma formally opened the SWAPO Embassy in Delhi.                         
                                                                                                              
 A resident Indian diplomatic mission at Embassy level was opened in Luanda, Angola, in                       
 September 1986. A Mission is also being opened in Gaborone, Botswana, in the near future.                    
 With the establishment of these Missions, India would have resident diplomatic                               
 representation in all the Six Frontline States of Southern Africa. Bilateral assistance to                   
 Frontline States was also enhanced. Thus India has offered Zambia a Government credit of                     
 Rs. 100 million and a                                                                                        
 -x>                                                                                                          
                                                                                                              
 credit by financial institutions of Rs. 150 million. Agreements on trade and on economic,                    
 technical, scientific and cultural co- operation have been signed with Angola. Medicines                     
 worth nearly Rs. 6 lakhs were gifted to Mozambique. Assistance was also provided to the                      
 SWAPO Mission in New Delhi.                                                                                  
                                                                                                              
 India's relations with countries of Western Europe remain cordial. The twelve members of                     
 the European Community remain our major trading partners. In addition, the Scandinavian                      
 countries continue, as in the past, their economic aid for projects in the field of social                   
 welfare, health and rural development. Several high-level visits, including that of the                      
 President of India to Greece and of the Vice President of India to France, and of the                        
 President of Finland, of Chancellor Kohl of the FRG, and of the Prime Ministers of Turkey,                   
 Italy and Denmark to India added greater economic and commercial content to our bilateral                    
 relations with these countries.                                                                              
                                                                                                              
 The governments in Western Europe have generally been responsive to India's concern                          
 regarding anti-Indian activities in their countries. The Government of India has been                        
 monitoring these activities and has been in constant touch with the governments concerned.                   
 With Britain, relations in this respect offer scope for improvement. The British                             
 authorities have, however, taken some action in convicting or bringing to trial some                         
 extremists or terrorists in the UK. Meanwhile, on an Extradition Treaty, two rounds of                       
 talks have already taken place and discussions are continuing. Britain's refusal to join                     
 the other members of the Commonwealth in imposing effective sanctions against South                          
 Africa, resulted in the boycott of the Commonwealth Games at Edinburgh in July 1986 by a                     
 number of Commonwealth countries.                                                                            
                                                                                                              
 The mutually beneficial bilateral relations between India and the socialist countries in                     
 Eastern Europe continue to develop satisfactorily. Exchange of high-level visits with the                    
 USSR culminating in the State visit of General Secretary Gorbachev served to reaffirm the                    
 dynamic and stable character of Indo- Soviet relations. Agreements for expanding trade,                      
 economic and technical co-operation with the Soviet Union on an enhanced scale were                          
 concluded as well as a protocol for holding Festivals in each other's country. The                           
 official visit of the President of India, Giani Zail Singh, to Poland in November, the                       
 visit of the then Minister for External Affairs Shri P. Shiv Shanker to Bulgaria in June                     
 and ministerial and official level visits exchanged with Czechoslovakia, Hungary                             
 -xi>                                                                                                         
                                                                                                              
 and the GDR contributed to strengthening bilateral relations with all these countries.                       
 Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi also had fruitful discussions on bilateral and international                     
 issues with Czechoslovak Prime Minister Strougal in Prague.                                                  
                                                                                                              
 India and Yugoslavia have a close, friendly and multifaceted bilateral relationship in                       
 diverse fields. Relations were furthers trengthened during the year with the visit of the                    
 Yugoslav Prime Minister Branko Mikulic to India in July August and of the President of                       
 India to Yugoslavia in October/November 1986.                                                                
                                                                                                              
 With the United States, a sustained dialogue is being maintained for enhancing relations                     
 in the fields of commerce, scientific co-operation and the transfer of technology. The new                   
 procedures under the Memorandum of Understanding have enabled the clearance of the                           
 transfer of several computer systems. On political matters, there have been high-level                       
 exchanges of view to improve mutual understanding.                                                           
                                                                                                              
 Canada and India continued to maintain a close dialogue on bilateral and international                       
 issues. The Canadian law enforcement agencies took vigorous steps to meet the threat of                      
 terrorism posed by extremist elements based in Canada. The Canadian authorities initiated                    
 legal action against extremists and terrorists conspiring to commit violence against                         
 India. An Extradition Treaty was signed during the visit of Canadian Secretary of State                      
 for External Affairs Mr. Joe Clark in February, as also a Memorandum of Understanding on                     
 Industrial and Technological collaboration.                                                                  
                                                                                                              
 The visit of President Daniel Ortega of Nicaragua to India in September and the signing of                   
 three agreements on that occasion gave special emphasis to India's concern regarding the                     
 problems of Central and South America.                                                                       
                                                                                                              
 Relations with Peru have been greatly strengthened by the State visit of the Peruvian                        
 President, Dr. Alan Garcia Perez in January 1987. During the visit an agreement was                          
 concluded envisaging co-operation between the two countries in various fields of culture.                    
                                                                                                              
 Developing countries have become increasingly aware of the advantage of fostering close                      
 economic co-operation among themselves for mutual benefit. The                                               
 -xii>                                                                                                        
                                                                                                              
 concept of Economic Co-operation among Developing Countries (ECDC) has been given added                      
 urgency due to the continuing deterioration in the world economic climate. A major                           
 development in ECDC was the Second High Level Meeting on Economic Co- operation among                        
 Developing Countries in Cairo in August 1986.The meeting reaffirmed the relevance of ECDC                    
 and reiterated the pivotal role of South-South co-operation. The meeting approved, among                     
 others, the Cairo Declaration on ECDC, which recommended, inter alia, that the scale of                      
 priorities be outlined for the selection of programmes and projects to be implemented                        
 within a fixed time-frame. It was also decided to ensure that the ECDC become                                
 self-generating and self-financing.                                                                          
                                                                                                              
 A special Ministerial Meeting of the Contracting Parties of GATT held at Punta del Este in                   
 Uruguay in September 1986 recorded its determination to halt and reverse protectionism and                   
 remove distortions in trade. It was agreed that the question of services would be taken up                   
 separately outside the framework of GATT.                                                                    
                                                                                                              
 India continues to promote economic and technical co-operation with developing countries                     
 in the spirit of South-South co- operation. Besides providing assistance under                               
 multilateral schemes, India has provided bilateral assistance to developing countries                        
 through the Indian Technical and Economic Co-operation (ITEC) Programme operated by the                      
 Ministry of External Affairs. The ITEC Programme launched in 1964 with an outlay of Rs.                      
 4.64 lakhs has expanded to Rs. 9 crores in 1986-87 covering nearly 60 countries in Asia,                     
 Africa and Latin America.                                                                                    
                                                                                                              
 The Ministry of External Affairs also assisted foreign governments in recruiting Indian                      
 experts on a bilateral basis. It also made its contribution towards the promotion of                         
 Indian economic interests through its representation in international bodies.                                
                                                                                                              
 Indians overseas are increasingly being recognised as a potential bridge of understanding                    
 and co-operation. They in turn have evinced greater interest in developing their cultural                    
 and economic ties with India to which the Government of India has responded positively                       
 with due regard for the mutual benefit of India and of the host country. The Government of                   
 India has set up a Consultative                                                                              
 -xiii>                                                                                                       
                                                                                                              
 Committee for Non-Resident Indians (NRIs). This Committee comprises representatives from                     
 the Ministries of Finance, Commerce, Industry and External Affairs, the India Investment                     
 Centre, representatives of trade and industry and NRIs from different regions of the world                   
 who will be represented by rotation. Through this Committee the NRIs interested in                           
 investment and collaboration in India will be in a better position to represent their                        
 views.                                                                                                       
                                                                                                              
 During the year under review, the External Publicity Division of the Ministry made                           
 concerted efforts, as part of its basic policy, to project the various dimensions of our                     
 foreign policy. Emphasis was laid on dissemination of information in a persuasive manner                     
 to achieve optimum results. Audio-visual and printed material was widely disseminated and                    
 particular attention was given to personal briefings and contacts with opinion makers. The                   
 principled positions taken by India on major global and regional issues facing mankind                       
 were made known, particularly the challenges in the path of stability and progress of                        
 South Asia where a fifth of humanity resides.                                                                
 -xiv>                                                                                                        
                                                                                                              
 -1>                                                                                                          
 INDIA'S NEIGHBOURS                                                                                           
                                                                                        Top                   
 India continued its efforts to foster relations of friendship, co-operation and mutual                       
 understanding with the neighbouring countries of South Asia and maintained high-level                        
 contacts to accomplish that purpose.                                                                         
                                                                                                              
 During the year under review, the Government of India sought to strengthen the existing                      
 friendly ties between India and Bangladesh. There were several meetings at the highest                       
 level between the leaders of India and Bangladesh. In July 1986 President Ershad of                          
 Bangladesh paid a visit to India in his capacity as Chairman of SAARC and during his                         
 meeting with the Prime Minister of India extensive discussions were held on bilateral                        
 issues.                                                                                                      
                                                                                                              
 In pursuance of an agreement reached between the Prime Minister of India and President                       
 Ershad in October 1985 at the CHOGM in the Bahamas, a Joint Committee of Experts (JCE) was                   
 constituted in November 1985 to study the common water resources of India and Bangladesh                     
 within a period of 12 months. The JCE could not complete its work in the stipulated time                     
 and it was decided, at the Prime Minister's meeting with President Ershad during the SAARC                   
 Summit in Bangalore in November 1986, to extend its term by six months.                                      
                                                                                                              
 The then Minister for External Affairs of India, Shri P. Shiv Shanker visited Bangladesh                     
 on 30 July 1986 to hand over the 100 cyclone-proof shelters constructed by India on the                      
 island of Urir Char, for the relief and rehabilitation of the victims of the cyclone which                   
 had ravaged coastal Bangladesh in May 1985. The design and construction of these shelters                    
 had been undertaken by Indian engineers at a cost of about Rs. 1.5 crores which was borne                    
 by the Prime Minister's Relief Fund.                                                                         
 -2>                                                                                                          
                                                                                                              
 Pending a permanent solution to the Tin Bigha issue the Government of India had, in 1985,                    
 offered greater access to Bangladesh to its enclaves of Dahagram and Angorpota. Making use                   
 of this offer, in addition to a number of routine administrative visits facilitated by                       
 India, the Bangladesh President and Home Minister visited the enclaves in June/July 1986,                    
 the first of such visits.                                                                                    
                                                                                                              
 Since April 1986, there has been an influx of a large number of Chakma refugees from the                     
 Chittagong Hill Tracts of Bangladesh into Tripura. This influx has continued since then                      
 and some 30,000 Chakma refugees have been housed in four refugee camps in Tripura. The                       
 Government of India have been in constant touch with the Government of Bangladesh, urging                    
 them to enable the early repatriation of these refugees to their homeland. While the                         
 Foreign Secretary of India was in Dhaka in November 1986, in connection with the meeting                     
 of the Standing Committee of the Joint Economic Commission (JEC), he and the Foreign                         
 Secretary of Bangladesh held discussions concerning the repatriation of these refugees.                      
                                                                                                              
 The Minister for External Affairs, Shri N.D. Tiwari visited Bangladesh from 6 to 9 January                   
 1987. Discussions were held on SAARC, and all important bilateral issues such as river                       
 waters, Tin Bigha, boundary demarcation, Chakma refugees, insurgency, vested properties                      
 and economic co-operation. It was agreed that the Indo-Bangladesh Joint Economic                             
 Commission will meet in New Delhi during the first half of 1987.                                             
                                                                                                              
 The continuing ethnic crisis in Sri Lanka remained a source of concern to the Government.                    
 The number of refugees from Sri Lanka continues to grow, with the total reaching 130,000                     
 by the end of 1986.                                                                                          
                                                                                                              
 Though there were frequent setbacks, the Government persisted in its efforts to narrow the                   
 gap between the positions of the Sri Lanka Government and the Tamil minority in order to                     
 facilitate a negotiated political settlement. India's efforts remained suspended in the                      
 beginning of the year as a result of the rejection by the Sri Lanka Government of the TULF                   
 proposals and the continuing indiscriminate violence against Tamil civilians by the Sri                      
 Lanka security forces.                                                                                       
 -3>                                                                                                          
                                                                                                              
 In April 1986, the Sri Lanka Government conveyed through its Foreign Minister its desire                     
 to revive India's good offices. A delegation led by Shri P. Chidambaram, Minister of State                   
 for Personnel and Administrative Reforms, visited Colombo at the end of April and had                        
 detailed discussions with the Sri Lankan authorities. Flowing from these discussions a                       
 package of proposals emerged which the Government felt deserved serious consideration of                     
 the Tamil groups as a basis for resuming negotiations with the Sri Lanka Government.                         
                                                                                                              
 On the basis of these proposals, the TULF had two rounds of negotiations with the                            
 Government of Sri Lanka in July and August 1986. Based on these discussions, the Sri Lanka                   
 Government prepared and forwarded a set of detailed proposals for the creation of                            
 provincial councils and devolution of powers on them. These proposals, however, are still                    
 not acceptable to the Tamil militants as they do not address the crucial question of                         
 linkage between the Northern and the Eastern provinces.                                                      
                                                                                                              
 Further efforts to overcome this hurdle were made at meetings between the Prime Minister                     
 and President Jayewardene during the SAARC Summit in Bangalore in November 1986 and                          
 subsequent visits by Minister of State for External Affairs, Shri K. Natwar Singh and                        
 Minister of State for Home Affairs, Shri P. Chidambaram, to Colombo in November and                          
 December 1986. As a result of discussions between the two Ministers of State and President                   
 Jayewardene in Colombo during the last visit, new proposals emerged for resolving the                        
 issue of the status of the Eastern province, especially the question of linkage.                             
 Immediately, after the Ministers' return from Colombo, however, the Sri Lankan authorities                   
 sent word that they would not find it possible to proceed with the proposals agreed to by                    
 them in Colombo.                                                                                             
                                                                                                              
 Thereafter the situation took a turn for the worse, with the Tamil groups announcing their                   
 own administrative arrangements in certain fields in Jaffna area and the Sri Lanka                           
 Government imposing an economic blockade of the Jaffna peninsula and launching military                      
 attacks against the Tamil militants. These measures have resulted in great suffering and                     
 hardship for the civilians in Jaffna.                                                                        
                                                                                                              
 Though further measures to break the impasse were discussed with the Sri Lankan                              
 authorities, especially during the visit of Lands Minister Gamini                                            
 -4>                                                                                                          
                                                                                                              
 Dissanayake to Delhi on January 14-15, 1987, the Sri Lankan response remains ambiguous and                   
 the possibility of resuming the peace process uncertain.                                                     
                                                                                                              
 India's relations with the Maldives received an impetus with the Prime Minister's official                   
 visit to the Republic of Maldives from 7 to 9 February 1986. During the visit, an                            
 Agreement on Economic and Technical Co-operation was signed between the two countries.                       
 This Agreement provides for the setting up of a Joint Commission to promote bilateral                        
 co-operation in the economic and technical spheres. A package of assistance and                              
 co-operation amounting to Rs. 21 crores was announced at the end of the visit. Under this                    
 package programme India will assist the Maldives in the setting up of a hotel training                       
 school, a 200-bed hospital with a specialised cardiac centre, and the use of INSAT                           
 facilities. India shall also extend the services of experts and provide scholarships for                     
 Maldivian students in India. Apart from bilateral relations, developments in South Asia                      
 and SAARC were also discussed.                                                                               
                                                                                                              
 The Minister for External Affairs of India, Shri N. D. Tiwari, paid an official visit to                     
 Burma from 22 to 25 December 1986. A bilateral Maritime Boundary Agreement was signed                        
 between the two countries on 23 December 1986 on the delimitation of the Maritime Boundary                   
 in the Andamans sea, in the Coco Channel and in the Bay of Bengal. The visit is likely to                    
 enhance bilateral relations between the two countries.                                                       
                                                                                                              
 Relations between India and Nepal continued to strengthen in all areas during the year                       
 under review. The President paid a State visit to Nepal from 21 to 25 July 1986. The warm                    
 welcome accorded to him was an eloquent testimony to the close relations between the two                     
 countries. The President had fruitful discussions with the King of Nepal and various                         
 aspects of bilateral relations formed subjects of official discussions at different levels                   
 during the visit. Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi and the King of Nepal met twice in Harare in                   
 September 1986, and in Bangalore in November 1986. These meetings provided an opportunity                    
 for a frank and friendly discussion of all aspects of bilateral relations. The                               
 co-operation between the two countries within the SAARC framework also had a beneficial                      
 impact on bilateral relations.                                                                               
 -5>                                                                                                          
                                                                                                              
 Economic co-operation between the two countries continued to intensify. Indian-aided                         
 projects under various stages of implementation included the construction of the Western                     
 Sector of the Mahendra Raj Marg, the establishment of a Museum Library-cum- Documentation                    
 Centre at the Institute of Forestry, Hetauda, the supply of sophisticated medical                            
 equipment for, and training of, medical personnel of the Bir Hospital in Kathmandu, the                      
 supply of iodised salt and assistance in the setting up of iodisation plants, and a Rural                    
 Electrification project. During the visit from 9 to 13 December 1986 to India by the                         
 Nepalese Minister of State for Finance and Industry, the two countries agreed to promote                     
 the establishment of Indo-Nepal joint ventures in Nepal. It was also decided that the                        
 standby credit extended by India to Nepal would be increased from Rs. 15 crores to Rs. 25                    
 crores. A new project for setting up a small scale Industrial Estate at Rajbiraj was                         
 agreed upon during the visit to Nepal of the Minister for External Affairs Shri N. D.                        
 Tiwari in January 1987. An Agreement on Avoidance of Double Taxation was also concluded                      
 during this visit.                                                                                           
                                                                                                              
 The traditionally close and friendly relations between India and Bhutan were further                         
 strengthened during the year under review. The NAM Summit in Harare in September and the                     
 SAARC Summit in Bangalore from 15 to 17 November offered an opportunity for discussions on                   
 subjects of mutual interest at the highest level between the King of Bhutan and Prime                        
 Minister Rajiv Gandhi. Both meetings were marked by close identity of views on matters of                    
 mutual interest, reflecting the relationship of trust and co- operation that prevails                        
 between the two countries.                                                                                   
                                                                                                              
 In the economic field, co-operation flourished. Units I & II of the Rs. 244 crores 336 MW                    
 Chukha Hydel Project were successfully commissioned and power synchronised with the                          
 Eastern grid of India. Besides, Thimphu and Phuntsholing, parts of West Bengal and Assam                     
 have started receiving power from Chukha. The remaining two units are expected to be                         
 commissioned by March 1988. As per the 1974 Chukha Agreement, the Government of India is                     
 committed to purchase all power surplus to Bhutan's internal requirements. It is proposed                    
 to extend assistance to Bhutan for funding the Dungsum (Nanglam) Cement Project in Eastern                   
 Bhutan. Surplus cement production from the Nanglam Plant will be supplied to the                             
 North-eastern States of India.                                                                               
 -6>                                                                                                          
                                                                                                              
 It was also proposed to continue Indo-Bhutan economic co- operation during Bhutan's VIth                     
 Plan (1987-1992). Forming an important component in the development of infrastructure in                     
 Bhutan is the involvement of Indian agencies in various projects of differing sizes and                      
 locations in the fields of telecommunications, road building, geological exploration and                     
 irrigation works etc.                                                                                        
                                                                                                              
 In addition India continues to offer opportunities for secondary as well as higher                           
 education, for specialised training in various fields such as defence, police, customs,                      
 medicine etc. India has offered scholarships worth Rs. 14 lakhs as well as Colombo Plan                      
 TCS slots for this purpose. At Bhutan's request India continues to supply, at controlled                     
 prices, certain essential commodities such as wheat, rice, sugar, coal, explosives, steel                    
 and edible oils.                                                                                             
                                                                                                              
 India is committed to developing cordial, co-operative and good neighbourly relations with                   
 Pakistan in accordance with the letter and the spirit of the Simla Agreement. We wish to                     
 encourage greater people-to-people contact between the two countries and it is our earnest                   
 hope that such contacts would usher in a new era of Indo-Pakistan relations.                                 
                                                                                                              
 The process of normalisation of relations which had been set in motion following President                   
 Zia-ul-Haq's visit to New Delhi on 17 December 1985 was soon held up on account of                           
 Pakistan's unwillingness to have non-discriminatory trade with India. It was also                            
 adversely affected by Pakistan's assistance to Sikh terrorists, indications of its                           
 continuing nuclear weapons programme, its keenness to secure sophisticated weaponry                          
 including an AWACS type capability, its attempts to internationalise the Kashmir issue                       
 despite the fact that President Zia-ul-Haq had earlier said on 17 December 1985 that                         
 Pakistan wanted this issue to be resolved in accordance with the Simla Agreement and at an                   
 appropriate time.                                                                                            
                                                                                                              
 Notwithstanding these unfortunate developments, the Prime Minister of India, during his                      
 meeting with Prime Minister Junejo at Bangalore on 16 November 1986, agreed that our Home                    
 Secretary and Foreign Secretary should visit Pakistan in December 1986 with a view to                        
 exploring possibilities for reviving the normalisation process. In pursuance of this                         
 understanding, the Home Secretary and Foreign Secretary visited Pakistan as scheduled and                    
 had a wide ranging                                                                                           
 -7>                                                                                                          
                                                                                                              
 exchange of views with their counterparts. During the Home Secretary's visit it was                          
 decided to set up two committees-one to evolve fresh border ground rules and the other to                    
 curb drug trafficking and smuggling.                                                                         
                                                                                                              
 However, during January 1987 tension on the Indo-Pakistan border was aggravated on account                   
 of the Pakistani forces having moved to provocative and threatening positions.                               
 Accordingly, an invitation was sent to Pakistan on 25 January at the Prime Minister's                        
 initiative for talks in Delhi for defusing the situation. As a result of these talks,                        
 which were held from 30 January to 4 February 1987, a series of measures were agreed upon                    
 in this regard. India's initiative in this matter demonstrates its desire to live in peace                   
 and good neighbourly relations with Pakistan, as also its determination to strengthen                        
 peace in South Asia.                                                                                         
                                                                                                              
 South Asian regional co-operation received further impetus with the holding of the second                    
 South Asian Association for Regional Co-operation (SAARC) Summit in Bangalore from 15 to                     
 17 November 1986. The Summit was preceded by the preparatory meetings of the second                          
 session of the Council of Ministers, the seventh session of the Standing Committee of                        
 Foreign Secretaries, and the second session of the Programming Committee consisting of                       
 senior officials. Prior to these, a number of meetings were held in new areas of                             
 co-operation proposed by the Heads of State or Government at the first Summit in 1985.                       
 Thus in 1986 a Ministerial Meeting on International Economic Issues was held in Islamabad                    
 in March-April; a Ministerial Meeting on `Women in Development' was hosted by India in                       
 Shillong in May; the Study Groups on Terriorism and on Drug Trafficking and Drug Abuse met                   
 in Dhaka in June and September respectively; an Expert Group Meeting on Terrorism was held                   
 in September; the SAARC Conference on South Asian Children in co-operation with UNICEF was                   
 held in New Delhi in October; and the Working Group on the establishment of the                              
 Secretariat met in Dhaka also in October to work out the modalities of launching the SAARC                   
 Secretariat. In addition, the first session of the Council of Ministers preceded by the                      
 meetings of the Standing Committee and the Programming Committee was also held in Dhaka in                   
 August 1986, which approved the establishment of the Regional Meteorological Research                        
 Centre, and the Regional Agricultural Information Centre.                                                    
                                                                                                              
 The results of these meetings were consolidated in the decisions of the Summit, at the end                   
 of which the Bangalore Declaration, the Joint Press Release, and the Report of the second                    
 session of the Council of Ministers were adopted. A                                                          
 -8>                                                                                                          
                                                                                                              
 Memorandum of Understanding on the establishment of the SAARC Secretariat was signed by                      
 the Foreign Ministers in the presence of the Heads of State or Government. The Summit                        
 welcomed the establishment of two new Technical Committees under the Integrated Programme                    
 of Action-one on Prevention of Drug Trafficking and Drug Abuse and the other on Women in                     
 Development. They decided to include, in the expanding ambit of co-operation, annual                         
 reviews by the Standing Committee of the situation of children in SAARC countries and                        
 agreed that SAARC countries co- operate regularly in international economic fora to                          
 promote their objectives there.                                                                              
                                                                                                              
 A number of significant measures were undertaken to effect organisational improvements in                    
 conducting activities under SAARC. Draft Rules of Procedure for the meetings of the                          
 Technical, Programming and Standing Committees and those of the Council of Ministers were                    
 adopted as guidelines as an interim measure, pending their finalisation; guidelines for                      
 financing the institutional costs of regional institutions were worked out and measures                      
 for streamlining the implementation of SAARC activities adopted. A Calendar of Activities                    
 comprising over 100 events is being currently implemented.                                                   
                                                                                                              
 The second SAARC Summit was considered a success. India played an active role announcing a                   
 contribution of Rs. 15 million for 1987-88, and hosting a number of important SAARC                          
 meetings. The Chairmanship of SAARC is to remain with India until the next Summit in late                    
 1987.                                                                                                        
                                                                                                              
 The SAARC Secretariat was launched on 16 January 1987 in Kathmandu. The Minister for                         
 External Affairs, Shri N. D. Tiwari, led the Indian delegation to the inauguration of the                    
 Secretariat.                                                                                                 
                                                                                                              
 The Heads of State/Government had directed that the following ideas be examined by March                     
 1987; the launching of a South Asian Broadcasting Programme; the establishment of a SAARC                    
 Documentation Centre; the institution of SAARC Fellowships; the facilitation of tourism in                   
 the region and the launching of an organised volunteer's programme. Accordingly, India                       
 convened an Expert Group meeting on "New Ideas" in February 1987 in New Delhi and detailed                   
 schemes for implementation of these ideas were drawn up.                                                     
 -9>                                                                                                          
                                                                                                              
 During the year under review India's bilateral relations with Afghanistan continued to                       
 develop satisfactorily. A mid-term review meeting of the Indo-Afghan Joint Commission on                     
 Economic Trade and Technical Co-operation was held in Kabul in June 1986. It was a matter                    
 of satisfaction to both sides that most of the decisions of the Seventh Indo-Afghan Joint                    
 Commission had been implemented. The work on the construction of an additional Surgical                      
 Ward and a Polyclinic at the Indira Gandhi Institute of Child Health, Kabul, which is a                      
 prime symbol of Indo-Afghan co- operation, was started. India continued to provide                           
 assistance to Afghanistan in several areas including Public Health, industrial development                   
 and education.                                                                                               
                                                                                                              
 India is deeply concerned about the situation in Afghanistan which has affected our                          
 security environment. India's stand on Afghanistan is consistent and principled. India                       
 continues to be opposed to both intervention and interference in Afghanistan. In our view,                   
 there can be no military solution of the Afghan problem. We are deeply interested in the                     
 sovereignty, non- alignment and independent status of Afghanistan. We stand for a                            
 political settlement in Afghanistan that takes into account the legitimate interests of                      
 the countries concerned. In this context, we support the initiative of the UN Secretary                      
 General.                                                                                                     
                                                                                                              
 The Foreign Minister of Afghanistan Mr. Abdul Wakil paid an official visit to India at his                   
 own initiative from 7 to 10 February 1987. The visit was primarily to brief the Government                   
 of India on the national reconciliation moves initiated in Afghanistan and to have                           
 consultation with us prior to the next round of the Proximity Talks.                                         
                                                                                                              
 India has also taken note of the recent Afghan-Soviet initiatives designed to facilitate a                   
 political settlement of the Afghan issue. It is our hope that speedier progress will be                      
 made in the oximity Talks and a political settlement will be reached expeditiously.                          
                                                                                                              
 The increasing military presence of the great powers in the Indian Ocean and the                             
 heightened tension in the area has been a matter of deep concern for the Government of                       
 India. The military presence in the Indian Ocean area of extra-regional powers, has led to                   
 a spiralling arms race which exacerbates regional tensions. The formation of military                        
 command structures which encompass the                                                                       
 -10>                                                                                                         
                                                                                                              
 region negates the decision of the UN General Assembly to declare the Indian Ocean as a                      
 Zone of Peace.                                                                                               
                                                                                                              
 India remains firmly committed to the total elimination of all foreign military presence                     
 from the Indian Ocean region and the complete dismantling of bases and other facilities                      
 used by the great powers in the area. Reports have been received that, in addition to the                    
 upgradation of already existing military bases, further facilities are being sought in                       
 India's immediate neighbourhood which would lead to deterioration in our security                            
 environment. The Government of India continues to hope that countries in the Indian Ocean                    
 region would not enter into military alignments with extra-regional powers.                                  
 -11>                                                                                                         
 SOUTH-EAST ASIA                                                                                              
                                                                                        Top                   
 India's traditionally good relations with the countries of the Association of South East                     
 Asian Nations (ASEAN) received fresh impetus with the visit of the Indian Prime Minister                     
 to Indonesia and Thailand in October 1986. The visit filled the long felt need to give                       
 more attention to this region. The mutual desire on the part of these countries to develop                   
 closer bilateral relations with India was manifested in the spontaneous and extremely warm                   
 reception accorded to the Prime Minister during his visit.                                                   
                                                                                                              
 Wide ranging exchange of views with President Soeharto of Indonesia and Prime Minister                       
 General Prem Tinsulanonda of Thailand on various regional and international issues have                      
 resulted in better understanding of our respective positions. The talks were held in a                       
 very cordial atmosphere and reflected a shared perception on major international issues.                     
 On the bilateral front, it was agreed to expand and diversify co-operation in various                        
 fields and to step up the level of trade and economic exchanges. A Protocol on                               
 Co-operation in Science and Technology was signed between the Indian Council of Scientific                   
 and Industrial Research and the Thailand Institute of Scientific and Technological                           
 Research. It was also agreed to have increased interaction in the field of science and                       
 technology with Indonesia and to conclude an Agreement on Avoidance of Double Taxation                       
 soon. The Minister for External Affairs Shri N. D. Tiwari, paid a visit to Bangkok from 21                   
 to 22 December 1986 as part of the followup of decisions taken during the Prime Minister's                   
 visit to Thailand. An Instrument of ratification on the convention for Avoidance of Double                   
 Taxation with Thailand was exchanged during the visit. Princess Maha Chakri Sirindhorn of                    
 Thailand visited India in March 1987.                                                                        
 -12>                                                                                                         
                                                                                                              
 At the fifth session of the India-Malaysia Joint Committee which was held in New Delhi on                    
 30-31 October 1986, bilateral trade and commercial relations including participation in                      
 projects, co-operation in development of small scale industries, joint ventures, and trade                   
 promotional measures were reviewed. It was agreed to take measures to correct the                            
 imbalance of trade which continues to remain in Malaysia's favour. Dr. Mahathir Mohamad,                     
 Prime Minister of Malaysia, paid an official visit from 29 January to 1 February 1987. The                   
 delegation included the Foreign Minister and the Secretary General of the Ministry of                        
 Foreign Affairs of Malaysia. Dr. Mahathir and the Prime Minister had a useful exchange of                    
 views on various international and regional issues. Steps to strengthen bilateral                            
 co-operation and trade were discussed.                                                                       
                                                                                                              
 There was a regular exchange of trade delegations between India and Singapore. Mr. Lee                       
 Boon Yang, Minister of State for Trade and Commerce visited India in October 1986 to                         
 inaugurate the office of the Singapore Trade Development Board in Bombay. The Federation                     
 of the Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry (FICCI) during the visit of its delegation                   
 to Singapore in November 1986, established a Working Group with the Singapore Federation                     
 of Chambers of Commerce and Industry.                                                                        
                                                                                                              
 With the assumption of power in the Philippines by President Corazon Aquino a new                            
 atmosphere of greater bilateral co-operation and understanding has been generated. A                         
 number of agreements in the fields of agriculture, science and technology and economic and                   
 technical co-operation are being negotiated.                                                                 
                                                                                                              
 India's existing friendly relations with Australia and New Zealand got a further impetus                     
 with Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi's visit to these countries in October 1986. An Indian                       
 Prime Minister visited these countries after a gap of nearly two decades. The visit thus                     
 signalled a new emphasis on India's relations with this part of the world.                                   
 -13>                                                                                                         
                                                                                                              
 The Prime Minister was received with warmth and spontaneity in both countries. The visits                    
 resulted in a better understanding of each other's perspectives on various world issues. A                   
 Science & Technology Agreement with Australia and Agreements on Trade and on Avoidance of                    
 Double Taxation with New Zealand were signed during the Prime Minister's visit. Bilateral                    
 trade came under close examination in the official talks. It was decided that efforts                        
 would be made to bring about a more balanced growth of trade. Australia and New Zealand                      
 indicated their interest in specific areas of co-operation-Australia in the coal and                         
 mining sectors; and New Zealand in afforestation, agriculture and tourism. A Coal                            
 Delegation from Australia visited India to discuss details of possible co-operation in                       
 this sector. A Trade Delegation from Australia also came to New Delhi for the annual Joint                   
 Trade Committee (JTC) talks. Apart from strengthening existing exports, we have identified                   
 new thrust areas for exports.                                                                                
                                                                                                              
 A high-level delegation from Australia is likely to visit India in early 1987 to examine                     
 the whole gamut of bilateral economic relationship.                                                          
                                                                                                              
 During the Prime Minister's visit, a delegation from the Associated Chambers of Commerce &                   
 Industry of India (ASSOCHAM) also visited Australia. A Joint Business Council (JBC) was                      
 formed between ASSOCHAM and the Confederation of Australian Industries (CAI), which is                       
 expected to give an impetus to trade between the private sectors of the two countries.                       
                                                                                                              
 A Cultural Exchange Programme was finalised with Australia in August 1986.                                   
 During 1986 there were many high-level visits to the area: Shri K.C. Pant, Minister for                      
 Steel & Mines, visited Australia in July; Shri H.K.L. Bhagat, Minister for Parliamentary                     
 Affairs, visited New Zealand at the head of a Parliamentary Delegation in September; New                     
 Zealand's Minister for Social Welfare, Mr. Ann Hercus, visited India in April 1986. An                       
 Australian Parliamentary delegation and Joint Services Staff College study team visited                      
 India in November 1986.                                                                                      
                                                                                                              
 The Permanent Secretary for Foreign Affairs of Fiji, Dr. James Maraj, presented his                          
 credentials to the President of India in September 1986 as the Island                                        
 -14>                                                                                                         
                                                                                                              
 country's first ever Non-Resident High Commissioner to India. During this visit bilateral                    
 relations were reviewed. During the then Secretary (East)'s visit to Fiji in 1985, it was                    
 decided that economic and technical co-operation with Fiji would be stepped up. Action                       
 aimed at co-operation in various areas, e.g. cottage industries, marble cutting, provision                   
 of doctors, industrial exhibition etc., has been initiated. Fiji has sought India's help                     
 in other areas such as building of tourism infrastructure as well as joint ventures.                         
                                                                                                              
 India provided relief to the cyclone ravaged Solomon Islands in the form of medicines                        
 worth Rs. 5 lakhs.                                                                                           
                                                                                                              
 India's relations with the three countries of Indo-China retained their high level of                        
 cordiality. In the political sphere, India's stand on the Kampuchean issue was made clear                    
 by the Prime Minister during his visits to Indonesia, Australia, New Zealand and Thailand.                   
 The need to create an atmosphere conducive to a settlement was emphasized, as it was our                     
 conviction that the genocidal Pol Pot elements should be excluded from any settlement.                       
                                                                                                              
 Implementation of the Indian Technical & Economic Co-operation (ITEC) programme of this                      
 Ministry, which is the main vehicle for providing technical assistance, was considerably                     
 improved in 1986. To Laos for instance, 55 large irrigation pump-sets were supplied as                       
 gifts from the Government of India, and a team of consultants were deputed for preparing                     
 feasibility studies on small scale industries. A team of senior geologists from India also                   
 visited Laos in order to make a preliminary survey of potash deposits in that country.                       
 Relief medicines were also supplied.                                                                         
                                                                                                              
 The year also saw a marked improvement in the utilisation of ITEC scholarships by the                        
 nationals of the Peoples' Republic of Kampuchea. Experts from the Archaeological Survey of                   
 India began work in Kampuchea on the restoration of the famous temple of Angkor Wat. This                    
 work too is being financed out of the ITEC programme. Relief supplies of medicines were                      
 supplied to Kampuchea.                                                                                       
 -15>                                                                                                         
                                                                                                              
 Implementation of the decisions taken at the Second Session of the India-Vietnam Joint                       
 Commission was effective. A large number of Vietnamese experts have received training in                     
 various Indian institutions and Indian experts have been deputed to Vietnam. Two Research                    
 Centres, one for animal husbandry and forage and the other on rice, which had been started                   
 under the ITEC programme in Vietnam, have begun to function smoothly.                                        
                                                                                                              
 The Minister for External Affairs, Shri N.D. Tiwari led a high-level delegation including                    
 the Ministers of State for Petroleum and Natural Gas, Shri Brahm Dutt, for External                          
 Affairs, Shri K. Natwar Singh and for Expenditure, Shri B. K. Gadhvi to Vietnam from 9 to                    
 12 January 1987. The delegation had useful discussions with the Vietnamese leadership. An                    
 Agreement, in principle, providing for co-operation in the field of oil between India and                    
 Vietnam was signed. A fresh Government of India credit of Rs. 10 crores and a gift of Rs.                    
 1 crore was also announced during the visit.                                                                 
                                                                                                              
 High-level visits this year included those by the Kampuchean Minister for Information and                    
 Culture, Mr. Cheng Phon, during April-May 1986, and by India's Minister for Health and                       
 Family Welfare, Smt. Mohsina Kidwai, to Vietnam in June 1986.                                                
 -16>                                                                                                         
 EAST ASIA                                                                                                    
                                                                                        Top                   
 During the year under review, efforts to normalize and improve relations with the People's                   
 Republic of China were continued. The Government of India remained committed, as before,                     
 to finding a just and satisfactory solution to the crucial boundary question in a peaceful                   
 and fair manner.                                                                                             
                                                                                                              
 The Seventh Round of Official Level Talks was held in Beijing from 21 to 23 July 1986. On                    
 the boundary question, substantive discussions which were initiated at the Sixth Round of                    
 Talks in New Delhi in November 1985, were continued on the Eastern and Western Sectors of                    
 the boundary. Although the discussions were inconclusive, a better perception of each                        
 other's views was obtained. A programme of exchanges in the field of Science and                             
 Technology was finalized. The implementation of the Cultural Exchange Programme was also                     
 reviewed. Both sides exchanged views on the international situation.                                         
                                                                                                              
 India's deep concern over the Chinese intrusion in the Sumdorong Chu Valley area of the                      
 Tawang District of Arunachal Pradesh was conveyed to Acting Chinese Premier Wan Li and                       
 Foreign Minister Wu Xueqian also during the Seventh Round of Talks. It was stressed that                     
 such intrusions added to tension and vitiated the atmosphere for the achievement of a just                   
 and satisfactory solution to the boundary question. The subject of the Chinese intrusion                     
 was also taken up at the meeting between the then Minister for External Affairs Shri P.                      
 Shiv Shanker, with the Chinese Foreign Minister in New York on 18 September 1986. The                        
 Chinese side was informed that this recent irritant involving the boundary question was                      
 not in consonance with the wishes of the peoples of the two countries.                                       
 -17>                                                                                                         
                                                                                                              
 While exchanges in the fields of trade, culture and science and technology have grown, the                   
 crucial question of the boundary still remains to be solved. The Government of India has                     
 consistently emphasized to the Chinese Government that it is necessary for both sides to                     
 find a solution to problems that arise along the boundary through peaceful consultations                     
 and in a manner that ensures the maintenance of peace and tranquility all along the                          
 border. To this end, India also stressed that the Chinese side should do nothing to                          
 aggravate matters and disturb the status quo.                                                                
                                                                                                              
 The Government of India also rejected the adverse Chinese reaction to the conferment of                      
 Statehood to Arunachal Pradesh as a clear interference in India's internal affairs, and as                   
 entirely contrary to China's professed desire for a peaceful settlement of the boundary                      
 question. India expressed the hope that the five principles of peaceful co-existence will                    
 continue to guide relations between the two countries.                                                       
                                                                                                              
 Under the official Exchange Programme, a number of delegations were exchanged between the                    
 two countries in such fields as education, student scholarships, carpet technology, etc.                     
 The Chinese Vice Minister for Education, Liu Zhongde, led their Education Delegation to                      
 India. The President of the Supreme People's Court of China, Zheng Tianxiang, visited                        
 India at the invitation of the Chief Justice of India.                                                       
                                                                                                              
 Mr. Li Beihai, Council Member of the Chinese Association for International Understanding,                    
 led a 5-member delegation on a visit to India from 28 November to 6 December 1986, at the                    
 inviation of the V. K. Krishna Menon Memorial Society. Mr. Jiang Guang Hua, Deputy head of                   
 the International Liaison Department (ILD) of the Chinese Communist Party, led a 5-member                    
 ILD delegation to visit India from 19 to 31 December 1986, at the invitation of the                          
 CPI(M). The delegation also had discussions with Congress-I leaders at New Delhi.                            
                                                                                                              
 In respect of Japan, the mutually friendly and co-operative relations received fresh                         
 momentum with the visit of our Prime Minister to Japan in 1985. There were increased                         
 exchanges in cultural, commercial, economic, scientific and technological fields between                     
 the two countries.                                                                                           
 -18>                                                                                                         
                                                                                                              
 Japan continued to be India's third largest trading partner though accounting for only 7                     
 to 8% of our total trade turnover. Our efforts were geared at diversifying exports to                        
 Japan while maintaining, and wherever possible increasing exports of traditional items                       
 like marine products, mineral ores, tea, spices etc. The scope for increasing exchanges in                   
 the commercial field was discussed during the India-Japan bilateral trade talks at Tokyo                     
 in June 1986. At New Delhi, in December 1986, the 19th Joint Meeting of the India-Japan                      
 Business Co-operation Committee, discussed promotional measures in trade, investments,                       
 joint ventures and collaborations. It was noted that though Japanese investment in India                     
 has been increasing, it remains marginal and does not reflect the potentialities. A number                   
 of Japanese survey missions, sponsored by important Japanese companies including the Bank                    
 of Tokyo, visited India to assess the economic situation and the possibilities of                            
 co-operation and interaction. Conversely a number of Indian delegations, official and                        
 non-official, in the economic, commercial and other fields from the Chambers of Commerce,                    
 the Export Promotion Councils, and from Public Sector Undertakings also visited Japan.                       
                                                                                                              
 In a follow-up action on the Projects for Indo-Japanese co- operation identified during                      
 the visit of the Prime Minister of India to Japan, feasibility studies and surveys were                      
 conducted to determine the scope of Japanese assistance. Notes were exchanged for the                        
 special credit of Yen 30 billion for the gas-based power project in Assam and for the                        
 grant assistance of Yen 1.973 billion for the Sanjay Gandhi Post-Graduate Medical                            
 Institute at Lucknow. Japanese delegations visited India for carrying out feasibility                        
 studies for the modernisation of railways, the IISCO Burnpur Plant and the textile                           
 industry. Japanese Yen credit for the financial year 1986-87 of Yen 48.443 billion                           
 represented an increase of about 23.5% over the credit of Yen 39.231 billion extended by                     
 Japan for 1985-86. Japan thus emerged as the second largest donor to India on a bilateral                    
 basis.                                                                                                       
                                                                                                              
 The India-Japan Committee on Science & Technology which held its first meeting in New                        
 Delhi in September 1986, identified more than ten areas for possible co-operation and                        
 interaction. During the year under review, exchanges under other institutional                               
 arrangements in science were also carried out.                                                               
                                                                                                              
 Smt. Pupul Jayakar, Chairman, Festival of India and Adviser to the Prime Minister on                         
 Culture, visited Japan in October 1986 to discuss with Government officials and with                         
 various Japanese sponsors, the events and venue of the Festival                                              
 -19>                                                                                                         
                                                                                                              
 of India in Japan in 1988. Japanese delegations also visited India to discuss the Festival                   
 of India in Japan and the Japan Month in India.                                                              
 The visit of Smt. Krishna Sahi, Minister of State for Education and Culture to Japan in                      
 October 1986 on the occasion of the inauguration of the granite stone relief depicting the                   
 life of Buddha, in Nara Prefecture, reflected the abiding historical and cultural links                      
 between Japan and India.                                                                                     
                                                                                                              
 There were a number of Ministerial level visits from India to Japan in 1986 which included                   
 the visits of Shri N.D. Tiwari as Minister for Industry in August and as Minister for                        
 External Affairs in November; of Shri K.C. Pant, Minister for Steel and Mines in June; and                   
 of Smt. Rajendra Kumari Bajpai, Minister of State for Welfare in August. Also Prof. M.G.K.                   
 Menon, Member, Planning Commission, Shri V.C. Shukla, President of the Indian Olympic                        
 Association (IOA), Shri S. Venkitaramanan, Finance Secretary, Capt. W.A. Sangama, Chief                      
 Minister of Meghalaya and other senior officials from the Centre and from the States, as                     
 well as a number of MPs and State legislators and a National Defence College team visited                    
 Japan during the period under review.                                                                        
                                                                                                              
 From Japan too, delegations, official and non-official, and an increasing number of                          
 tourists visited India.                                                                                      
                                                                                                              
 Official-level bilateral consultations between the Foreign Ministries of both countries                      
 which were held at New Delhi in December 1986, were comprehensive and reflected the                          
 recognition of the important regional and global roles of both countries.                                    
                                                                                                              
 Follow-up action on the economic package decided upon during the visit in March 1986 of                      
 the Prime Minister of the Republic of Korea (ROK) comprising of the increased export of                      
 iron-ore, development of Paradeep Port and ships orders bulk cargo sharing, was taken with                   
 a view to enhancing the economic content of the India-ROK bilateral relations. Promotional                   
 measures were undertaken for diversified and balanced trade between India and the ROK such                   
 as visits of business delegations from India, participation in the Seoul International                       
 Trade Fair in September 1986, the holding of the India-ROK Joint Business Council Meeting                    
 in July 1986 at Seoul and the organising of exhibitions.                                                     
 -20>                                                                                                         
                                                                                                              
 India participated in the 10th Asian Games at Seoul in September-October 1986. About 600                     
 persons including the Indian contingent, Members of Parliament, State legislators, Press                     
 correspondents, and official media representatives visited Seoul. The Indian official                        
 delegation was led by Smt. Margaret Alva, Minister of State for Youth Affairs and Sports.                    
 Shri H.L. Kapur, Lt. Governor of Delhi and Shri V.C. Shukla, IOA President also visited                      
 Seoul. A 19-member Manipuri dance troupe and a 15-member Himachal Pradesh dance troupe                       
 participated in the opening ceremony of the Games.                                                           
                                                                                                              
 Twenty three paintings of Indian modern art were sent for exhibition in the Contemporary                     
 Asian Art Show. A photography exhibition entitled "In the Footsteps of Buddha" was                           
 organised in the ROK in April 1986. The Indian film entry 'MAYURI' won a prize in the                        
 'Asia Pacific Film Festival' held at Seoul in September                                                      
 1986.                                                                                                        
                                                                                                              
 The former Chief Justice of India, Shri P.N. Bhagwati, and Shri H.R. Bhardwaj, Minister of                   
 State for Law and Justice, visited Seoul to participate in the International Law                             
 Association Conference in August 1986. Shri K.C. Pant, Minister for Steel and Mines, paid                    
 an official visit on invitation. A 14-member National Defence College team visited the ROK                   
 in September 1986. There were visits from the ROK to India at the official level. Business                   
 and sports delegations from the ROK also visited India. During his visit to India in                         
 August 1986, Mr. Soc-Gil Park, Assistant Minister for Foreign Affairs, exchanged views                       
 with us on important bilateral relations and on international issues.                                        
                                                                                                              
 An Indian Parliamentary delegation led by Shri Shivraj Patil, the then Minister of State,                    
 visited the Democratic People's Republic of Korea (DPRK) in June 1986, on invitation.                        
 Minister of State, Smt. Margaret Alva, led the Indian delegation to the Second General                       
 Conference on Physical Education and Sports of the Non-aligned Countries held in Pyongyang                   
 in July 1986. The Mayor of Delhi Shri Mahinder Singh Saathi visited the DPRK in September                    
 1986. Several Parliamentarians and academicians from India also visited Pyongyang on                         
 invitation from cultural and social organisations in the DPRK.                                               
 -21>                                                                                                         
                                                                                                              
 A number of DPRK delegations visited India to explore the possibility of increasing trade                    
 exchanges between the two countries. A deal for the supply of 100,000 tons of wheat from                     
 India against the supply of zinc from the DPRK was finalised. India also agreed to supply                    
 273,000 tons of wheat to the DPRK under an arrangement with the Soviet Union.                                
                                                                                                              
 A State Commission was established in Mongolia with a view to promoting bilateral                            
 relations with India in the economic, commercial and other fields. During the visit of the                   
 Mongolian Deputy Foreign Minister, Mr. Olzvoi, to India in September 1986, views were                        
 exchanged on important international issues and on matters of mutual interest including                      
 Mongolia's guest status in the Non-aligned Movement (NAM). The Mongolian Foreign Minister                    
 Mr. M. Dugersuren also exchanged views on these matters with our Minister for External                       
 Affairs in New York in September 1986.                                                                       
                                                                                                              
 Shri Bhuvnesh Chaturvedi, Member of Parliament, Rajya Sabha, visited Mongolia on the                         
 occasion of the 19th Congress of the Mongolian People's Revolutionary Party (MPRP) in May                    
 1986. Delegations of CPI and of CPI(M) from India also attended the MPRP Congress.                           
                                                                                                              
 India extended assistance under the Indian Technical and Economic Co-operation (ITEC)                        
 programme of this Ministry for the production of a document-ary film on Mongolia in                          
 English for which a team from the Films Division of India visited Mongolia in July-August                    
 1986.                                                                                                        
 -22>                                                                                                         
 WEST ASIA AND NORTH AFRICA                                                                                   
                                                                                        Top                   
 India's relations with the countries in the West Asia and North Africa (WANA) region have                    
 been characterised by warmth and friendship. The process of consolidation and                                
 diversification of these ties continued through 1986. India has been consistent and                          
 steadfast in its support of the Arab cause and for a comprehensive, just and durable                         
 settlement of the West Asia problem.                                                                         
                                                                                                              
 India continues to offer its moral and material support to the Palestinian people. It                        
 extended its support to the Non-aligned Movement (NAM) call at the Harare Summit for                         
 convening of an International Peace Conference on West Asia as a means to resolve this                       
 problem.                                                                                                     
                                                                                                              
 The situation in Lebanon continues to be grim with no end in sight to the continued                          
 factional fighting. India hopes that good sense will prevail and a solution will emerge                      
 soon to bring this tragedy to an end.                                                                        
                                                                                                              
 The US bombing of the Libyan cities of Tripoli and Benghazi in April 1986 was strongly                       
 condemned by the Government of India both bilaterally and in its capacity as Chairman of                     
 the Non-aligned Movement. The NAM Minis-terial delegation led by the then Minister for                       
 External Affairs Shri B.R. Bhagat visited Tripoli and New York to express solidarity with                    
 Libya. The economic contents of the Indo-Libyan relations has increased substantially in                     
 the last few years. The Sixth Session of the Indo-Libyan Joint Commission on Economic and                    
 Technical Co-operation was held in New Delhi in July 1986 to monitor progress of ongoing                     
 co-operation and to identify fresh areas for increased bilateral co-operation.                               
 -23>                                                                                                         
                                                                                                              
 India and Algeria continue to have close political co- operation both bilaterally and in                     
 the international arena. There has already been a marked increase in the economic and                        
 commercial co-operation between the two countries. The Algerian Vice- Minister for                           
 Co-operation visited India in March 1986 in order to prepare the ground for the third                        
 session of the Joint Commission Meeting which was held in Algiers in July 1986. The                          
 Minister of State for Railways, Shri Madhav Rao Scindia, had also visited Algeria in April                   
 1986. During his visit an Agreement on Co- operation in the Railway sector was signed. The                   
 third session of the Indo-Algerian Joint Commission had agreed to set an annual trade                        
 turnover target of US $ 100 million, which will be a five- fold in-crease in trade over                      
 the previous year. The Joint Commission also identified co-operation possibilities in                        
 various sectors, most notably in ralways, industry, hydraulics, fertilizers and                              
 pharmaceuticals.                                                                                             
                                                                                                              
 Following our recognition of the Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic (SADR) in October 1985,                    
 an SADR Embassy has started functioning in New Delhi.                                                        
                                                                                                              
 We were privileged to host their Majesties the King and Queen of Jordan on a State visit                     
 to India in October 1986. A high- powered delegation had accompanied their Majesties and                     
 the bilateral exchanges held are expected to boost Indo-Jordanian relations-both in the                      
 political and economic fields. Indo- Jordanian economic co-operation has already witnessed                   
 a marked increase. Jordanian imports from India are expected to increase substantially in                    
 the current year.                                                                                            
                                                                                                              
 Contacts with other countries in the region were maintained at various levels. Efforts                       
 were made to strengthen and intensify co- operation in areas of mutual interests. The then                   
 Minister of State for External Affairs, Shri K.R. Narayanan, visited Cairo in August 1986                    
 to attend a high-level meeting on Economic Co- operation amongst Developing Countries of                     
 the Group of 77. He also had bilateral talks with the Egypitan officals covering political                   
 and economic matters. A multi-disciplinary inddustrial delegation led by the Minister of                     
 State for Industrial Development, Shri N. Arunachalam, visited                                               
 -24>                                                                                                         
                                                                                                              
 Tunisia in October 1986. The team identified mutually beneficial reas of co-operation in                     
 selected commercial and industrial fields. These include exports for non-traditional                         
 commodities and possibilities for joint ventures in small industries, communications and                     
 the power sectors. The Somalian Minister for Commerce and Industry had visited India in                      
 July 1986, during which Agreed Minutes were signed for co-operation in the industrial                        
 field. The implementation of the Agreed Minutes would raise the possibility of increasing                    
 export of Indian goods and expertise to Somalia.                                                             
                                                                                                              
 Opportunities for maintaining high-level contacts with WANA countries were also availed of                   
 during the NAM Co-ordinating Bureau Meeting in New Delhi in April 1986 and also during the                   
 Harare Summit in September 1986.                                                                             
                                                                                                              
 Ten countries of the Gulf region, namely, Iran, Iraq, Saudi Arabia, the United Arab                          
 Emirates (UAE), Kuwait, Oman, Bahrain, Qatar, the Yemen Arab Republic (YAR) and the                          
 People's Democratic Republic of Yemen (PDRY), come under the ambit of the Gulf Division of                   
 this Ministry. Our friendly and cordial relations with these countries have continued to                     
 improve in diverse fields. Contacts with the Gulf countries have been maintained by high-                    
 level visits and meetings. The Firance Minister of India visited Saudi Arabia where he                       
 went as a leader of the Inian delegation to the second meeting of the Indo-Saudi Joint                       
 Commission held in Riyadh in April 1986. The Minister of State for Industry led a                            
 delegation to Iran in December 1986 and the Minister for Human Resource Development                          
 visited the UAE in December 1986. At the official level, Secretary (Steel) visited Iran in                   
 September 1986 in connection with the Kudremukh Iron Ore Project.                                            
                                                                                                              
 The Iranian Foreign Minister visited India in August 1986 for bilateral talks. This was                      
 followed by the visit of an Economic delegation from Iran in September 1986 to discuss the                   
 question of a barter deal in oil against import of goods from India. Because of divergence                   
 of views on the ratio of oil imports from Iran to be linked to Indian exports, no                            
 agreement could be reached From Iraq, its permanent Under Secretary visited India in June                    
 1986 before the Harare Summit for bilateral discussions. The Iraqi Minister for Oil led                      
 the                                                                                                          
 -25>                                                                                                         
                                                                                                              
 Iraqi delegation to the tenth session of the Indo-Iraq Joint Commission which was held in                    
 Delhi in October 1986.                                                                                       
 Other visits from this area included the high powered Kuwaiti Investment delegation which                    
 visited India in October 1986 with a view to search avenues for Kuwaiti investment in                        
 India. A delegation from Bahrain visited India in November 1986 during the India                             
 International Trade Fair. Similarly, a Trade delegation from Oman visited India in                           
 November 1986 to discuss about trade relations between the two countries. The Yemen Arab                     
 Republic Communication Minister visited India in December 1986 to discuss co-operation in                    
 the field of telecommunication between India and the YAR.                                                    
                                                                                                              
 The continuing Iran-Iraq war and its adverse impact in terms of human suffering continued                    
 to remain a matter of concern for India has friendly and broad-based relations with both                     
 countries which are also members of the Non-Aligned Movement and is interested in a speedy                   
 end to this tragic war. Our efforts to find ways and means to bring an end to this tragic                    
 war continued during the year under review.                                                                  
                                                                                                              
 The Iraqi Permanent Under Secretary and the Foreign Minister of Iran visited India before                    
 the Non-aligned Summit for bilateral talks.                                                                  
                                                                                                              
 India has Joint Commissions with five Gulf countries, namely, the UAE, Saudi Arabia, Iran,                   
 Iraq and the YAR. India also has Joint Committees with Bahrain and Qatar. During the year                    
 under review, the following meetings took place:                                                             
                                                                                                              
 (i) The first meeting of the Indo-Bahrain Joint Committee in March 1986.                                     
                                                                                                              
 (ii) The second Indo-Saudi Joint Commission meeting in April 1986.                                           
                                                                                                              
 (iii) The tenth session of the Indo-Iraq Joint Commission in October 1986.                                   
 -26>                                                                                                         
                                                                                                              
 In these meetings agreements were reached for the strengthening of bilateral relations and                   
 mutual co-operation in various fields covering wide-ranging subjects. The fourth session                     
 of the Indo-Iran Joint Commission is scheduled to meet in Delhi in February 1987.                            
                                                                                                              
 There are a large number of immigrant Indians working in the Gulf. According to a                            
 conservative estimate they number over 7 lakhs. Owing to an economic recession in the Gulf                   
 countries, job opportunities are fast dwindling. Any significant increase in the number of                   
 our nationals working in the Gulf countries can be ruled out. In fact there was                              
 apprehension that the number of Indians working in the Gulf region would fall                                
 significantly as a result of the recession in these countries. But this has not taken                        
 place so far. Indian emigrants in the Gulf region are prosperous and happy. However,                         
 considering their large numbers, problems do arise from time to time. The Indian Missions                    
 continued to provide the necessary consular help to the Indian emigrants.                                    
                                                                                                              
 As a result of recession and falling oil prices, the income of the Gulf countries has                        
 reduced and it is expected that these countries will be looking towards other developing                     
 countries for investment opportunities and economic co-operation for development purposes.                   
 India, which has a key position as a developing country, is likely to benefit from this.                     
 -27>                                                                                                         
 AFRICA (SOUTH OF THE SAHARA)                                                                                 
                                                                                        Top                   
 Relations between India and the countries in Africa South of the Sahara continued to be                      
 cordial during the year under review. Special efforts were made to intensify relations                       
 with Southern African countries. The Prime Minister, accompanied by high- powered                            
 delegations, paid visits to Zambia, Zimbabwe, Angola and Tanzania in May 1986 to highlight                   
 the value we attach to bilateral relations with these countries as well as to underline                      
 India's solidarity with them in regard to the liberation struggle in South Africa and                        
 Namibia. India also entertained visits from President Oliver Tambo of the African National                   
 Congress (ANC) and from President Sam Nujoma of the South West Africa People's                               
 Organisation (SWAPO) in May 1986. The South African question was the subject of a                            
 Mini-Summit of seven Commonwealth Countries in London in August 1986 in which our Prime                      
 Minister tried to bring about unanimity of thinking in the matter of sanctions against                       
 South Africa additional to the measures decided upon at the Nassau Commonwealth Summit in                    
 1985.                                                                                                        
                                                                                                              
 The Eighth Non-aligned Summit held in Harare (Zimbabwe) in September 1986 expressed its                      
 grave concern on the deteriorating situation in Southern Africa. It took note of the                         
 initiatives taken by many countries and organisations to have the problem resolved through                   
 negotiations. It regretted that instead of heeding the call of the international community                   
 to eradicate apartheid, the racist regime had stepped up its oppression and the                              
 subjugation of the disenfranchised and dispossessed people of South Africa through the                       
 imposition of a state of emergency and other repressive measures. It reaffirmed that the                     
 imposition of comprehensive and mandatory sanctions against South Africa in accordance                       
 with Chapter 7 of the Charter of the United Nations was the only peaceful option to compel                   
 the racist regime to abandon apartheid. The Summit Meeting also                                              
 -28>                                                                                                         
                                                                                                              
 noted that the racist regime had intensified its campaign of intimidation, blackmail,                        
 economic sanctions and naked acts of aggression against the independent states in the                        
 region with a view to weakening and subjugating them. It stressed the need for concerted                     
 international action both short-term and long-term to provide assistance to the Frontline                    
 States in the region to enable them to withstand the effect of retaliatory sanctions by                      
 the racist Pretoria region.                                                                                  
                                                                                                              
 As a concrete measure it was resolved to establish the Action for Resisting Invasion,                        
 Colonialism and Apartheid Fund (AFRICA Fund). The nine-Member Fund Committee consists of                     
 India (Chairman), Zambia (Vice-Chairman), Algeria, Argentina, Congo, Nigeria, Peru,                          
 Yugoslavia and Zimbabwe. The objectives of the Fund are to strengthen the economic and                       
 financial capability of the Frontline States; to assist them enforce sanctions against                       
 South Africa and to cope with retaliatory action by the racist regime. The measures                          
 envisaged in the Resolution to achieve these objectives include: the establishment of a                      
 strategic relief reserve to relieve shortages of essential commodities; the strengthening                    
 of the transport and communication system; the ensuring of continued availability of oil                     
 and other energy sources; the ensuring of safety of infrastructural installations and                        
 net-works; the neutralising of the negative trade effects; the development of trained                        
 manpower resources and the mobilisation of international public opinion and financial                        
 resources for fulfilling the objectives of the Fund.                                                         
                                                                                                              
 India, in the capacity of Chairman of the Fund, undertook extensive consultations with the                   
 Frontline States and liberation movements to identify specific areas in which assistance                     
 is urgently required.                                                                                        
                                                                                                              
 The Summit Meeting of the Fund Committee Member-States was held in New Delhi on 24 and 25                    
 January 1987. It was preceded by preparatory meetings of Senior Officials and Foreign                        
 Ministers. The Summit adopted a Plan of Action and the Rules of procedure for management                     
 and operation of the Fund. The Plan of Action sets out specific projects and measures to                     
 be undertaken by the Fund to achieve its objectives. It consists of 9 chapters including 7                   
 areas of priority assistance to the Frontline States, support to the liberation movements                    
 in South Africa and Namibia and mobilisation of public opinion and financial                                 
 -29>                                                                                                         
                                                                                                              
 resources. The Rules of Procedure provide for a sub-committee under the Chairmanship of                      
 Zambia for screening and evaluation of projects. It also provides for periodical reports                     
 on the funds operations to be submitted by the Fund Committee to the Ministerial and                         
 Summit Conferences of the Non-aligned Countries. The Summit also issued an appeal calling                    
 upon all nations of the world, international financial and other organisations, non-                         
 governmental organisations and individuals to contribute generously to the AFRICA Fund in                    
 demonstration of their unflinching solidarity with the struggle against apartheid. During                    
 the summit meeting, contributions amounting to US $ 70 million, which includes India's                       
 contribution of Rs. 50 crores over a period of three years, were pledged to the Fund.                        
                                                                                                              
 A resident Indian diplomatic Mission at Embassy level was opened in Luanda, Angola, in                       
 September 1986. A Mission is also expected to be opened in Gaborone, Botswana, in the very                   
 near future. With the establishment of these Missions, India would have resident                             
 diplomatic representation in all the Six Frontline States of Southern Africa.                                
                                                                                                              
 Africa Day, 25th May, the anniversary of the founding of the OAU, was celebrated in Delhi                    
 with greater enthusiasm than in the past years, with the participation of our Prime                          
 Minister and with President Sam Nujoma of SWAPO as the Chief Guest. Mr. Nujoma, during the                   
 visit, also formally opened the SWAPO Embassy in Delhi.                                                      
                                                                                                              
 The Minister of State for External Affairs, Shri Eduardo Faleiro, represented India at the                   
 International Conference on Namibia held at Vienna in July 1986.                                             
                                                                                                              
 President Albert Rene or the Seychelles paid a State visit to India in April 1986 when                       
 co-operation between the two countries in various fields was agreed. upon,                                   
 -30>                                                                                                         
                                                                                                              
 As a follow-up of our Prime Minister's visit to Zambia and Angola, the Prime Minister of                     
 Zambia, Rt. Hon. Mr. Kobby Musokotwane, visited India in September/October 1986, and an                      
 Angolan delegation led by their Minister for External Trade visited India in October 1986.                   
 During these visits India offered to provide a Government credit of Rs. 100 million and a                    
 credit of Rs. 150 million by financial institutions to Zambia, and signed with Angola a                      
 Trade Agreement and an Agreement on Economic, Technical, Scientific and Cultural                             
 Co-operation. An Agreement for Cultural Co-operation was also signed with the People's                       
 Republic of Benin whose Foreign Minister visited India in July 1986.                                         
                                                                                                              
 The Prime Minister of India paid a State visit to Mauritius in July 1986. Apart from                         
 discussions on various matters of mutual interest, agreements were signed during the visit                   
 for a Government-to-Government credit of Rs. 5 crores and an EXIM Bank credit for an equal                   
 amount to Mauritius. Sir Charles Gaetan Duval, Mauritian Deputy Prime Ministe leading a                      
 delegation with three other Ministers paid an official visit to India from 29 January to 5                   
 February 1987. During discussions between the Mauritian delegation and the Indian                            
 delegation led by the Minister for External Affairs, Shri N.D. Tiwari, stress was laid on                    
 more bilateral trade and other economic co-operation.                                                        
                                                                                                              
 The Vice President of India, accompanied by the Minister of State for External Affairs,                      
 Shri Eduardo Faleiro, represented India at the Celebrations of the 20th Anniversary of                       
 Botswana's independence. The Minister for Human Resources Development, Shri Narasimbha                       
 Rao, represented India at the funeral of President Samora Machel of Mozambique in October                    
 1986. Sardar Darbara Singh, MP, represented India at the Coronation of Crown Prince                          
 Makhosetive of Swaziland in April 1986.                                                                      
                                                                                                              
 Important visits from Africa during the year under review were: Mauritian Finance                            
 Minister, Mauritian Foreign Minister, Prime Minister of Zambia, Finance Minister of                          
 Zambia, Trade and Commerce Minister of Zimbabw, Minister for Trade & Industries of                           
 Zanzibar, Commerce Minister of Angola, Assistant Agriculture Minister of Botswana,                           
 Minister for Foreign Affairs of                                                                              
 -31>                                                                                                         
                                                                                                              
 Banin, Minister for Works, Housing and Physical Education of Kenya, Minister for Commerce                    
 of Senegal, Minister for Steel and Mines of Nigeria, Permanent Secretary, Ministry of                        
 Transport, Tanzania, Minister for Mineral and Water Development of Uganda, President of                      
 ANC Mr. Oliver Tambo and President of SWAPO Mr. Sam Nujoma.                                                  
                                                                                                              
 Similarly, a number of Indian Ministers also visited various African countries. These                        
 visits were Shri Eduardo Faleiro, Minister of State, to Zambia, Zimbabwe and Botswana;                       
 Shri K. Natwar Singh, Minister of State, to Zambia, Zimbabwe and Kenya; Shri K.R.                            
 Narayanan, the then Minister of State for External Affairs to Kenya and Zimbabwe; Shri                       
 P.V. Narasimha Rao, Minister for Human Resources Development, to Mauritius; Shri Santosh                     
 Mohan Dev, Minister of State for Tourism to Mauritius and Seychelles; Smt. Krishna Sahia                     
 Minister of State for Education and Culture, to Mauritius.                                                   
                                                                                                              
 As in the past, during the year under review also we sent medicines and other relief                         
 materials to countries in Africa as well as to the liberation movements in Southern                          
 Africa. Rs. 587,860 worth of medicines were gifted to Mozambique, Rs. 50,000 worth each to                   
 Madagascar and the ANC, and Rs. 75,000 worth to Uganda. Rs. 1,29,000 worth of office                         
 equipment and machinery were gifted to SWAPO Mission in New Delhi.                                           
 -32>                                                                                                         
 EUROPE WESTERN EUROPE                                                                                        
                                                                                        Top                   
 India's relations with the countries of Western Europe continued to be cordial and                           
 friendly. On major questions, their attitudes and views were usually modified not to clash                   
 too vehemently with those of their close ally, the United States. However, their belief in                   
 political and negotiated settlements for resolving problems and reducing tensions, often                     
 runs parallel to India's views, even if they do not coincide. There is not much doubt that                   
 on larger questions of East-West or North-South relations, Europeans do take a longer term                   
 perspective and arrive at conclusions not dissimilar to those of India.                                      
                                                                                                              
 The internal political stability and credit-worthiness of India have strengthened the                        
 belief among West European countries of India as a nation of growing significance in Asia                    
 and the world. These countries, in their search for new markets to support their highly                      
 export dependent economies, have thus rated India high on their list. The twelve members                     
 of the European Community remain our major trading partners, and co-operation with the                       
 Community is being actively pursued in the fields of industrial co-operation, investment                     
 and co-operation in science and technology. In addition the Scandinavian countries                           
 continued to extend economic aid to India especially for projects in the fields of social                    
 welfare, health and rural development. There is considerable scope for India to co-operate                   
 with these countries in high technology areas.                                                               
                                                                                                              
 Indian exports to countries in Western Europe have registered some increase but the range                    
 of products remained narrow and the deficit in the balance of trade                                          
 -33>                                                                                                         
                                                                                                              
 has increased. While this is of concern to India, it can be attributed to favourable                         
 investment climate, import of capital goods and our requirement for import of new                            
 technology as also to the protective policies of the Community. These aspects were                           
 discussed in detail during the Indo-EEC Joint Commission Meeting held in Brussels in                         
 January 1987.                                                                                                
                                                                                                              
 The Joint Economic and Trade Committees between India and Greece, Sweden, Spain and                          
 Austria held their meetings in 1986. The main focus was on expansion of Indian exports,                      
 commodity and quantum-wise. Particular attention was paid to establishing joint                              
 collaboration with import of latest technology and buy back arrangements.                                    
                                                                                                              
 During the year under review, there were several high-level visits. The President of India                   
 visited Greece when an extensive exchange of views took place on bilateral and                               
 international issues. The Vice President of India visited France to attend the closing                       
 ceremonies of the Festival of India.                                                                         
                                                                                                              
 The visits of Chancellor Kohl of the Federal Republic of Germany (FRG), of Prime Ministers                   
 Turgut Ozal of Turkey, of Benito Craxi of Italy and of Paul Schlueter of Denmark provided                    
 fresh impetus and added greater economic and commercial content in our bilateral relations                   
 with these respective countries.                                                                             
                                                                                                              
 Finland's President Mauno Koivisto paid a 4 day State visit to India in February 1987. The                   
 delegation included, among others, the Foreign Minister of Finland. During the visit,                        
 bilateral and international matters including disarmament and North-South dialogue were                      
 discussed between the leaders of the two countries.                                                          
                                                                                                              
 Both the Dutch Prime Minister Mr. R. F. M. Lubbers and the Foreign Minister of France Mr.                    
 Jean Bernard Raimond paid official visits during March 1987.                                                 
 -34>                                                                                                         
                                                                                                              
 The Minister for External Affairs, Shri N.D. Tiwari, visited Italy, Belgium, France, the                     
 FRG and the UK as part of an AFRICA Fund delegation. In addition, there were many visits                     
 at the Ministerial level in economic, industrial, commercial, cultural and educational                       
 fields apart from exchanges of parliamentary delegations, industrial and business groups,                    
 academicians, journalists, etc.                                                                              
                                                                                                              
 The governments in Western Europe have generally been responsive to our concern at the                       
 anti-India activities in their countries. We have been monitoring these activities and                       
 have been in constant touch with those governments. Negotiations have also commenced for                     
 concluding an Extradition Treaty with the FRG.                                                               
                                                                                                              
 However, in the case of Britain, our concern has been expressed to the British authorities                   
 and every opportunity was utilised to suggest to the UK that such activities should be                       
 curbed with a strong hand. One of our suggestions for effectively curbing terrorist                          
 activities in the UK was for the two countries to enter into an Extradition Treaty. Two                      
 rounds of talks have already taken place and discussions are continuing. In the meanwhile,                   
 the British authorities have taken some action in convicting/bringing to trial some                          
 extremists/terrorists in the UK.                                                                             
                                                                                                              
 THE USSR AND EASTERN EUROPE                                                                                  
                                                                                                              
 The period under review saw continuation of development of mutually beneficial bilateral                     
 relations with the USSR and other socialist countries in Eastern Europe.                                     
                                                                                                              
 The General Secretary of the CPSU Central Committee Mr. M.S. Gorbachev paid an official                      
 friendly visit to India in November 1986. Mr. Gorbachev was accompanied by his wife and a                    
 high- powered delegation which consisted of, interalia, Foreign Minister E.A.                                
 Shevardnadze, CPSU CC Secretary A.F. Dobrynin,                                                               
 -35>                                                                                                         
                                                                                                              
 Deputy Prime Minister V.M. Kamentsev, Chief of General Staff of the USSR Armed Forces                        
 Marshal S.F. Akhromeyev and First Deputy Foreign Minister Y.M. Vorontsov. The visit was a                    
 landmark in Indo-Soviet relations. It provided the occasion for the continuation of the                      
 dialogue begun between the two leaders during Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi's visit to                         
 Moscow in May 1985. Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi and Mr. M.S. Gorbachev held extensive and                    
 cordial discussions on important bilateral, regional and international issues. Mr. M.S.                      
 Gorbachev called on the President, Giani Zail Singh, and addressed Members of the Indian                     
 Parliament. The other members of the delegation held discussions with their Indian                           
 counterparts on various bilateral matters. The visit served to reaffirm the dynamic,                         
 resilient and stable character of Indo-Soviet relations and demonstrated once again the                      
 coincidence or similarity of views of the two countries on major international issues. In                    
 the course of the visit the two leaders signed the Delhi Declaration on Principles for a                     
 Nuclear Weapon Free and Non-violent World which embodies a comprehensive new framework for                   
 international relations based on freedom, equality, justice and non-violence. The other                      
 documents signed were an Agreement on Economic and Technical Co-operation, the largest to                    
 have been signed between the two countries so far, a Consular Convention, and a Protocol                     
 on conducting the Festival of India in the USSR and the Festival of the USSR in India.                       
                                                                                                              
 The then Minister for External Affairs and Commerce, Shri P. Shiv Shanker, and                               
 subsequently the Minister for External Affairs, Shri N.D. Tiwari, visited the Soviet Union                   
 during 1986. During their visits the Ministers held talks with their Soviet counterpart,                     
 Mr. E.A. Shevardnadze, and called on General Secretary Gorbachev.                                            
                                                                                                              
 The Tenth meeting of the Indo-Soviet Joint Commission for Economic, Scientific and                           
 Technical Co-operation was held in New Delhi in April 1986. The two sides were led                           
 respectively by the then Minister for External Affairs, Shri B.R. Bhagat, and the then                       
 Soviet First Deputy Prime Minister, Mr. I.V. Arkhipov. The meeting reviewed ongoing                          
 bilateral co-operation in various projects and took stock of the progress made in                            
 implementation of the agreements signed during the Indian Prime Minister's visit in May                      
 1985. The meeting also discussed new areas of co-operation between the two countries. The                    
 Trade Protocol for 1987 was signed in New Delhi in November 1986. The Protocol envisages                     
 an increase                                                                                                  
 -36>                                                                                                         
                                                                                                              
 in the quantum of already traded goods and the identification of fresh commodities for                       
 trade between the two countries. The Chairman of the USSR State Committee for Foreign                        
 Economic Relations, Mr. K.F. Katushev, and the Minister for Petroleum Industry, Mr. V.A.                     
 Dinkov, visited India in connection with the economic agreements signed during General                       
 Secretary Gorbachev's visit. The Soviet Ministers for Aviation Industry, Mr. A.S. Systsov,                   
 and for Health, Mr. S.P. Burenkov, also visited India.                                                       
                                                                                                              
 Exchanges in culture, arts, education, sports, mass-media and other fields developed well.                   
 Preparations for conducting the Festival of India in the USSR and the Festival of the USSR                   
 in India reached an important stage with the signing of a Protocol during General                            
 Secretary Gorbachev's visit. A Parliamentary delegation led by the Soviet First Vice                         
 President, Mr. V.V. Kuznetsov, visited India in January 1986.                                                
                                                                                                              
 The 15th anniversary of the Indo-Soviet Treaty on Peace, Friendship and Co-operation was                     
 marked by both countries. On this occasion and on the occasion of Independence Day, India                    
 played host to a delegation led by the Vice President of the USSR Supreme Soviet Presidium                   
 and the President of the Azerbaijan SSR, Mr. S.B. Tatliev.                                                   
                                                                                                              
 Other important visitors from India to the Soviet Union during this period were the                          
 Minister for Energy, Shri Vasant Sathe, the then Minister of State for Information and                       
 Broadcasting, Shri V.N. Gadgil, and the Minister of State for Defence, Shri Arun Singh.                      
                                                                                                              
 The Eighth session of the Indo-Bulgarian Joint Commission for Economic, Scientific and                       
 Technical Co-operation was held in Sofia, Bulgaria, from 5 to 10 October 1986. The Indian                    
 delegation was led by Shri G.S. Dhillon, Minister for Agriculture. A Protocol was signed                     
 on this occasion setting out the possibilities for further co-operation and delineating                      
 appropriate measures for further expansion and diversification of co-operation between the                   
 two countries in economic, scientific and technical fields. Another Protocol was signed to                   
 encourage cooperation in the field of tourism. A Plan of Co-operation in the field of                        
 Public                                                                                                       
 -37>                                                                                                         
                                                                                                              
 Health was signed between India and Bulgaria on 29 April 1986. The trade plan for 1986,                      
 providing for a balanced two-way trade turnover of Rs. 148 crores against the actual trade                   
 turnover of Rs. 87 crores in 1985, was signed in May 1986 during the visit of the                            
 Bulgarian Deputy Foreign Trade Minister. The then Minister for External Affairs Shri P.                      
 Shiv Shanker, paid an official visit to Bulgaria in June 1986. He had fruitful discussions                   
 with President Zhivkov and Prime Minister Mr. Atanassov and his counterpart Mr. Peter                        
 Mladenev and others. Cultural exchanges between the two countries have grown                                 
 satisfactorily. Mutual celebration of "Days of Bulgarian Culture in India" and of Indian                     
 Culture in Bulgaria is being planned for 1987.                                                               
                                                                                                              
 Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi made a transit halt at Prague on 10 August 1986 on his way                       
 back from Mexico. During the brief stop-over he had fruitful discussions on bilateral and                    
 international issues with the Czechoslovak Prime Minister, Mr. Strougal. Bilateral                           
 contacts with Czechoslovakia in political, economic and cultural fields progressed                           
 satisfactorily.                                                                                              
                                                                                                              
 The then Minister for Information & Broadcasting Shri V.N. Gadgil, visited Czechoslovakia                    
 for the Karlovy Vary Film Festival in July 1986. The Indian entries in the competition                       
 were received with appreciation. An Agreement on Avoidance of Double Taxation was signed                     
 between the two countries on 31 May/1 June 1986 and is expected to encourage joint                           
 ventures.                                                                                                    
                                                                                                              
 Air Chief Marshal D.A. La Fontaine, Chief of Air Staff paid an official visit to the GDR                     
 from 20 to 26 July 1986 at the invitation of his GDR counterpart. A 5-member Planning                        
 Commission delegation led by Shri Hiten Bhaya, Member, Planning Commission, visited the                      
 GDR from 31 August to 6 September 1986 for the fifth session of the Indo-GDR Group of                        
 Planning Experts. A highlevel NDC team also visited the GDR from 9 to 12 September 1986.                     
 From the GDR side, Dr. Kurt Singhuber, Minister for Ore Mining, Potash and Metallurgy, the                   
 Co-Chairman of the Indo-GDR Joint Commission for Economic, Scientific and Technical                          
 Co-operation, made his first visit to India from 17 to 20 November 1986 at the invitation                    
 of his Indian counterpart, the Industry Minister Shri J. Vengal Rao. The GDR Deputy                          
 Transport Minister, Mr. H. Rentner, visited India in February 1986 and signed a Shipping                     
 Protocol with the Secretary in the                                                                           
 -38>                                                                                                         
                                                                                                              
 Ministry of Transport. The GDR Deputy Minister for Higher and Technical Education, Prof.                     
 Guenther Heidorn, visited India from 24 August to 4 September 1986 in terms of the                           
 Indo-GDR Cultural Exchange Programme.                                                                        
                                                                                                              
 Indo-GDR economic relations have shown progress during the year under review. The two                        
 countries signed a Long Term Trade Protocol for the period 1987-90 to develop import and                     
 export of certain selected commodities of major interest to them. The Trade Plan for 1987                    
 signed in December 1986 is fixed at Rs. 490 crores as against Rs. 414 crores for 1986. The                   
 Indo-GDR Agreement on Avoidance of Double Taxation has also been agreed to and initialled.                   
                                                                                                              
 Shri Abdul Ghafoor, the then Minister for Urban Development, visited Hungary from 23 to 26                   
 May 1986. Gen. K. Sundarji, Chief of Army Staff visited Hungary in September 1986 at the                     
 invitation of Lt. Gen. Joseph Paczek, Deputy Minister for Defence and Chief of General                       
 Staff of the Hungarian Peoples' Army. The Hungarian Foreign Trade Minister, Mr. Peter                        
 Veress, visited India on 14-15 April 1986 and had talks with the then Minister for                           
 Industry Shri N.D. Tiwari and the Minister for Energy Shri Vasant Sathe, besides having                      
 discussions in the Ministry of Commerce on bilateral trade matters.                                          
                                                                                                              
 The Indo-Hungarian economic and industrial co-operation relations were reviewed in-depth                     
 at the Sixth session of the Indo-Hungarian Joint Commission held in Delhi from 27 to 30                      
 October 1986 with delegations of the two sides led by the Hungarian Finance Minister Dr.                     
 Istvan Hetanyi and our Minister for Industry Shri J. Vengal Rao respectively.                                
 Indo-Hungarian trade was of Rs. 65.8 crores in 1985 as against Rs. 62.5 crores in 1984.                      
 Also in conjunction with the Joint Commission session, the Finance Ministers of India and                    
 Hungary signed the Avoidance of Double Taxation Agreement. Dr. A.P. Mitra, Director                          
 General of CSIR, visited Hungary at the invitation of the Hungarian Deputy Foreign                           
 Minister, Dr. Benyi, from 24 to 26 September 1986 when a programme of bilateral                              
 co-operation in the field of Science and Technology was agreed to between the two                            
 countries.                                                                                                   
                                                                                                              
 The President of India, Giani Zail Singh, paid an official visit to Poland in November                       
 1986 during which he had talks with President General Jaruzelski                                             
 -39>                                                                                                         
                                                                                                              
 and Prime Minister Messner. The visit provided a useful occasion for reviewing bilateral                     
 relations and exchange of views on important international issues. The 10th session of                       
 Indo-Polish Joint Commission for Economic, Scientific and Technical Co- operation was held                   
 in New Delhi on 1-2 April 1986. The two sides were led respectively by the Minister for                      
 Energy, Shri Vasant Sathe, and the Polish Deputy Prime Minister, Mr. Gwiazda. Earlier, a                     
 long term trade and payments agreement was signed during the visit by the Minister for                       
 Commerce Shri P. Shiv Shanker, to Warsaw on 22-23 February 1986. The Indo-Polish Trade                       
 Plan for 1987 provides for a two-way turnover of Rs. 500 crores as against the Trade Plan                    
 provision of Rs. 451.4 crores for 1986. The Minister of State for Science and Technology,                    
 Shri Shivraj Patil, visited Poland from 9 to 13 July 1986 and had talks with his                             
 counterpart regarding intensification of co-operation in the field of science and                            
 technology. The Polish side expressed interest in deepening scientific interaction over a                    
 large number of areas. Cultural exchanges progressed satisfactorily and a Cultural                           
 Exchange Programme was signed in June 1986 to regulate, co-ordinate and promote cultural                     
 interaction over 1986-88.                                                                                    
                                                                                                              
 A State visit by the President of the Socialist Republic of Romania, Nicolae Ceausescu,                      
 was scheduled for November 1986. He however visited India in March 1987 at Romanian                          
 request.                                                                                                     
 Indo-Romanian trade and economic/industrial collaboration has continued to pick up                           
 momentum during the year under review. The trade turnover during 1986 is expected to top                     
 Rs. 300 crores against Rs. 192.8 crores in 1985.                                                             
                                                                                                              
 India and Yugoslavia have developed close, friendly and multifaceted co-operative                            
 bilateral relationship in diverse fields. Relations were further strengthened during the                     
 year under review when Yugoslav Prime Minister Mr. Branko Mikulic visited India from 28                      
 July to 1 August 1986. The President of India, Giani Zail Singh, paid a visit to                             
 Yugoslavia from 30 October to 3 November 1986. These visits provided opportunities for                       
 useful exchange of views between the Indian and Yugoslav leadership at the highest level                     
 on bilateral relations as well as international matters of mutual interest including the                     
 Non-aligned Movement. It was agreed to give greater economic and commercial content to our                   
 political relationship.                                                                                      
 -40>                                                                                                         
                                                                                                              
 Shri H.K.L. Bhagat, Minister for Parliamentary Affairs, Food and Civil Supplies, led a                       
 Parliamentary delegation to Yugoslavia from 9 to 15 June 1986.                                               
 Indo-Yugoslav economic and industrial co-operation is perceptibly on the upswing with                        
 bilateral trade crossing the level of $ 100 million, the target set for 1986, at the end                     
 of October 1986 itself against the trade turnover of $ 76 million for 1986. The next                         
 session of the Indo-Yugoslav Joint Economic Committee is took place in January 1987. India                   
 and Yugoslavia also reached in July 1986 an Agreement on Civil Aviation to introduce                         
 direct air services between the two countries. Agreements for co-operation in Radio and TV                   
 have also been signed by AIR and Doordarshan with their counterpart orgaanisation in                         
 Yugoslavia.                                                                                                  
 -41>                                                                                                         
 THE AMERICAS                                                                                                 
                                                                                                              
 NORTH AMERICA                                                                                                
                                                                                        Top                   
 Efforts were made to enhance mutual understanding and to narrow differences between India                    
 and the USA in perception and in the approach to various regional and international issues                   
 through an exchange of official visits and the intensification of people- to-people                          
 contacts. The Minister for External Affairs had wide ranging discussions with President                      
 Reagan, Vice President Bush, Secretary of State Shultz and Defence Secretary Weinberger in                   
 Washington in February 1986 while India was host to the first- ever visit by a US Defence                    
 Secretary in October 1986.                                                                                   
                                                                                                              
 Bilateral relations between India and the USA in the economic and commercial fields, in                      
 scientific co-operation and on technology transfer have been marked by good progress. The                    
 Sixth Session of the Indo-US Joint Commission, held in Washington on 6 February 1986,                        
 reviewed progress in the areas covered by the four sub commissions. Important                                
 recommendations made were to increase the frequency of meetings on bilateral trade issues                    
 and to establish a new Working Group on Narcotics. The first meeting of the Working Group                    
 was held in September 1986.                                                                                  
                                                                                                              
 Economic contacts between India and the USA were given an impetus through trade and                          
 collaboration in the field of technology transfer. The new procedures under the Indo-US                      
 Memorandum of Understanding on Technology Transfer resulted in the clearance of many                         
 computer systems for governmental and non- governmental organisations in India. Several                      
 official level contacts                                                                                      
 -42>                                                                                                         
                                                                                                              
 were held to streamline the procedures. In 1986, India continued to maintain a positive                      
 balance of trade with the USA with exports to that country amounting to $ 2478.3 million                     
 and imports of the order of $ 1641.9 million. Contacts between the business communities of                   
 both countries were intensified in tune with the growing optimism of better commercial                       
 prospects and industrial collaboration.                                                                      
                                                                                                              
 The Indian Naval Frigate INS Godavari participated in the Centenary Celebration of the                       
 Statue of Liberty in June-July 1986. It was the first-ever goodwill visit by an Indian                       
 naval ship to the USA. The year long Festival of India was formally concluded in November                    
 1986 having provided a unique window to India for the Americans.                                             
                                                                                                              
 India and Canada continued to maintain a close dialogue on bilateral and international                       
 issues. The Prime Ministers of India and Canada met in London in August 1986 where they                      
 were attending the Commonwealth Mini-Summit on the question of sanctions against South                       
 Africa. The then Minister for External Affairs Shri B.R. Bhagat, and the Canadian                            
 Secretary oj State for External Affairs, Mr. Joe Clark, met on 20 June, in Cork, Ireland,                    
 where they were taking part in the commemoration of the first anniversary of the tragic                      
 crash of an Air-India Boeing 747. The Speaker of the Lok Sabha, Dr. Balram Jakhar, also                      
 visited Canada from 27 May to 7 June 1986 to attend the Commonwealth Parliamentary                           
 Association Executive Committee Meeting.                                                                     
                                                                                                              
 Canadian Law enforcement agencies took vigorous steps to meet the threat of terrorism                        
 posed by extremist elements based in Canada. Their effective action resulted in the                          
 aversion of senseless tragedies and loss of innocent lives. The Canadian authorities                         
 initiated a number of legal actions against extremists and terrorists conspiring to commit                   
 violence against India. An Extradition Treaty was signed during the visit of Canadian                        
 Secretary of State for External Affairs Mr. Joe Clark in February 1987.                                      
                                                                                                              
 Indo-Canadian economic ties are expected to receive an impetus on account of the                             
 determination of both countries to expand and diversify them. A Memorandum of                                
 Understanding on Industrial and Technological Co-operation                                                   
 -43>                                                                                                         
                                                                                                              
 was signed in February. Contacts between the business communities of the two countries                       
 increased including a meeting of the India- Canada Business Council in Toronto. Several                      
 economic delegations were exchanged and Canada participated as a partner country with                        
 fifty leading Canadian firms in the Trade Fair organised by the Confederation of                             
 Engineering Industries in New Delhi in February 1987.                                                        
                                                                                                              
 CENTRAL AND SOUTH AMERICA AND THE CARIBBEAN                                                                  
 India's relations with the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean continued to grow                    
 during the period under review. Exchanges of high-level visits, signing of bilateral                         
 agreements and active co-operation with the countries of the region strengthened India's                     
 relations with these countries and laid the basis for further development of ties.                           
                                                                                                              
 The major events were the visits of the Presidents of Nicaragua and Peru to India and the                    
 visit of the Indian Prime Minister to Mexico. Nicaragua's President Daniel Ortega paid a                     
 State visit to India from 8 to 11 September 1986 during which three bilateral agreements-a                   
 Cultural Agreement, a Memorandum of Understanding and a Credit Agreement-were signed. The                    
 Memorandum of Understanding provides for the gifts of wheat and raw jute by India to                         
 Nicaragua and India's co-operation in the setting-up of industrial projects in Nicaragua;                    
 under the Credit Agreement, a credit of Rs. 12.5 crores will be made available to                            
 Nicaragua.                                                                                                   
                                                                                                              
 Peruvian President Dr. Alan Garcia Perez paid a State visit from 23 to 29 January 1987                       
 during which he took part in the 'AFRICA Fund' Summit on 24-25 January in New Delhi. He                      
 was also the Chief Guest for the 1987 Republic Day celebrations. During the visit,                           
 bilateral discussions were held and a cultural agreement envisaging co-operation between                     
 India and Peru in various fields was signed. The Peruvian President was conferred an                         
 honorary degree of Dactor of Laws by Delhi University at a colourful function at Vigyan                      
 Bhavan.                                                                                                      
 -44>                                                                                                         
                                                                                                              
 An Indian techno-economic team visited Nicaragua in April to assess the Possibilities of                     
 bilateral economic and technical co- operation. As a result of discussions with the                          
 Nicaraguan authorities, areas of co-operation in industry, infrastructure and increased                      
 trade were identified.                                                                                       
                                                                                                              
 A delegation of Members of Parliament led by Shri R. L. Bhatia, MP and General Secretary                     
 AICC(I), visited Nicaragua for the 25th Anniversary Celebrations of the Sandinist National                   
 Liberation Front (FSLN) in November 1986. The delegation included Shri Anand Sharma, MP                      
 and President of IYC(I), Shri Mukul Wasnik, MP (Congress I), Shri E.M.S. Namboodiripad, MP                   
 and Secretary General CPI(M), Shri N.E. Balaram, MP and Secretary, National Council of                       
 CPI, and Shri Chitta Basu, MP and Secretary General, Forward Block of India.                                 
                                                                                                              
 The situation in Central America continued to be tense and volatile. On various occasions                    
 in the UN and the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) for a India reiterated support for the                          
 Contadora effort and its position that the Central American issues should be resolved                        
 peacefully through dialogue among the countries of the region without outside interference                   
 or introduction of big- power rivalries.                                                                     
                                                                                                              
 Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi paid a visit to Mexico from 7 to 9 August 1986 after the                         
 Six-Nation Ixtapa Summit on Peace and Disarmament. The Prime Minister's discussions with                     
 President Miguel de la Madrid reflected shared perceptions on major international issues                     
 and a common concern for Peace, Disarmament and Development. The two leaders agreed to                       
 give greater content to bilateral economic co-operation.                                                     
                                                                                                              
 At the invitation of the Chairman of the Chamber of Deputies of Venezuela a seven-member                     
 Parliamentary delegation, led by the Speaker, Dr. Balram Jakhar, visited Venezuela from 30                   
 June to 6 July 1986. During the visit, the Speaker unveiled a bust of Mahatma Gandhi                         
 presented by India.                                                                                          
 -45>                                                                                                         
                                                                                                              
 India was again among the co-sponsors of a UN General Assembly (UNGA) Resolution on the                      
 Falklands/Malvinas calling upon Argentina and the UK to hold negotiations with a view to                     
 resolving their dispute which was adopted by an overwhelming majority (116 for, 4 against,                   
 34 abstentions).                                                                                             
                                                                                                              
 The Finance Minister Shri V. P. Singh visited Brasilia and held bilateral discussions with                   
 Brazilian leaders after leading India's delegation to the Ministerial Meeting of the                         
 Negotiating Committee for the GSTP from 19 to 23 May 1986.                                                   
                                                                                                              
 A delegation led by Minister of State for Science and Technology, Shri Shivraj Patil,                        
 visited Havana from 29 June to 2 July 1986 to attend the inauguration of a Cuban                             
 Bio-Technology Centre.                                                                                       
                                                                                                              
 An Indian delegation led by Smt. Sushila Rohatgi, the then Minister of State for Education                   
 and Culture, visited Cuba for the Second Conference of Ministers for Education and Culture                   
 of non- aligned and other developing countries from 1 to 4 April 1986.                                       
                                                                                                              
 The Indian Navy frigate INS Godavari, on a goodwill visit to various countries of the                        
 region, called at ports in Cuba, Jamaica, Trinidad & Tobago, Guyana and Brazil.                              
                                                                                                              
 A six-member Indian Army expedition in the yacht 'Trishna' called at Guyana, Trinidad &                      
 Tobago, Panama, Ecuador and Jamaica during the course of their round-the-world cruise.                       
                                                                                                              
 The Trade Fair Authority of India participated in the XVI Bogota International Fair from 5                   
 to 23 July 1986.                                                                                             
 -46>                                                                                                         
                                                                                                              
 Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi sent congratulatory messages to Mr. Errol Barrow, Leader of                      
 the Democratic Labour Party of Barbados, who was appointed Prime Minister following a                        
 landslide victory in the country's general elections held in May 1986 and to Mr. A.N.R.                      
 Robinson on his assuming the Prime Ministership of Trinidad & Tobago following the                           
 sweeping victory (33 seats out of 36) of the National Alliance for Reconstruction in                         
 Trinidad & Tobago in December 1986.                                                                          
                                                                                                              
 India donated medical supplies worth Rs. 50,000 to Jamaica for relief of the victims of a                    
 devastating flood disaster.                                                                                  
                                                                                                              
 In November 1986 a multifaceted Indian cultural festival featuring Indian classical                          
 dances, folk dances and music, brides of India show, handicrafts display and Indian food                     
 was organised by the Indian Embassy in Panama in collaboration with the India Tourism                        
 Development Corporation (ITDC) and the Indian Council for Cultural Relations (ICCR). The                     
 festival was inaugurated by the First Lady of Panama in the presence of the Panamanian                       
 President Eric Arturo Delvalle. An amount of about Rs. 1.60 lakhs was raised for donation                    
 to the First Lady's Charity Fund.                                                                            
 -47>                                                                                                         
 UNITED NATIONS AND INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCES                                                                 
                                                                                        Top                   
 As in previous years, India played an active and constructive role in various                                
 international conferences and sessions of the UN General Assembly and Security Council                       
 held during 1986. The major international conferences held under the UN auspices included                    
 the World Conference on Sanctions against South Africa in Paris in June 1986, the                            
 International Conference for the Immediate Independence of Namibia in July 1986 and the                      
 Special Session of the UN General Assembly on Namibia in September 1986. The UN General                      
 Assembly also held a special session on Africa in May 1986. The Eighth Summit Conference                     
 of Non-aligned Countries was also held in Harare in September 1986 when India handed over                    
 the Chairmanship of the Non-aligned Movement (NAM) to Zimbabwe.                                              
                                                                                                              
 The 41st session of the UN General Assembly, held during September-December 1986, remained                   
 primarily pre-occupied with one overriding issue-the most serious financial crisis in the                    
 history of the United Nations in addition to wide ranging deliberations on various                           
 political, economic, social, cultural and legal questions.                                                   
                                                                                                              
 Political Issues at the United Nations                                                                       
                                                                                                              
 A whole range of disarmament issues, the situation in Southern Africa, West Asia, Central                    
 America and decolonisation questions dominated the political agenda of the United Nations                    
 during the year under review. Among the new items of the agenda of the 41st session of the                   
 UN General Assembly were the US aggression against Libya and the re-inscription of New                       
 Caledonia in the UN's list of non-self-governing territories.                                                
 -48>                                                                                                         
                                                                                                              
 The three major and inter-related aspects of the South African situation, namely, South                      
 Africa's policy of apartheid, its illegal occupation of Namibia and its repeated acts of                     
 aggression and subversion against neighbouring African countries, received constant                          
 attention at the United Nations, including in the Security Council.                                          
                                                                                                              
 The continuing crisis in South Africa and the intensification of repression of the black                     
 majority by the racist regime evoked serious concern at the United Nations throughout the                    
 year under review in the Security Council, the General Assembly and the Special Committee                    
 against Apartheid. A major international initiative to combat apartheid was the World                        
 Conference on Sanctions against Racist South Africa held in Paris in June 1986. India as                     
 Chairman of the Non-aligned Movement, along with the Organisation of African Unity (OAU),                    
 was one of the co-sponsors of this Conference. The Indian delegation played a major role                     
 in harmonising positions and ensuring full reaffirmation of the urgent necessity for                         
 comprehensive and mandatory sanctions against South Africa.                                                  
                                                                                                              
 As Chairman of the Non-aligned Movement, India was also specially invited to a seminar on                    
 Arms Embargo against South Africa held in London in May 1986. The London seminar led to                      
 the adoption, by consensus, of Resolution 591 of the Security Council later in the year,                     
 which aims at addressing the problem of circumvention of loopholes in the international                      
 Arms Embargo against South Africa.                                                                           
                                                                                                              
 India maintained an active role in the UN Special Committee against Apartheid, the                           
 principal UN organ to keep South Africa's policy of apartheid under constant review. India                   
 was closely involved with the preparation of six draft resolutions in the Special                            
 Committee on Situation in South Africa and Assistance to Liberation Movements,                               
 Comprehensive and Mandatory Sanctions against the Racist Regime of South Africa, Status of                   
 the International Convention against Apartheid in Sports, Programme of Work of the Special                   
 Committee against Apartheid, Concerted International Action for the Elimination of                           
 Apartheid and Relations between Israel and South Africa. In addition to these, two                           
 resolutions on Oil Embargo against South Afrca and the United Nations                                        
 -49>                                                                                                         
                                                                                                              
 Trust Fund for South Africa were drafted by Norway and Sweden respectively, The                              
 resolutions were adopted by the General Assembly by large majorities. India co-sponsored                     
 all resolutions except two and voted in favour of all of them.                                               
                                                                                                              
 The continued illegal and colonial occupation of Namibia by South Africa remained a major                    
 concern of the United Nations. An International Conference for the Immediate Independence                    
 of Namibia at Ministerial level was convened in Namibia in July 1986 where India                             
 represented the Non-aligned Movement. The Vienna Conference reaffirmed the resolve of the                    
 International community to assure freedom, human dignity and their rightful place in the                     
 international community for the people of Namibia. A highlight of the Conference was an                      
 eloquent and moving appeal addressed by a Group of Eminent Persons specially invited to                      
 Vienna which included Sardar Swaran Singh from India.                                                        
                                                                                                              
 The UN General Assembly also held a Special Session on Namibia in September 1986. India                      
 was one of the countries mandated by the Harare Summit of Non-aligned Countries to                           
 participate in the Special Session at Ministerial level and the External Affairs Minister                    
 led the Indian delegation. The Special Session reaffirmed the direct responsibility of the                   
 United Nations for Namibia until independence. It reiterated that comprehensive mandatory                    
 sanctions under Chapter VII of the UN Charter were the most effective means to ensure the                    
 compliance of South Africa with the decisions of the United Nations on Namibia. It also                      
 urged those States which have not yet done so to immediately cease, individually and                         
 collectively, all dealings with South Africa in order to ensure its total isolation.                         
                                                                                                              
 India maintained its active participation in the UN Council for Namibia and was re-elected                   
 as a Vice President of the Council upon the assumption of office by her new Permanent                        
 Representative to the United Nations.                                                                        
                                                                                                              
 The Security Council held meetings on several occasions during the year under review in                      
 the wake of South African acts of aggression and destabilisation                                             
 -50>                                                                                                         
                                                                                                              
 against neighbouring African States. Following South African raids in Botswana, Zambia and                   
 Zimbabwe in May 1986, the non- aligned caucus in the Security Council pressed for                            
 imposition of mandatory sanctions against South Africa. A similar effort was made during                     
 the Council session in June 1986 in the wake of a South African raid on the Angolan Port                     
 of Namib. While the vetoes of certain permanent members of the Security Council prevented                    
 the adoption of mandatory sanctions, the Security Council meetings effectively mirrored                      
 the sense of international outrage and anguish at Pretoria's policy of aggression and                        
 destabilisation.                                                                                             
 The continuing conflict in the Central American region was the subject of discussion on                      
 several occasions during the year under review. The Security Council convened on two                         
 occasions in July 1986 at the request of Nicaragua following approval of funds for the                       
 Contra rebels by the US Congress and the judgement of the International Court of Justice                     
 (27 June 1986) declaring US actions against Nicaragua to be in violation of international                    
 law. A further Meeting of the Security Council was held in October 1986 at the request of                    
 Nicaragua to seek US compliance with the judgement of the International Court of Justice.                    
 Participating in the debate, India's Permanent Representative called for greater efforts                     
 to bring the Contadora peace process to fruition and underlined the need for full                            
 co-operation of the international community. He also urged member-States to be fully                         
 responsive to their obligations under the UN Charter. The incidents on the                                   
 Nicaraguan-Honduran border in 1986 were also considered by the Security Council at the                       
 request of Nicaragua in December 1986.                                                                       
                                                                                                              
 The situation in Central America was also addressed by the UN General Assembly during its                    
 41st session which adopted a consensus resolution sponsored by the Contadora and the Lima                    
 Support Group. The resolution essentially endorsed the Contadora peace process and                           
 affirmed the need for its acceleration. In his intervention during the debate, India's                       
 Permanent Representative stressed the need for resolution of the problems in the region in                   
 a regional perspective through dialogue and negotiations.                                                    
                                                                                                              
 The General Assembly also adopted a separate resolution, sponsored by Nicaragua, affirming                   
 the need for compliance with the judgement of the                                                            
 -51>                                                                                                         
                                                                                                              
 International Court of Justice by 94 votes against 3 with 47 abstentions. India voted in                     
 favour.                                                                                                      
                                                                                                              
 The Security Council met in February 1986 to consider the situation between Iran and Iraq                    
 and, after prolonged consultations, unanimously adopted Resolution 582 on the basis of a                     
 working paper prepared by the ten non-permanent members of the Council. The resolution                       
 deplored the initial acts which gave rise to the conflict as well as its continuation and                    
 escalation and called for an immediate ceasefire. The Security Council convened again in                     
 October 1986 to discuss this question. In a statement, the Secretary General of the United                   
 Nations reiterated the necessity for the Security Council to establish a basis upon which                    
 both sides would find it possible to co-operate with the United Nations in its efforts to                    
 promote a settlement. The Security Council adopted a resolution calling upon Iran and Iraq                   
 to implement Council Resolution 582 and requested the Secretary General to intensify his                     
 efforts with the two nations to give effect to the Resolution.                                               
                                                                                                              
 The General Assembly debated the question of Afghanistan at its 41st session. It adopted a                   
 resolution by 122 votes to 20 with 11 abstentions. India abstained. In his speech, India's                   
 delegate Shri Vayalar Ravi explained that the resolution was less than fully constructive                    
 and supportive of the efforts being made by the Secretary General and his Special                            
 Representative. India is of the view that the situation there can be resolved only through                   
 an overall political settlement based on the principles set out at the conference of                         
 Foreign Ministers of the Non-aligned Countries held in New Delhi in February 1981 and                        
 reiterated at the Seventh and Eigth Summit of the Non-aligned Movement.                                      
                                                                                                              
 The situation in Kampuchea was debated in the General Assembly on 20-21 October 1986. A                      
 number of delegations expressed reservations on the credentials of "Democratic Kampuchea".                   
 However, there was no formal move to challenge its credentials. The substantive resolution                   
 on Kampuchea was adopted by 115 votes to 21 with 13 abstentions. As in the past, India                       
 abstained on the resolution and pointed out that the adoption of one-sided resolutions,                      
 the recourse to inflexible positions and attempts for the restoration of the status quo                      
 ante would not create the conditions in which a peaceful and lasting solution could be                       
 found.                                                                                                       
 -52>                                                                                                         
                                                                                                              
 The ad hoc committee on the Indian Ocean meeting in July 1986 adopted a consensus report                     
 and draft resolution for adoption by the General Assembly. This resolution was adopted at                    
 the 41st session without vote. The resolution called on the ad hoc committee to complete                     
 preparatory work relating to the Conference on the Indian Ocean by 1987 in order to enable                   
 the convening of the Colombo Conference on the Indian Ocean at an early date thereafter                      
 but not later than 1988. The resolution reiterated that the Conference and the                               
 establishment and maintenance of the Indian Ocean as a Zone of Peace required the full and                   
 active participation and co-operation of all the permanent members of the Security                           
 Council, the major maritime users and the littoral and hinterland States.                                    
                                                                                                              
 The question of Antarctica was considered in the First Committee of the UN General                           
 Assembly where the debate reflected differing points of view. The Antarctic Treaty                           
 Consultative Parties (ATCPs) maintained that the Antarctic Treaty regime had preserved                       
 international peace and security in the Antarctic, promoted peaceful co-operation and                        
 scientific research in the area, ensured environmental protection, reconciled conflicting                    
 territorial claims and maintained the Antarctic as a nuclear free zone. Many non-ATCP                        
 countries called for a more universal regime for the Antarctic, some seeking to declare                      
 the Antarctic as a "common heritage of mankind". As at the 40th session, three separate                      
 resolutions were tabled during the year under review. One requested the Treaty Parties to                    
 keep the Secretary General fully informed on all aspects of the question of Antarctica so                    
 that the United Nations could "function as the central repository" of all such                               
 information, and, requested the Secretary General to continue to follow all aspects of the                   
 question of Antarctica to provide an updated report to the General Assembly at its 42nd                      
 session. The second resolution called upon the Antarctic Treaty Parties to impose a                          
 "moratorium" on the negotiations to establish a minerals regime until such time "as all                      
 members of the international community can participate fully in such negotiations". The                      
 third resolution called for the exclusion of South Africa from all meetings of the                           
 consultative parties. India voted in favour of the third resolution.                                         
                                                                                                              
 The XIII Meeting of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties took place in Brussels in                      
 October 1986 where China and Uruguay were admitted as ATCPs. Meetings on the ongoing                         
 negotiations for the establishment of an Antarctic minerals regime were held in Hobart in                    
 April 1986 and at Tokyo in October-November 1986.                                                            
 -53>                                                                                                         
 The situation in West Asia engaged the attention of the UN Security Council on several                       
 occasions during 1986. In January, the Council considered Lebanon's complaint against                        
 Israeli measures and practices against the civilian population in Southern Lebanon. In the                   
 same month, the Council convened to consider the situation in the Israeli-occupied Arab                      
 territories following allegations of Israeli violation of the Haram Al Sharif shrine in                      
 Jerusalem. However, owing to the veto of a Permanent Member of the Security Council, no                      
 resolutions could be adopted on these occasions. In December 1986, the Council met on the                    
 complaint of the PLO following the killing by Israeli security forces of some students in                    
 the Bir Zeit University in the occupied territories. The Council adopted Resolution 592 C                    
 reaffirming the applicability of the Geneva Convention relating to the Protection of                         
 Civilian Persons in Times of War to the Palestine and other territories occupied by Israel                   
 and called upon Israel to abide by it. Earlier, the President of the Security Council                        
 issued a statement on behalf of the Members of the Council on 2 December 1986, expressing                    
 concern at the escalation of violence around the Palestinian refugee camps in Lebanon.                       
                                                                                                              
 The 41st session of the UN General Assembly adopted altogether seven resolutions relating                    
 to the situation in West Asia-four resolutions on the question of Palestine and three on                     
 the situation in the Middle East. India reiterated its support to the right of                               
 self-determination of the Palestinian people including its right to an independent                           
 homeland. We also supported the holding of the International Peace Conference on the                         
 Middle East under the auspices of the United Nations with the participation of all parties                   
 to the Arab-Israeli conflict including the PLO as well as the USA, the USSR and other                        
 concerned States on an equal footing. In this context, we also supported the proposal for                    
 the establishment of a Preparatory Committee within the framework of the Security Council                    
 with the participation of its Permanent Members to take necessary action to convene the                      
 Conference.                                                                                                  
                                                                                                              
 During the 41st session of the General Assembly, India maintained its traditional position                   
 on issues of decolonisation, stressing particularly the responsibility of the United                         
 Nations and of negotiation in this regard. India co-sponsored the two main resolutions on                    
 the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial                            
 Countries and Peoples and on the Dissemination of Information on Decolonisation, both of                     
 which were                                                                                                   
 -54>                                                                                                         
                                                                                                              
 adopted by the General Assembly. India also supported the resolution sponsored by the                        
 South Pacific Forum calling for the re-inscription of New Caledonia on the list of                           
 non-self-governing territories of the United Nations. India co-sponsored the resolution in                   
 the General Assembly urging an immediate ceasefire in the Western Sahara region to prepare                   
 for a referendum to be conducted under the auspices of the United Nations and the OAU. It                    
 also co-sponsored a resolution urging the Governments of Argentina and the United Kingdom                    
 to resume negotiations to discuss all aspects of the problem of the Falkland Islands                         
 (Malvinas).                                                                                                  
                                                                                                              
 The resolutions on decolonisation in the General Assembly also                                               
 condemned the continued illegal occupation of Namibia by South Africa and urged the                          
 stopping of foreign economic and military activities that are detrimental to the                             
 decolonisation process. The General Assembly also devoted time to a separate discussion on                   
 the question of Namibia. Coming as it did less than two months after the Special Session                     
 on Namibia, the discussions in the General Assembly reflected the continued and indeed                       
 growing concern and resolve of the world community on this issue.                                            
                                                                                                              
 Disarmament Issues                                                                                           
                                                                                                              
 During 1986 India was active in all multilateral disarmament fora, namely, the Conference                    
 on Disarmament, the UN Disarmament Commission, and the First Committee of the UN General                     
 Assembly. This is in keeping with the Indian view that in this nuclear age, disarmament is                   
 indispensable not only for world peace but for the very survival of mankind.                                 
                                                                                                              
 India took several initiatives in the UN General Assembly to promote nuclear disarmament.                    
 India's two resolutions calling for a freeze on nuclear weapons and a convention on the                      
 prohibition of use of nuclear weapons respectively were adopted with overwhelming                            
 majorities. Of the 65 other resolutions on disarmament adopted by the UN General Assembly,                   
 India supported the vast majority and abstained on only a few. The International                             
 Conference on Disarmament and Development, which could not be held in 1986, is now to be                     
 held in New York from 24 August to 11 September 1987. India, as Chairman of the                              
 Preparatory Committee, has worked actively for the                                                           
 -55>                                                                                                         
                                                                                                              
 convening of this Conference. It is a matter of regret that the USA has announced its                        
 decision not to participate in the Conference.                                                               
                                                                                                              
 Certain proposals sought to divert attention from the highest priority issues of nuclear                     
 disarmament and prevention of nuclear war. On all these, India took a forthright stand                       
 and, in a number of cases, abstained from voting or voted against these resolutions. As in                   
 the past, India voted against the Pakistani resolution on a nuclear weapon free zone in                      
 South Asia, and expressed grave concern at the discordant note that its annual proposal                      
 introduced into the process of regional co-operation which the countries of South Asia are                   
 seeking to promote.                                                                                          
                                                                                                              
 India also continued her disarmament efforts through the Six- Nation Initiative. After the                   
 Delhi Declaration, the Six concentrated their efforts on securing a moratorium on all                        
 nuclear testing by the US and the USSR, as a first step towards a Comprehensive Test Ban                     
 Treaty. In February 1986, the Six Nations sent a message to the US and the USSR                              
 emphasizing the importance of their reaching agreement on concrete steps to halt the                         
 nuclear arms race at their next Summit meeting and suggesting a suspension of all nuclear                    
 testing until then as a confidence building measure. They also reiterated their offer,                       
 made in October 1985, to verify suspension of nuclear testing.                                               
                                                                                                              
 The leaders of the Six Nations met again on 6 August 1986 in Ixtapa, Mexico. Emphasizing                     
 the importance of ending all nuclear testing, they urged the two major nuclear weapon                        
 States to agree on a moratorium on nuclear testing and put forward a concrete proposal to                    
 assist in achieving adequate verification arrangements for the same.                                         
                                                                                                              
 In response to the Ixtapa Declaration, both General Secretary Gorbachev and President                        
 Reagan sent replies to the leaders of the Six-Nation Initiative. The Soviet leader                           
 extended his full support to the convictions expressed in the Declaration. He supported                      
 the call for a moratorium on nuclear testing and expressed his Government's willingness to                   
 enter into discussions with experts from the Six nations on verification arrangements. The                   
 US President, on the other hand, said that while a Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty remained                    
 a                                                                                                            
 -56>                                                                                                         
                                                                                                              
 long term objective, for the time being the US found it necessary to continue nuclear                        
 testing. He also rejected the verification offer made by the Six-Nation Initiative. In a                     
 joint press release on 3 October 1986, the leaders of the Six nations reiterated their                       
 hope that the two major nuclear weapon States would agree on a mutual suspension of                          
 testing and saw the next US-Soviet Summit as presenting an excellent opportunity to reach                    
 an agreement.                                                                                                
                                                                                                              
 In a New Year Eve statement (30 December 1986), the Six again urged the leaders of the                       
 Soviet Union and the USA to recommence comprehensive talks to prevent an arms race in                        
 space and terminate it on earth and ultimately to eliminate nuclear arms everywhere. The                     
 Six felt that 1987 "provided an opportunity for the Soviet Union and the United States to                    
 agree on a number of disarmament measures, including deep cuts in nuclear arsenals".                         
                                                                                                              
 The Six urged in particular the US to reconsider its decision to exceed the SALT II                          
 ceiling. They said they had also noted the decision of the USSR to terminate its                             
 unilateral moratorium and to resume nuclear testing following the first US test in 1987                      
 and hoped that this decision was not irreversible. At the same time, the Six noted that                      
 there was still room for a bilateral moratorium and reiterated their offer of ensuring                       
 adequate verification of such a moratorium.                                                                  
                                                                                                              
 The Eigth Conference of Heads of State of Non-aligned Countries met in Harare in September                   
 1986 and issued the Harare Appeal on Disarmament to the USA and the USSR. The Appeal                         
 reiterated the commitment of the NAM to nuclear disarmament and urged the super powers to                    
 take immediate steps to prevent the outbreak of a nuclear war. The Appeal emphasized the                     
 need to reach an accord for a permanent moratorium on nuclear tests.                                         
                                                                                                              
 Economic Issues                                                                                              
                                                                                                              
 During 1986 the overall climate for multilateral economic negotiations remained unhelpful.                   
 -57>                                                                                                         
                                                                                                              
 The problems of developing countries particularly the heavily indebted countries and                         
 countries of sub-Saharan Africa received a little more understanding and consideration.                      
 Discussions during the year under review were, however, largely focussed on issues                           
 concerning the major industrialised countries themselves. Problems of developing countries                   
 have been treated more or less as side issues. There is an increasing tendency among major                   
 industrialised countries to reach agreements and arrangements on matters of global                           
 interest among themselves. Even in the traditional development fora the developed                            
 countries are more actively pursuing issues of interest to them.                                             
                                                                                                              
 An important event in May 1986 was the holding of the Special Session of the General                         
 Assembly on the critical economic situation in Africa. This was the first time that a                        
 special session was devoted to the problems of one region. The Assembly adopted an agreed                    
 Plan of Action. Although the Plan of Action is less specific than may have been hoped, it                    
 reflects the general commitment of the international community to help the African                           
 countries overcome the grave situation facing their economies. The Indian delegation                         
 participated actively in the negotiations both with the African countries as well as the                     
 donor community which led to the final declaration. Although the adoption of the Plan of                     
 Action was an important achievement, much will depend on how effectively the general                         
 commitment towards Africa is translated into effective assistance.                                           
                                                                                                              
 At the General Assembly session, another important achievement was a consensus resolution                    
 on External Debt. This was an important agreement for the United Nations as the developed                    
 countries had so far shown little willingness to seriously discuss issues relating to                        
 Money and Finance at the General Assembly. In the past, they had taken the position that                     
 these questions should be discussed only in the IMF and the World Bank. There were also                      
 intensive discussions on the issue of agricultural trade. In the area of trade, generally                    
 it is hoped that the agreements reached at Punta del Este will check the slide towards                       
 increasing protectionism. The forthcoming UNCTAD- VII Conference in 1987 will provide an                     
 important opportunity to discuss issues related to trade commodities, financial flows and                    
 development.                                                                                                 
                                                                                                              
 The Pledging Conference for UN's Operational Activities for Development showed an increase                   
 in nominal term in the pledges for the major funds and                                                       
 -58>                                                                                                         
                                                                                                              
 programmes of the United Nations. The financial situation of many of these important                         
 programmes has stabilized though there is no real increase in resources and in some cases                    
 there have been some decline. Some institutions which have performed useful work such as                     
 UNITAR are facing an acute financial crisis. It was with great difficulty that agreement                     
 was possible on the restructuring and continuation of UNITAR. The Indian delegation took                     
 very active part in these negotiations to enable UNITAR to continue. UNFPA, which is                         
 suffering from withholding of contribution by the United States, has been able to secure                     
 additional commitments from other donors.                                                                    
                                                                                                              
 In all fora, particularly at the meetings of the Non-aligned Countries as well as the                        
 inter-governmental follow-up co- ordination committee in Cairo, India continued to stress                    
 the importance of increased South-South Co-operation. The major development in this area                     
 following the Ministerial Meeting hosted in Delhi was the holding of a Ministerial Meeting                   
 in Brasilia which agreed to a negotiating framework for the Global System of Trade                           
 Preferences. It is expected to stimulate trade among developing countries. Another                           
 positive development was that guidelines were agreed upon for identification, and for                        
 formulation of specific ECDC projects from a special fund designated as the Perez Guerero                    
 Fund for Economic and Technical Co-operation among developing countries. The Fund will                       
 provide valuable seed money for feasibility studies and formulation of projects which can                    
 then be taken up by interested developing countries on a self-financing and                                  
 self-sustaining basis.                                                                                       
                                                                                                              
 The Ministerial Meeting of the Co-ordinating Bureau of the Non-aligned Countries in April                    
 1986 in New Delhi agreed in principle for the setting-up of a Standing Ministerial                           
 Committee for economic co-operation. A decision in this regard was subsequently adopted at                   
 the Eighth Non-aligned Summit Conference at Harare. The Standing Ministerial Committee                       
 will review and harmonize policies and programmes of the non-aligned and other developing                    
 countries to promote international economic co- operation in response to the changing                        
 world economic situation, especially in regard to the crucial issues of money, finance,                      
 debt, trade and development.                                                                                 
                                                                                                              
 India played a leading role in the General Assembly Session of the International Civil                       
 Aviation Organisation (ICAO) held in Montreal from 23 September                                              
 -59>                                                                                                         
                                                                                                              
 to 10 October 1986. The leader of the Indian delegation was unanimously elected as the                       
 President of the Assembly. In the opening statement at the Assembly, India, inter alia,                      
 expressed deep anguish at the gruesome massacre of innocent people at the Karachi airport.                   
 It expressed the hope that the incident will be thoroughly investigated and appropriate                      
 stern action will be taken against those found responsible for having caused such                            
 excessive casualties in this unfortunate incident.                                                           
                                                                                                              
 Administrative and Budgetary Matters                                                                         
                                                                                                              
 During 1986, the UN faced the worst financial crisis in its 41-year history. This crisis                     
 was precipitated by the application of the US legislation popularly known as the Kassebaum                   
 Amendment which called for a 20% reduction in the contribution to the United Nations till                    
 "meaningful reforms in the budgetary procedure to the UN were introduced" which would                        
 allow major contributors to play a greater role than hitherto in determining not only the                    
 size of the budget but also the programmes it contained. Additional reductions also                          
 resulted from the application of the Gramm-Rudman-Hollings deficit reduction amendment to                    
 the US budget. These reductions were of crucial significance as the US pays 25% of the UN                    
 budget and is its largest contributor.                                                                       
                                                                                                              
 In April-May 1986, the 40th General Assembly was reconvened to consider the current                          
 financial crisis. The Assembly approved measures which included deferment of construction                    
 of conference facilities, postponement of certain programmes and activities, reduction in                    
 the frequency and duration of a number of meetings, a freeze on recruitment and                              
 curtailment of the publications programme. The Secretary General also urged early payment                    
 of arrears and appealed for voluntary contributions. The application of these economy                        
 measures have resulted in a saving of $ 67 million. As payment of arrears and voluntary                      
 contributions, an additional $ 35 million was received. Nevertheless, in terms of                            
 available cash balances, the UN continued to face severe constraints during the year under                   
 review.                                                                                                      
                                                                                                              
 The 41st General Assembly agreed with the Secretary General's proposal to continue these                     
 economy measures in 1987. It is expected that the resultant savings would be of a higher                     
 order as they would be applied throughout the calendar year.                                                 
 -60>                                                                                                         
                                                                                                              
 The Group of High-Level Inter-governmental Experts to Review the Efficiency and                              
 Administrative Functioning of the United Nations, of which India was a member and where it                   
 performed a significant role, recommended ways and means of streamlining and increasing                      
 the efficiency and effectiveness of the UN Secretariat, the inter-governmental structure                     
 and the related conference and meeting schedules. The Group also recommended measures for                    
 improvement of co-ordination and priority setting between activities and programmes. Of                      
 particular significance were the recommendations which called for a 15% reduction in the                     
 number of staff and a 25% reduction in the number of top echelon posts and review of                         
 inter-governmental and Secretariat structures.                                                               
                                                                                                              
 The Group agreed that it was necessary for substantial improvements to be made in the                        
 planning and budget process to facilitate the attainment of broad agreement among                            
 member-States on the level and content of the budget as failure to do so could lead to a                     
 continuation of the current financial crisis. However, no agreement was reached in the                       
 Group on the manner in which the improvements were to be made. Thus the attention of the                     
 41st General Assembly, in its consideration of the Report of the Group, focussed on the                      
 programme and budget process. Our approach to the Report of the Group was that the                           
 measures to improve the long-term efficiency and cost effectiveness of the UN should be                      
 fully supported while at the same time it was necessary to ensure that the UN continues to                   
 function on the basis of democratic principles. India played an important and constructive                   
 role in the negotiations at all levels and in shaping the UN General Assembly resolution                     
 on the Report of the Group. We played a particularly significant role in the negotiating                     
 and the drafting of the section of the resolution relating to the planning and budget                        
 process by which it has been agreed that in the budget process consensus should be the                       
 desired objective towards which all endeavours should be made.                                               
 Social and Humanitarian Issues                                                                               
                                                                                                              
 India has traditionally taken a keen interest in social and humanitarian issues, both in                     
 the United Nations General Assembly, the UN Commission for Human Rights and other related                    
 UN bodies. This flows out of the commitment and principles on human rights and social                        
 justice which are an essential part of our Constitutional and Legislative provisions and                     
 also a very important component                                                                              
 -61>                                                                                                         
                                                                                                              
 of social and political life in the country. On all issues of importance to the developing                   
 and Non-aligned Countries India helped in co-ordinating positions, first as Chairman of                      
 the Non- aligned Movement and subsequently in close co-operation with Zimbabwe, the                          
 current Chairman of the Non-aligned Movement. India continued, as in previous years, to be                   
 closely involved with the drafting of conventions relating to the Rights of the Child and                    
 the Migrant Workers. We emphasized in different UN fora the importance of the World                          
 Community acceding to the International Covenants on Human Rights, to the International                      
 Covenant on Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid and to the Convention on                    
 the Elimination on Racial Discrimination.                                                                    
                                                                                                              
 In the UN Commission on Human Rights, India participated actively in the 42nd session of                     
 the Commission which was held in Geneva in February March 1986. In this session as                           
 Chairman of the Non-aligned Countries, India played an important role in co- ordinating                      
 their position on the traditional resolutions on Southern Africa, the Middle East,                           
 Ethiopia as well as on the Right to Development. India presented the draft resolution on                     
 Lebanon and Palestine on behalf of the Arab group. The leader of the Indian delegation                       
 paid a tribute to late Mr. Olaf Palme, former premier of Sweden, on behalf of the Asian                      
 and Non-aligned group. In its interventions during the proceedings of the session, the                       
 Indian delegation expressed its great concern at the continued deterioration in the human                    
 rights situation in many parts of the world, and also contributed to the discussion on                       
 different aspects of standard setting in the field of human rights. This included our                        
 contribution to the discussion on the Right to Development, the imperative need for a New                    
 International Economic Order, the relationship between Human Rights and Scientific and                       
 Technological Development and the Declaration on the Elimination of all Forms of                             
 Intolerance and of Discrimination based on Religion or Belief.                                               
                                                                                                              
 During the deliberations, India highlighted the increasing gravity of the Human Rights                       
 situation in Southern Africa, the continued occupation of Namibia and the efforts to                         
 intimidate and destabilise the Frontline States. In respect of the situation in Southern                     
 Africa, India called for the application of comprehensive and mandatory sanctions against                    
 South Africa without any reservation motivated by economic, political or strategic                           
 considerations in order not only to induce a change in South Africa, but also to put an                      
 end to its destabilisation policy directed against the Frontline States and to bring                         
 -62>                                                                                                         
                                                                                                              
 independence to Namibia. India also called for the immediate and unconditional release of                    
 Nelson Mandela and all the other freedom fighters in South Africa and Namibia. Our                           
 delegation invited more countries to accede to the International Convention on the                           
 Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid and stressed the necessity of                           
 providing moral and material support to SWAPO, the ANC and all other freedom fighters in                     
 Southern Africa who were campaigning not only for their own freedom and independence but                     
 to uphold a cause dear to all humanity. India also highlighted the suffering inflicted                       
 upon the Arabs, especially Palestinians, in the territories occupied by Israel. India                        
 together with several other country's delegations as well as a large number of                               
 Non-Governmental Organisations (NGOs) intervened in the debate on the situation of the                       
 Tamils in Sri Lanka during the 42nd session of the Commission. Our delegation reiterated                     
 the deep and abiding interest of the Indian Government in restoring communal amity in Sri                    
 Lanka with whom we have maintained traditionally close and cordial relations. We indicated                   
 our opposition to all forms of violence and our firm support to the unity and territorial                    
 integrity of Sri Lanka. We also pointed out that India will continue its endeavour to                        
 ensure that the parties to the ethnic violence in Sri Lanka are brought together to                          
 achieve a viable political solution without any further delay and loss of life.                              
                                                                                                              
 In the 41st session of the UN General Assembly, India played its traditionally significant                   
 role in the deliberations of the Third Committee. In the Third Committee, 67 draft                           
 resolutions were adopted, 46 without a vote and 21 by recorded votes. The Committee also                     
 adopted 10 draft decisions, 9 without a vote and one by a recorded vote. We co-sponsored,                    
 among others, resolutions relating to the future work of the Committee on the Elimination                    
 of Racial Discrimination, the Sub-Commission for the Prevention of Discrimination and                        
 Protection of Minorities and the UN Working Group on Migrant Workers. The resolution                         
 initiated by India on the "National Institutions for the Promotion and Protection of Human                   
 Rights" was also adopted by consensus in the General Assembly. In our interventions in the                   
 Third Committee, we highlighted the acute distress and suffering of the Palestinians in                      
 the territories occupied by Israel, the colonization of Namibia, our abhorrence of the                       
 system of apartheid in South Africa and our support to the people of that country in the                     
 legitimate struggle for their rights.                                                                        
 -63>                                                                                                         
                                                                                                              
 By far of the most important development in the Third Committee was the adoption, with                       
 only one negative vote, of a declaration on the Right to Development. India had been                         
 closely associated with the long negotiations in the General Assembly and in the Human                       
 Rights Commission which preceded the adoption of this declaration. We believe that the                       
 adoption of this delaration with positive votes from some Western countries will                             
 constitute one of the most important initiatives of the United Nations towards innovative                    
 standard setting and codification in the field of human rights.                                              
                                                                                                              
 Activities of the Non-aligned Movement                                                                       
                                                                                                              
 The Non-aligned Movement (NAM) remained a vital dimension of India's foreign policy during                   
 the period under review. As Chairman of the Movement since the New Delhi Summit of 1983,                     
 India has played a crucial role in the Movement. Our efforts during the three years of our                   
 Chairmanship have aimed at strengthening the unity of the Non-aligned Countries and their                    
 capacity for concerted action in fulfilment of the original principles and objectives of                     
 the Movement. With this end in view, India has worked to expand the area of consensus                        
 among the Non- aligned Countries. On issues where differences of perception have come to                     
 surface, India attempted to keep the process of dialogue and consultations alive.                            
                                                                                                              
 In recent years, the Non-aligned Movement has focussed on nuclear disarmament, the                           
 struggle against racism and colonialism in Southern Africa and on building a co-operative                    
 international economic and political order based on equality and justice for all nations.                    
 The conflicts raging in several parts of the world such as the Middle East, Central                          
 America, the Gulf countries etc. have also been major pre-occupations in the Non-aligned                     
 Movement. The principled position of the Non-aligned Countries for resolution of such                        
 conflicts and tensions was affirmed at numerous occasions during the Ministerial and other                   
 meetings of the Non-aligned Countries. The Co-ordinating Bureau of the Movement at New                       
 York functioned on a continuous basis to keep the evolving international economic and                        
 political situation under constant review. It held a large number of meetings on the                         
 burning issues before the Movement including the situation in Southern Africa, the                           
 conflict in Central America and the unresolved tensions and conflicts in the Middle East.                    
 -64>                                                                                                         
                                                                                                              
 The global economic crisis and the severe difficulties faced by developing countries                         
 particularly in the areas of external debt, reduced financial flows, the fall in commodity                   
 prices, fluctuating exchange rates and rising protectionism in the developed world have                      
 been the major questions on the economic side of the agenda of the Non-aligned Countries.                    
 While, on the one hand, the Non-aligned Countries continued their efforts in various                         
 international fora to actualise the goal of a New International Economic Order, parallely                    
 there was a growing emphasis on South-South Co-operation. The Action Programme for                           
 Economic Co-operation of the Non-aligned Countries adopted at the New Delhi Summit                           
 provided the blueprint for a growing interaction and exchange among the Non-aligned                          
 Countries in several areas of co-operation.                                                                  
                                                                                                              
 In preparation for the Eighth Summit of the Non-aligned Countries at Harare in                               
 August-September 1986, India as the Chairman of the Movement hosted two major meetings in                    
 New Delhi in 1986. The Fifth meeting of the Co-ordinating Countries in April 1986 reviewed                   
 progress in diverse sectors unde the Action Programme for Economic Co-operation and                          
 evolved outlines for future action in different sectors. Later in the month, New Delhi was                   
 the venue for a Ministerial Meeting of the Co-ordinating Bureau, which undertook a                           
 comprehensive review of the international political and economic situation. The                              
 deliberations at the Bureau Meeting in New Delhi proved to be a valuable input in the work                   
 of the non-aligned leaders at the Harare Summit.                                                             
                                                                                                              
 The Harare Summit in August-September 1986 coincided with the 25th Anniversary of the                        
 Non-aligned Movement and gave that event a special significance. A special commemorative                     
 Declaration was adopted on the occasion at Harare which reaffirmed the original principles                   
 of the Movement and their continuing relevance in the present international context.                         
                                                                                                              
 Southern African issues were in the forefront of the agenda of the Harare Summit and saw                     
 the launching of several useful initiatives to combat South Africa's policies of apartheid                   
 and its illegal occupation of Namibia. Apart from identifying a wide range of selective                      
 measures against South Africa, the Harare Summit also established the AFRICA (Action for                     
 Resisting Invasion, Colonialism and Apartheid) Fund with the objectives of assisting the                     
 Frontline States and the liberation movements in Southern Africa to withstand South                          
 -65>                                                                                                         
                                                                                                              
 Africa's acts of aggression and economic sabotage. India was entrusted with the                              
 Chairmanship of the nine-member Fund Committee. In the months since Harare, considerable                     
 groundwork has been prepared for the AFRICA Fund including a meeting at the level of                         
 senior officials in Lusaka in November 1986 which commenced preparations for finalising                      
 the Fund's work programme at the Summit in January 1987. It was also decided at Harare to                    
 set-up a Committee of Foreign Ministers to canvass support for the imposition of                             
 comprehensive mandatory sanctions against South Africa which was mandated to visit certain                   
 key industrialised countries in this connection. The Minister for External Affairs                           
 participated in the Mission of this Committee to some West European capitals and to Japan                    
 undertaken in October-November 1986 in pursuance of this mandate.                                            
                                                                                                              
 At the Eighth Summit Conference of the Non-aligned Countries at Harare in September 1986,                    
 the Chairmanship of the Non-aligned Movement passed to Zimbabwe. Prime Minister Rajiv                        
 Gandhi addressed the Summit as the outgoing Chairman of the Movement as well as the                          
 Commemorative Session held at Harare on 1 September 1986 to mark the 25th Anniversary of                     
 the Movement. The Summit paid warm tributes to India's contribution during the term of her                   
 Chairmanship to the unity and strength of the Non-aligned Countries.                                         
                                                                                                              
 The Harare Summit also addressed a joint appeal to the President of the United States and                    
 the General Secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union on nuclear disarmament.                     
 On the economic front, the Summit reviewed the prevailing international economic situation                   
 especially its adverse consequences for the developing countries. One concrete initiative                    
 at Harare related to the approval of the establishment of a Standing Ministerial Committee                   
 of the Non-aligned Countries on North-South economic issues. While reaffirming the                           
 Movement's commitment to a New International Economic Order, the Harare Summit also                          
 underlined the need for greater South-South Co- operation and approved a wide ranging                        
 Action Programme for Economic Co-operation among the Non-aligned Countries which spans                       
 several areas of activity.                                                                                   
 The situation in Southern Africa remained a major focus of attention in the Non-aligned                      
 Movement and India sought, as Chairman, to sustain and give direction to this momentum.                      
 The Co- ordinating Bureau met on 22 May                                                                      
 -66>                                                                                                         
                                                                                                              
 1986 following the South African aggression against Botswana, Zambia and Zimbabwe and                        
 adopted a communique expressing profound indignation and grave concern at these unprovoked                   
 attacks. The Non-aligned Movemen was also associated with the World Conference on                            
 Sanctions against South Africa held in Paris in June 1986 when a message from the Chairman                   
 stressing an urgent need for mandatory sanctions against South Africa was sent to the                        
 Conference. The Chairman also addressed a message to the International Conference on                         
 Immediate Independence for Namibia held in Vienna in July 1986.                                              
                                                                                                              
 The Co-ordinating Bureau met on several occasions during the year under review to consider                   
 the situation in Central America. The meetings considered developments in Central America                    
 and issued communiques expressing grave concern at the deterioration of the situation in                     
 the sub-region around Nicaragua, expressing grave concern and regret at the approval by                      
 the US Congress of funds for the mercenary groups seeking the overthrow of the Government                    
 of Nicaragua and noted with satisfaction the judgement of the International Court of                         
 Justice delivered on 27 June 1986. It also appealed to the United States to abide by it                      
 immediately and unconditionally.                                                                             
                                                                                                              
 Within the Security Council, the Non-aligned Countries actively participated in the                          
 consideration of the situation in the Middle East. The Non-aligned Committee of Eight                        
 continued its efforts through informal consultations for an International Peace Conference                   
 on the Middle East under the UN auspices. It submitted a report to the Harare Summit where                   
 Zimbabwe was included as an additional member and new Chairman of the Committee.                             
                                                                                                              
 The continuing fratricidal conflict between Iran and Iraq received constant attention in                     
 the Movement. Following a renewed escalation in hostilities in February 1986, the official                   
 spokesman of the Government of India made a statement on behalf of the Chairman of NAM                       
 calling upon the two countries to move away from the path of conflict and confrontation                      
 towards a negotiated peaceful settlement. At the Ministerial Meetings of the Co-ordinating                   
 Bureau in New Delhi in April 1986, the Chairman of the meeting issued a statement renewing                   
 the urgent appeal addressed by the Chairman of the Movement at the Seventh Summit in New                     
 Delhi in 1983.                                                                                               
 -67>                                                                                                         
                                                                                                              
 The emerging tensions in the Mediterranean region also engaged the Movement during the                       
 period under review. Several meetings of the Bureau were held during the year to consider                    
 the grave situation facing the Socialist People's Libyan Arab Jamahiriya. It issued                          
 statements expressing grave concern over the situation in the region, the interception and                   
 forcible diversion by Israel on 4 February 1986 of a Libyan civilian aircraft in                             
 international air-space and the provocations and use of force against the Jamahiriya,                        
 demanding urgent cessation of military operations.                                                           
                                                                                                              
 The Ministerial Meeting of the Co-ordinating Bureau in New Delhi held a special session                      
 and adopted a communique on 15 April 1986 noting with deep shock and profound indignation                    
 the armed attacks of the United States of America against the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya. In                     
 pursuance of the mandate of this Ministerial Meeting of the Co-ordinating Bureau, the                        
 Foreign Ministers of India, Cuba and Yugoslavia and representatives of the Congo, Ghana                      
 and Senegal visited Tripoli and handed over to Colonel Muammar Al-Qadhafi the text of the                    
 communique adopted by the emergency Ministerial Meeting held on 15 April 1986 and                            
 reiterated to him the Movement's solidarity with the Socialist People's Libyan Arab                          
 Jamahiriya. Also, as mandated by the New Delhi Ministerial Meeting of the Co-ordinating                      
 Bureau, the Ministerial Group delivered the text of the communique to the President of the                   
 Security Council and the Secretary General of the United Nations and expressed to them the                   
 concern of the Movement and its solidarity with the Socialist People's Libyan Arab                           
 Jamahiriya. The Group participated in the Security Council session held in this context on                   
 24 April 1986.                                                                                               
                                                                                                              
 The Non-aligned Countries continued their efforts for the establishment of a new                             
 international economic order and kept the global economic situation, especially its impact                   
 on developing countries, under constant review. As Chairman of the Movement, India drew                      
 attention of the leaders of the Industrialised Seven on the eve of the Tokyo Summit of May                   
 1986 to the continuing global economic crisis and the concern of the developing countries                    
 at the increasing protectionist policies of the industrialised countries.                                    
 -68>                                                                                                         
                                                                                                              
 At the Fifth Meeting of the Co-ordinating Countries of the Action Programme for Economic                     
 Co-operation of the Non-aligned Countries held in New Delhi in April 1986, the Chairman of                   
 NAM and the Chairman of the Group of 77 presented a joint report on harmonisation and                        
 co-ordination of the Caracas Programme of Action of G-77 and the Action Programme for the                    
 Economic Co- operation of the Non-aligned Countries. The Non-aligned Movement was also                       
 represented at the Inter-governmental Follow-up and Co- ordination Committee (IFCC)                          
 Meeting at Cairo in August 1986 with a view to achieving such harmonisation.                                 
                                                                                                              
 Efforts were continued to accelerate progress in South-South Co-operation and further the                    
 implementation of the Action Programme for Economic Co-operation approved at the Seventh                     
 Summit. A large number of meetings in different spheres were organised to give effect to                     
 the recommendations of the Summit.                                                                           
                                                                                                              
 The Fourth Conference of the Non-aligned News agency Pool was held in Havana from 17 to 22                   
 March 1986 which adopted the Havana Programme of Action.                                                     
                                                                                                              
 The Inter-governmental Council in the field of Information met at the Ministerial level in                   
 Dakar in January and undertook a comprehensive review of the Programme of Action adopted                     
 at the Jakarta Meeting of Information Ministers.                                                             
                                                                                                              
 An expert-level meeting of Co-ordinating Countries in the field of Sports was convened in                    
 Havana, Cuba, in February 1986. This was followed by a Ministerial Meeting in the field of                   
 Sports and Physical Education at Pyongyang in July 1986 which adopted a Plan of Action for                   
 co-operation in this sphere.                                                                                 
                                                                                                              
 An expert-level meeting of Co-ordinating Countries in the sector of Health was held in                       
 Havana, Cuba, in March 1986.                                                                                 
 -69>                                                                                                         
                                                                                                              
 The first meeting of the co-ordinators in the Environment sectors was held in Nairobi in                     
 March 1986.                                                                                                  
                                                                                                              
 Madagascar hosted an expert-level meeting of co-ordinators in the sector of Monetary and                     
 Financial Co-operation in March 1986 to consider the proposal of the President of                            
 Madagascar on monetary and financial co-operation among the non-aligned and other                            
 developing countries.                                                                                        
                                                                                                              
 A Ministerial level meeting in the sphere of Education and Culture was held in Havana in                     
 April 1986.                                                                                                  
                                                                                                              
 An expert-level meeting in the field of Food and Agriculture was held in Rabat, Morocco,                     
 in July 1986 which adopted a Programme of Action aimed at achieving self-sufficiency in                      
 food and agriculture.                                                                                        
                                                                                                              
 Commonwealth                                                                                                 
                                                                                                              
 India was actively associated with the Commonwealth activities spanning a wide range of                      
 subjects under the Commonwealth umbrella. The most important pre-occupation of the                           
 Commonwealth during the period under review was the situation in Southern Africa, in                         
 particular the anti-apartheid struggle in South Africa and the question of Namibian                          
 independence. In this context, mention must be made of the Eminent Persons' Group (EPG)                      
 established through consultations among the leaders of Australia, the Bahamas, Canada,                       
 India, the UK, Zambia and Zimbabwe and the Commonwealth Secretary General in accordance                      
 with the Nassau Accord on Southern Africa and the London Review Meeting of Commonwealth                      
 leaders during August 1986.                                                                                  
                                                                                                              
 Sardar Swaran Singh, former Minister for External Affairs, was nominated by the Prime                        
 Minister to the Eminent Persons' Group. The Group visited South Africa and the Frontline                     
 States on several occasions and undertook wide                                                               
 -70>                                                                                                         
                                                                                                              
 ranging consultation with the representatives of the South African Government, leaders of                    
 the Frontline States, representatives of the liberation movements in Southern Africa as                      
 well as a wide cross section of leaders of public opinion in South Africa with a view to                     
 facilitating a dialogue for the establishment of a non-racial and representative                             
 government in that country. In its report to the Commonwealth leaders in June 1986, the                      
 EPG came to the unanimous conclusion that there was no genuine intention on the part of                      
 the South African Government to enter into negotiations with the representatives of the                      
 black majority for the establishment of non-racial and representative Government in South                    
 Africa. While drawing attention to the prospect of a blood bath in South Africa, the                         
 report stressed the need for meaningful sanctions by the international community against                     
 South Africa.                                                                                                
                                                                                                              
 The Prime Minister of India participated in the London Review Meeting of the Commonwealth                    
 leaders held from 3 to 5 August 1986 under the terms of the Nassau Accord on Southern                        
 Africa. The leaders of Australia, the Bahamas, Canada, India, Zimbabwe and Zambia agreed                     
 on the immediate adoption of additional selective measures against South Africa in                           
 addition to those outlined in para 7 of the Nassau Accord to put further pressure on the                     
 Pretoria regime. The UK, however, disassociated itself from this agreement and confined                      
 itself to action against South Africa in the Commonwealth context to a voluntary ban on                      
 new investments and on promotion of tourism to South Africa and to the readiness to abide                    
 by any EEC decisions regarding import of coal, iron, steel and uranium from South Africa.                    
                                                                                                              
 While Southern African issues were at the forefront of the Commonwealth concerns, a large                    
 number of meetings were held in other areas including Ministerial Meetings in the fields                     
 of Finance, Law and Health. The meeting of Law Ministers in Harare in July-August 1986                       
 adopted the Commonwealth Scheme on Mutual Assistance relating to Criminal Matters to                         
 facilitate Commonwealth Co-operation to combat illicit drug trafficking etc.                                 
                                                                                                              
 At Nassau, the question of the vulnerability of small States had emerged as a major                          
 concern of the Commonwealth in the wake of the report of the consultative group                              
 established at the New Delhi CHOGM (1983). In accordance                                                     
 -71>                                                                                                         
                                                                                                              
 with the decision taken at the Nassau Summit, an official level meeting was held in London                   
 in October 1986 to evolve a Commonwealth Plan of Action to address the vulnerability of                      
 small States.                                                                                                
                                                                                                              
 The biennial meeting of the Commonwealth senior officials was held in Dhaka from 3 to 5                      
 December 1986. The meeting reviewed progress in the implementation of decisions of the                       
 Nassau Summit in the run-up to the forthcoming Summit to be held in Vancouver in October                     
 1987. In the wide ranging exchange of views at Dhaka, the issues of Southern Africa,                         
 Multilateral Trade Negotiations- Prospects for the Uruguay Round, International                              
 Co-operation to Combat Terrorism, the Problem of Drug Trafficking etc. figured                               
 prominently. The meeting also reviewed progress under the Commonwealth Fund for Technical                    
 Co-operation (CFTC) as well as other areas of Commonwealth Co-operation such as the                          
 Commonwealth Foundation, the Commonwealth Youth Programme etc.                                               
                                                                                                              
 International Law: Developments and Activities                                                               
 During 1986, the Preparatory Commission for the International Sea-bed Authority and the                      
 International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea (PREPCOM) continued its work. Its Informal                     
 Plenary and its four Special Commissions continued discussion of the subjects allocated to                   
 them. It held its fourth session in two parts, viz., March-April 1986 in Kingston,                           
 Jamaica, and August-September 1986 in New York. During these meetings, the Chairman Mr.                      
 Warioba and the Acting Chairman Mr. Jhingran of India continued their efforts towards the                    
 resolution of conflicts relating to overlapping of application areas. At its session in                      
 New York held in August- September 1986, the Preparatory Commission as a whole endorsed an                   
 understanding known as the Arusha Understanding between the four pioneer investors, which                    
 sought to resolve the matter of overlapping claims. This understanding was concluded in                      
 Arusha in February 1986. Pursuant to the endorsement of the Arusha Understanding all the                     
 four pioneer investors shall be submitting revised co-ordinates of their application areas                   
 to the Preparatory Commission to enable it to register application of India, France, Japan                   
 and the USSR pending before it.                                                                              
 -72>                                                                                                         
                                                                                                              
 At its 41st session, the General Assembly of the United Nations adopted a resolution on                      
 the Law of the Sea, whereby it expressed, inter alia, satisfaction at the important                          
 decision of the Preparatory Commission on 5 September 1986 which had created conditions                      
 for the early implementation of the regime for pioneer investors contained in Resolution                     
 II of the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea, thus facilitating the                       
 process of registration of applicants for pioneer investors status at the next session of                    
 the Preparatory Commission.                                                                                  
                                                                                                              
 On 23 December 1986, the Agreement between India and Burma on the Delimitation of Maritime                   
 Boundary in the Andaman Sea, in the Coco Channel and in the Bay of Bengal, was signed in                     
 Rangoon by the Minister for External Affairs, Shri N.D. Tiwari, on behalf of India and                       
 Minister for Foreign Affairs, U Ye Goung, on behalf of Burma.                                                
                                                                                                              
 The maritime boundary between the two countries in the Andaman Sea, in the Coco Channel                      
 and in the Bay of Bengal is formed by a single continuous line whose course has been                         
 determined on the basis of the equi-distance principle. The Agreement stipulates that the                    
 extension of the maritme boundary in the Andaman Sea up to the maritime boundary                             
 tri-junction point between Burma, India and Thailand will be done subsequently after the                     
 tri-junction point is established by Agreement between the three countries. The Agreement                    
 also provides that the extension of the Maritime Boundary in the Bay of Bengal beyond 200                    
 Nautical Miles shall be done subsequently.                                                                   
                                                                                                              
 The Agreement recognizes the sovereignty of each party over all islands falling on its                       
 side of the maritime boundary, including those that may emerge in the future. It further                     
 recognizes the sovereignty, sovereign rights and jurisdictions of the parties in their                       
 respective maritime zones in accordance with the relevant provisions of the 1982 United                      
 Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea. The Agreement is subject to ratification, and                      
 the Instruments of Ratification are to be exchanged in New Delhi as soon as possible.                        
                                                                                                              
 The 41st session of the General Assembly of the United Nations held elections for the                        
 International Law Commission (ILC) on 14 November 1986.                                                      
 -73>                                                                                                         
                                                                                                              
 Fifty two candidates from five Regional Groups of the UN contested the elections. For the                    
 Asian Group there were eleven candidates for the seven seats available. Dr. P. S. Rao,                       
 Director, Legal and Treaties Division, Ministry of External Affairs, was elected as a                        
 member of the ILC.                                                                                           
                                                                                                              
 The UN Commission on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL) held its 19th session in New York                    
 from 23 June to 11 July 1986. India participated in the session as a member of the                           
 Commission. Shri P.K. Kartha, Law Secretary, was the Chairman of the session. The                            
 Commission considered the draft Convention on International Bills of Exchange and                            
 International Promissory Notes prepared by its Working Group on International Negotiable                     
 Instruments. The draft Convention on International Bills of Exchange and International                       
 Promissory Notes finalised by the Commission shall be considered again by the Working                        
 Group on International Negotiable Instruments at its 15th session to be held in New York                     
 from 16 to 27 February 1987. The draft Convention finalised by this Working Group shall                      
 then be considered by the Commission at its 20th session to be held in Vienna from 20 July                   
 to 14 August 1987.                                                                                           
                                                                                                              
 UNCITRAL Working Group on International Contract Practices held its 10th session in Vienna                   
 from 1 to 12 December 1986. India was a member of this Working Group and it participated                     
 in its deliberations. The Indian delegate was elected Rapporteur of this Working Group.                      
 The Working Group has prepared the text of a draft Convention on the Liability of                            
 Operators of Transport Terminals. The operator is defined to mean a person who undertakes                    
 to take in-charge goods involved in international carriage in order to provide or                            
 toprocure transport related services with respect to the goods in an area under his                          
 control. The Convention is applicable only in relation to the goods which are involved in                    
 international carriage. The draft text of the Convention on the liability of the operators                   
 of transport terminals prepared by the Working Group shall be considered again by it at                      
 its next session in January 1988.                                                                            
                                                                                                              
 The Eighth session of UNCITRAL Working Group on the New International Economic Order was                     
 held in Vienna from 17 to 27 March 1986. The session was attended by 27 member-States,                       
 including India, and 28 observers. The Working, Group considered draft chapters of the                       
 Legal Guide on Drawing up International Contracts for Construction of Industrial Works.                      
 The guide                                                                                                    
 -74>                                                                                                         
                                                                                                              
 identifies the legal issues involved in such contracts and suggests possible solutions to                    
 assist parties, in particular from developing countries, in their negotiations.                              
                                                                                                              
 The Legal Sub-Committee of the UN Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space held its                     
 25th session in Geneva from 24 March to 11 April 1986 and considered legal issues relating                   
 to remote sensing of the earth from space, nuclear power sources in outer space, the                         
 definition and delimitation of outer space and the geostationary orbit.                                      
                                                                                                              
 Regarding remote sensing of the earth by satellite, a set of 15 draft principles, the                        
 product of 12 years work, were approved by the Legal Sub-Committee.                                          
                                                                                                              
 On nuclear power sources, the Working Group reached consensus on two principles relating                     
 to notification of re-entry and assistance to States.                                                        
                                                                                                              
 Regarding definition and delimitation of outer space, some delegations expressed the view                    
 that for legal and practical reasons it was urgent to have a clear demarcation between                       
 air- space and outer space and that an international convention would be the appropriate                     
 response. Those delegations said that a good basis for further work was the Soviet Union                     
 proposal for a multilateral agreement establishing the beginning of outer space at an                        
 altitude not exceeding 110 km above sea-level and allowing for innocent passage at lower                     
 altitudes through the air-space of one State of another State's space object for the                         
 purpose of reaching orbit or returning to earth.                                                             
                                                                                                              
 Other countries took the view that the need for definition or delimitation had not yet                       
 been established and that in any case the location of a demarcation point would be                           
 arbitrary as no clear scientific basis for fixing a particular altitude had been                             
 established.                                                                                                 
                                                                                                              
 Regarding the question of geostationary orbit, some delegations described it as an                           
 integral part of outer space as a whole. Equatorial countries stated that the orbit was a                    
 limited natural resource calling for a special legal regime.                                                 
 -75>                                                                                                         
                                                                                                              
 These countries felt that they should have special rights and responsibilities with                          
 respect to the segments of the geostationary orbit superjacent to their territories. Some                    
 other delegations felt that the physical characteristics of the orbit derived from earth                     
 as a whole. There was no basis for any State or group of States to claim jurisdiction or                     
 preferential rights over any part of the orbit. Still others stated that the Sub-                            
 Committee should first determine the legal status of the geostationary orbit and then draw                   
 other conclusions regarding its use.                                                                         
                                                                                                              
 The United Nations Conference on the Law of Treaties between States and International                        
 Organisations or between International Organisations was held at Vienna from 18 February                     
 to 21 March 1986 to consider the draft articles on the topic adopted by the International                    
 Law Commission at its 34th session. It is significant to note that in drafting the                           
 articles, the International Law Commission had largely drawn on the provisions of the 1969                   
 Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties which applies to treaties between States.                           
                                                                                                              
 97 States including India participated in the Conference. International inter-governmental                   
 organisations that have traditionally been invited as observers at legal codification                        
 conferences convened under the auspices of the United Nations were also invited to                           
 participate in the Conference. The Conference adopted the Vienna Convention on the Law of                    
 Treaties between States and International Organisations or between International                             
 Organisations on 20 March 1986. The Convention is subject to ratification by States and by                   
 Namibia, represented by the United Nations Council for Namibia and to acts of formal                         
 confirmation by international organisations. The Convention completes the process on                         
 codification in the field of Law of Treaties. On the whole, the Convention embodies the                      
 principle of uniformity and non-discrimination between States and international                              
 organisations as parties to a treaty.                                                                        
                                                                                                              
 Until the 40th session of the UN General Assembly, the Soviet Union insisted upon drafting                   
 of a treaty on non-use of force in international relations. The Western Group opposed this                   
 idea. During the 41st session (1986), the USSR changed its position and sought a mandate                     
 to draft a declaration as an intermediary step leading to the drafting of a treaty. It did                   
 not insist for a treaty on the subject. In the course of the debate in the Sixth Committee                   
 on this                                                                                                      
 -76>                                                                                                         
                                                                                                              
 item, both sides stressed the need for a declaration on the non- use of force in                             
 international relations. As a result, the draft resolution on the item was adopted without                   
 a vote. The resolution urges the Special Committee to complete a declaration on the item.                    
 This is a good omen which is expected to lead to conclusion of the work on the item in                       
 1987.                                                                                                        
                                                                                                              
 At its 41st session, the Sixth Committee adopted a resolution on the New International                       
 Economic Order (NIEO) co-sponsored by 14 States, including India, which requests the                         
 Secretary General to seek proposals of member-States relating to the most appropriate                        
 procedures to be adopted with regard to the consideration of the analytical study prepared                   
 by the UNITAR as well as the codification and progressive development of the principles                      
 and norms of international law relating to the new international economic order. The                         
 important development in the drafting of this resolution was inclusion of the word                           
 'codification' in operative paragraph 3 as suggested by India, which would be very helpful                   
 for the developing countries. It is pertinent to mention that West European States have                      
 taken the stand that there was no right such as right to development aid. The developing                     
 countries on the other hand stressed the urgent need to establish a machinery in order to                    
 implement the recommendations made by UNITAR.                                                                
                                                                                                              
 A list of treaties and agreements signed by India during 1986 is given at Appendix II.                       
 11/18/2008                                                                                                   
 -77>                                                                                                         
 FOREIGN ECONOMIC RELATIONS                                                                                   
                                                                                        Top                   
 A South Asian Association for Regional Co-operation (SAARC) Ministerial Meeting of                           
 International Economic Issues was held in Islamabad in April 1986, in pursuance of a                         
 decision of the First SAARC Summit in Dhaka. The Islamabad Meeting had the aim of                            
 formulating a joint position on important issues relating to the objective of the                            
 establishment of a new International Economic Order, and the improvement of the world                        
 trading systems under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) and related                          
 issues. The meeting adopted a Declaration on various major issues in the areas of money,                     
 finance, trade, development, debt, industrialisation, agriculture, etc., including a                         
 formulation on the Multilateral Trade Negotiations (MTN) which proved very useful in                         
 subsequent meetings where this issue was considered.                                                         
                                                                                                              
 The USA and Japan, supported by other major industrialised countries, initiated moves for                    
 launching a new round of multilateral trade negotiations in GATT since 1983. The US has                      
 urged that the proposed New Round includes new sectors such as services, intellectual                        
 property and trade related aspects of investment. The developing countries have opposed                      
 this proposal as they maintained that services, etc., were not within the jurisdiction of                    
 GATT. The Eighth Non-aligned Summit emphatically declared that no linkage should be                          
 established between the access for goods of developing countries and the concessions by                      
 them in the area of services. A special Ministerial Meeting of the Contracting Parties of                    
 GATT was held at Punta del Este in Uruguay in September 1986. Consensus was achieved by                      
 both sides touching some steps. The Ministerial Meeting accepted a two-track approach to                     
 the new MTN round to be called the Uruguay Round. A distinction has been drawn between                       
 negotiations on trade in goods which are to be conducted by the Contracting Parties to the                   
 GATT and the negotiations on trade in services which are to be conducted under the                           
 authority of a separate Ministerial Meeting formally                                                         
 -78>                                                                                                         
                                                                                                              
 independent of GATT. Thus developing countries agreed to engage in multilateral                              
 negotiations on services but developed countries accepted that they would not be in GATT.                    
 The Punta del Este Meeting also recorded its determination to halt and reverse                               
 protectionism and remove distortions in trade. The Declaration took into account the                         
 serious difficulties faced by the commodity markets and underlined the need for                              
 facilitating the debt ridden countries to meet their obligations and the need for                            
 effective action in the inter-related areas of money, finance and trade, besides                             
 reaffirming the principle of differential and more favourable treatment to benefit the                       
 developing countries without any reciprocity in negotiations with developing countries.                      
                                                                                                              
 Developing countries have become increasingly aware of the advantage of fostering close                      
 economic co-operation among themselves for mutual benefit. The concept of Economic Co-                       
 operation among Developing Countries (ECDC) has been given added urgency due to the                          
 continuing deterioration in the world economic climate and the lack of progress in the                       
 North-South dialogue on major issues relating to international co-operation and                              
 development. A major development in ECDC was the second High Level Meeting on Economic                       
 Co-operation among Developing Countries in Cairo in August 1986, to review the progress                      
 under the Caracas Programme of Action (CPA) in the last five years and to give directions                    
 for future work for the rest of the decade to improve the mechanisms available to the                        
 Group of 77 for the purpose. The meeting reaffirmed the relevance of ECDC as an                              
 indispensible means of restructuring international economic relationships for the benefit                    
 of the developing countries and reiterated the pivotal role of South-South Co-operation in                   
 their efforts to improve their economies and underlined the political commitment of all                      
 developing countries to the goal of collective self- reliance and for that purpose                           
 elaborating and intensifying their ECDC endeavours. The Cairo Meeting approved two                           
 documents :                                                                                                  
 (i)the Cairo Declaration on ECDC and                                                                         
 (ii)the Report of the High Level Meeting. The Declaration, inter alia, recommended that                      
 the scale of priorities be outlined for the selection of programmes and projects to be                       
 implemented within a fixed time framework. It was also decided to ensure that the ECDC                       
 becomes self-generating and self-financing. The Report of the meeting reviewed the                           
 implementation of the Caracas Programme of Action, supporting mechanisms, and the ECDC                       
 Trust Fund. The next session of the Inter-Governmental Follow-up and Co-ordination                           
 Committee (IFCC) would undertake a sectoral review of the CPA with a view to further its                     
 implementation. A key initiative under the CPA is the Global System of Trade Preferences                     
 (GSTP).                                                                                                      
 -79>                                                                                                         
                                                                                                              
 The establishment of the Global System of Trade Preferences is perhaps the most important                    
 ECDC initiative taken. India hosted a Ministerial Meeting on the GSTP in Delhi in July                       
 1985 where the proposal received significant political impetus. The Meeting agreed on a                      
 firm time-table for the launching of GSTP. Subsequently, an Inter-Ministerial Level                          
 Meeting was held in Brasilia in May 1986, where the negotiating phase of the GSTP was                        
 launched.                                                                                                    
                                                                                                              
 India continued its efforts to promote and enhance economic and technical co-operation                       
 withd eveloping countries in the spirit of South-South Co-operation, to which India                          
 remains firmly committed. Apart from providing assistance under multilateral schemes such                    
 as the Colombo Plan and the Special Commonwealth African Assistance Plan, bilateral                          
 assistance to developing countries has been provided through the Indian Technical and                        
 Economic Co-operation (ITEC) Programme, operated by the Ministry of External Affairs. The                    
 ITEC Programme launched in 1964 with an outlay of Rs. 4.46 lakhs has steadily been                           
 expanding over the years to Rs. 9 crores in 1986-87 to cover nearly 60 countries in Asia,                    
 Africa and Latin America.                                                                                    
                                                                                                              
 The main forms of technical co-operation under the ITCE Programme are providing training                     
 in India in various fields, deploying Indian experts abroad, undertaking feasibility and                     
 techno-economic studies, sponsoring visits of experts delegations, organising workshops                      
 and special training programmes and the supply of equipment.                                                 
                                                                                                              
 As in the previous years, during 1986-87, 700 slots were earmarked for nominees of                           
 developing countries for training in specialised Indian Institutes and nearly 150 Indian                     
 experts have been placed in developing countries on short or long term assignments.                          
                                                                                                              
 Some of the other ITEC activities during 1986-87 have been : the visit of a two-member                       
 team of the National Council for Cement and Building Materials to Panama to provide                          
 consultancy in the manufacture of cement using lime and rice husk; the visit of an                           
 official techno-economic delegation to Nicaragua in April 1986 for identification of                         
 specific projects for Indian assistance; the visit of a three-member Medical Specialists                     
 team (Group-I) to the People's Democratic Republic of Yemen for the treatment of patients;                   
 and two training programmes                                                                                  
 -80>                                                                                                         
                                                                                                              
 in Vietnam of two weeks duration each conducted by a team from the Indian Institute of                       
 Foreign Trade. A six-week training programme in Anguilla was conducted by a two-member                       
 team of the Institute of Secretariat Training and Management. Two delegations from Vietnam                   
 visited India for identifying joint research programmes in rice cultivation and in buffalo                   
 breeding. Two high- level delegations came from Afghanistan for gaining familiarity in the                   
 field of Small Scale Industry and in Indian banking methods. A two-member team from                          
 Mauritius visited museums in the North, East and South to study and submit a report                          
 detailing requirements for the ethnic museum to be set up in Mauritius. Afghanistan,                         
 Mauritius and Vietnam were provided assistance within the framework of the joint                             
 commissions with these countries. A Rural Technology Training-cum-Demonstration Centre has                   
 been set up in Dakar under the auspices of the Economic Commission for Africa (ECA).                         
                                                                                                              
 The Ministry of External Affairs also assisted foreign governments in recruiting Indian                      
 experts on a bilateral basis. It also made its contribution towards the promotion of                         
 Indian economic interests through its representation in bodies such as the                                   
 Inter-Ministerial Joint Venture Committee, the EXIM Bank, the Export Credit and Guarantee                    
 Corporation (ECGC), the Federation of Indian Engineering Organisation (FIEO), the Indian                     
 Institute of Foreign Trade (IIFT), the Project and Equipment Corporation (PEC), the                          
 Overseas Construction Council of India (OCCI), the Educational Consultants India Ltd.                        
 (EdCIL) and the Hospital Services Consultancy Corporation India Ltd. (HSCCIL).                               
 -81>                                                                                                         
 POLICY, PLANNING AND RESEARCH                                                                                
                                                                                        Top                   
 During the year under review, the Policy Planning Division continued to maintain contact                     
 with the Area Study Centres of various Universities where scholars are involved in                           
 research and studies of international relations. It also participated in the meetings of                     
 the Directors of the Area Study Centres. In order to promote greater interaction between                     
 the Ministry of External Affairs and academic institutions, the officers of the Ministry                     
 took part in a number of scholarly seminars and conferences relating to foreign policy and                   
 international affairs. The Division has fully utilised its modest Budget grant by                            
 extending financial assistance to various organisations/associations for organising                          
 seminars/conferences on international affairs.                                                               
                                                                                                              
 A seminar on "Strategic Environment into the 1990s" was jointly organised by the Ministry                    
 of External Affairs and the Institute for Defence Studies and Analyses (IDSA) from 3 to 5                    
 January 1987. The seminar brought together, in close interaction, senior officials from                      
 the concerned Ministries/Departments. The Division also jointly organised a workshop on                      
 "Security Environment of South Asia" with the Jawaharlal Nehru University (JNU) from 17 to                   
 19 January 1987. This workshop is the first of its kind and should prove to be                               
 stimulating.                                                                                                 
                                                                                                              
 Among the other seminars and symposia, which were partly financed by the Policy Planning                     
 Division, particular mention may be made of the following:                                                   
                                                                                                              
 (i) "Second Annual Conference of the World Women Parliamentarians for Peace," organised by                   
 the W.W.P.P., from 2 to 3 April 1986 at New Delhi.                                                           
 -82>                                                                                                         
                                                                                                              
 (ii) Seminar on "NAM & Asian Peace," organised by the Indian Council for Regional Affairs,                   
 on 12 April 1986 at New Delhi.                                                                               
                                                                                                              
 (iii) "Indo-FRG Seminar" organised by the Institute for Defence Studies and Analyses, from                   
 5 to 8 May 1986 at Srinagar.                                                                                 
                                                                                                              
 (iv) Seminar on "Nation Building and Development Process : Role of Communication,"                           
 organised by Indian Institute of Mass Communications, in September-October 1986 at New                       
 Delhi.                                                                                                       
                                                                                                              
 (v) One-day Seminar on International Year of Peace, held in New Delhi in October 1986, and                   
 four Seminars on International Year of Peace held in cities outside Delhi, organised by                      
 the Indian Federation of United Nations Associations, in November- December 1986.                            
                                                                                                              
 (vi) Two-day Seminar on International Year of Peace, organised by India International                        
 Centre, from 14 to 15 November 1986 at New Delhi.                                                            
                                                                                                              
 (vii) Afro-Asian Conference organised by Indian Society for Afro-Asian Studies, from 14 to                   
 19 November 1986 at New Delhi.                                                                               
                                                                                                              
 (viii) Asian Regional Seminar, organised by the Indian Federation of United Nations                          
 Associations, held in November-                                                                              
 December 1986 at New Delhi.                                                                                  
                                                                                                              
 (ix) Seminar on "International Global Development," organised by the Society for                             
 International Development (SID) Chapter of Government of Rajasthan, in December 1986 at                      
 Jaipur.                                                                                                      
                                                                                                              
 The Historical Division provides research input into the working of the Ministry. The                        
 Division has prepared a number of policy papers and background notes on subjects of                          
 concern and special interest to India in the external domain. In preparing the studies,                      
 the Division interacted with other divisions of the Ministry as well as with other                           
 Ministries and Departments in order to impart a multiple perspective to the studies. As in                   
 the past, several such studies were circulated to Missions abroad and territorial                            
 divisions of the Ministry as well as to other concerned departments and agencies of the                      
 Government.                                                                                                  
 -83>                                                                                                         
                                                                                                              
 The Historical Division is also responsible for providing historical and technical input                     
 in boundary questions. The depiction of India's external boundary in the maps on India                       
 published abroad are monitored by the Division and cases of wrong depiction of the                           
 external boundary of India are taken up with the concerned organisations/countries to                        
 ensure remedial action.                                                                                      
                                                                                                              
 As in earlier years, the Historical Division co-ordinated the work relating to the Annual                    
 Report of the Ministry.                                                                                      
                                                                                                              
 To support the research efforts a well stocked Library exists which has over one hundred                     
 thousand books and documents in its collection. During 1986 alone 1400 books, 300 maps,                      
 650 pamphlets and 31 reels of microfilm were added. The Library subscribes to 563                            
 periodicals (447 foreign and 116 Indian) besides 37 daily newspapers (24 foreign and 13                      
 Indian). Back-files of The Hindu (Madras), Bangladesh Observer (Dhaka), Daily Review,                        
 Izvestia and Pravda (Moscow), Dawn (Karachi), Pakistan Times (Rawalpindi), Egyptian                          
 Gazette (Cairo), Guardian (Rangoon), International Herald Tribune (Hong Kong), Le Monde                      
 (Paris), Renmin Ribao, China Daily (Beijing), Sun (Colombo), Suna (Khartoum), Standard                       
 (Nairobi) and The Times (London) are being maintained.                                                       
                                                                                                              
 From April 1986 the Library has initiated a computerisation of Documentation/Bibliographic                   
 Service. All new documents-books, periodicals, articles etc.-are being fed into an                           
 in-house microcomputer to create database on Foreign Affairs.                                                
                                                                                                              
 The Library is equipped with a microcomputer, a microfilm reader printer and a plain paper                   
 photocopier. The Library regularly issues a monthly Chronicle of Events, a Foreign Affairs                   
 Documentation Bulletin and an annotated monthly list of books added to the Library.                          
 -84>                                                                                                         
 EXTERNAL PUBLICITY                                                                                           
                                                                                        Top                   
 During the year under review, the External Publicity (XP) Division made concerted efforts                    
 to project the various dimensions of our foreign policy, promote a better understanding of                   
 India's economic achievements, industrial and technological potential, cultural heritage                     
 and democratic institutions, and also to counter anti-India propaganda by hostile                            
 elements. Emphasis was laid on dissemination of information-audio-visual, printed and by                     
 personal briefings and contacts-in a persuasive manner to achieve optimum results. The                       
 reportage on India in the international media was generally positive.                                        
                                                                                                              
 The foreign press in Delhi was briefed regularly about India's policy on various issues.                     
 Our Missions abroad also kept in regular touch with the foreign media to brief them about                    
 the current developments in India and provide them with factual material on the problems                     
 being faced by us. To that end, the XP'Division expanded its network of communications to                    
 keep our Missions informed on matters of contemporary interest in India in diverse fields                    
 through twice daily transmissions. During the year under review, 19 more Missions were                       
 provided twice daily transmissions, thus increasing the total number of Missions/posts                       
 covered on a daily basis with information bulletins to 73. Besides, 46 Missions receive                      
 bi-weekly press cables and 16 posts receive regular information bulletins by diplomatic                      
 bag.                                                                                                         
                                                                                                              
 The XP Division undertook the printing and publication of high quality publicity                             
 literature in India depicting different facets of India's national life in English,                          
 French, Spanish, Portuguese, German and Arabic. These publications have been widely                          
 circulated by our Missions abroad and have been found to be extremely popular and useful.                    
 -85>                                                                                                         
                                                                                                              
 Apart from the regular publication of a fortnightly magazine Indian and Foreign Review,                      
 its French counterpart Courrier de L'Inde and the monthly Foreign Affairs Record, the XP                     
 Division brought out about two dozen elegant publications-some of a regular nature like                      
 the Prime Minister's statements on foreign policy, some others of a general nature and                       
 some relating to specific occasions to achieve optimum results. For instance, during the                     
 year under review, special publications were brought out on the eve of the Ministerial                       
 Meeting of the Non-aligned Co- ordination Bureau in April, the Conference on Namibia in                      
 July at Vienna, the Eighth Non-aligned Summit at Harare in September, the Frankfurt Book                     
 Fair in September with India as the theme, and the SAARC Summit at Bangalore in November.                    
 Books and booklets describing India's role as the Chairman of the Non-aligned Movement and                   
 India's consistent support to the struggle against Colonialism and Apartheid in Southern                     
 Africa were also printed and widely distributed abroad.                                                      
                                                                                                              
 The External Publicity Division is placing increasing emphasis on the circulation of                         
 audio-visual material by Indian Missions abroad. All Indian Missions are now being                           
 equipped with Television sets and Video Cassette Recorders. Indian Missions abroad have                      
 also been provided with Video Libraries depicting India's agricultural, industrial,                          
 scientific and technological progress and different facets of our cultural heritage, apart                   
 from topics of contemporary interest. In close co-operation with Doordarshan, the External                   
 Publicity Division is regularly sending a Television Capsule entitled "India Magazine"                       
 every week to all our Missions abroad about developments in India. These Capsules have                       
 been widely welcomed and are being extensively used by the National Television Stations in                   
 a number of countries for viewing by their public. These programmes are also being lent by                   
 our Missions abroad to individuals, cultural organisations and educational institutions                      
 for wider impact. These programmes have proved to be extremely useful in catering to the                     
 needs of the Indian community and the people of Indian origin abroad. They are being used                    
 extensively by the Indian ethnic Television Stations in the USA and in Canada and are                        
 being viewed not only by the Indian community but also by other foreign expatriates.                         
                                                                                                              
 Keeping in view the increasing popularity of Indian Films across the world, the XP                           
 Division has acquired, in nine months ending December 1986, twelve high quality feature                      
 films viz., Janam, Mohan Joshi Hazir Ho, Aghat, Holi, New Delhi Times, Anant Yatra, Yahan                    
 Wahan and Bazaar in Hindi,                                                                                   
 -86>                                                                                                         
                                                                                                              
 Mukhamukham and Elipathayapa in Malayalam, Accident in Kanada, and Malgudi Days in                           
 English. After getting the films sub-titled in English, Spanish, French and Arabic, as the                   
 case may be, these have been sent to our Missions abroad for circulation and screening on                    
 the Mission's premises. The XP Division also provided our Missions with documentary films                    
 produced by the Films Division covering different aspects of India's national life. Film                     
 weeks were held in Kathmandu, Colombo, Dhaka, Rangoon, Seoul, Addis Ababa, Algiers,                          
 Kinshasa, Brussels, Lisbon, Vienna and Bogota during 1986.                                                   
                                                                                                              
 All our Missions abroad have been equipped with photo libraries containing photographic                      
 slides on different facets of developments in India. The Missions are also being regularly                   
 supplied with photographs of current developments in India. During nine months ending in                     
 December 1986, 2000 news-photographs were sent to our Missions abroad. Our Missions in                       
 Rangoon, Seoul, Damascus, Mahe, Belgrade, Athens, San Francisco, Lima, Panama, Santiago,                     
 and Canberra also held photographic exhibitions during the nine months ending 31 December                    
 1986.                                                                                                        
                                                                                                              
 The XP Division continued to maintain close liaison with the media representatives from                      
 abroad, and the resident foreign and Indian media representatives accredited to the Press                    
 Information Bureau and rendered them assistance in doing their work. During the 9 months                     
 ending 31 December 1986, 31 visiting media representatives participated in the coverage of                   
 the Ministerial Meeting of the Co-ordination Bureau of Non-aligned Countries in New Delhi                    
 in April 1986, 96 from the participating countries (Sri Lanka 15, Pakistan 28, Bhutan 5,                     
 Bangladesh 19, Maldives 6 and Nepal 23) for the SAARC Summit of the Heads of                                 
 State/Government in Bangalore in November 1986 and about 200 for the visit of General                        
 Secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (CPSU) later that month. In addition,                   
 about 300 resident foreign and Indian mediamen participated in these three important                         
 events, when the XP Division, with the assistance of other Government Departments, set up                    
 Media Centres to give them full facilities, including photo opportunities, supply of                         
 transcripts of speeches, timely briefings, interviews with high dignitaries and timely                       
 transmission of their despatches. Provision was made for direct telecast of the                              
 proceedings of the SAARC Summit at Bangalore for the benefit of the people of the                            
 participating countries.                                                                                     
 -87>                                                                                                         
                                                                                                              
 On the invitation of the Government of India, 38 mediamen from different countries paid a                    
 visit to India as guests of the XP Division, and another 20 were provided local                              
 hospitality or rendered assistance otherwise.                                                                
                                                                                                              
 During the year under review, the XP Division made complete logistical arrangements, with                    
 the help of our Missions abroad, for the media parties which accompanied the Prime                           
 Minister of India on his visits to Zambia, Zimbabwe, Angola and Tanzania in May; Mauritius                   
 in July; London, Mexico and the Eighth Non-aligned Movement (NAM) Summit at Harare in                        
 August; and Indonesia, Australia, New Zealand and Thailand in October. Logistical                            
 arrangements were also made during the visit of the President of India to Nepal in July                      
 1986, to Yugoslavia, Greece and Poland in October-November; and that of the Vice President                   
 of India to Botswana in October. On these occasions, press kits and audio- visual material                   
 were sent to our Missions in the countries concerned for a pre-publicity build-up.                           
 Similarly, the XP Division made logistical arrangements including Press Conferences for                      
 visiting foreign dignitaries and the accompanying media parties.                                             
                                                                                                              
 The XP Division continued to subscribe to the feature news services of news agencies and                     
 commissioned special articles on the occasion of the Republic Day and the Independence Day                   
 for dissemination abroad. The publication of special supplements on India by foreign                         
 newspapers/journals/magazines were facilitated.                                                              
                                                                                                              
 With the assistance of the Ministry of Home Affairs, the XP Division continued to                            
 regularly brief our Missions abroad on the developments in the Punjab and to counter                         
 extremist propaganda against India. Our Missions abroad have adopted a multi-pronged                         
 approach, including keeping in close touch with the resident Indian communities to brief                     
 them regularly about the developments in India including the situation in the Punjab, with                   
 a view to isolating the hostile elements. Selected Missions abroad are also being provided                   
 with information from the Punjab Government about the developments in the Punjab.                            
 -88>                                                                                                         
 CULTURAL RELATIONS                                                                                           
                                                                                        Top                   
 The activities of the Council reached a new high during the year 1986-87. Cultural                           
 delegations were sponsored by the Council to tour different regions of the world. During                     
 the period under review, the Council also provided an opportunity to Indian audiences to                     
 witness some of the leading performing groups from abroad.                                                   
                                                                                                              
 The Council undertook extensive preparations for the Festival of India and other cultural                    
 manifestations in the Soviet Union, Sweden and Switzerland scheduled for 1987-88.                            
                                                                                                              
 Panels were set up for filling vacancies in respect of Professors and Instructors of                         
 Hindi, Sanskrit, Buddhism and classical Music in foreign Universities and in Indian                          
 Cultural Centres abroad.                                                                                     
                                                                                                              
 During the period under review, the Council presented over 62 Cultural Programmes,                           
 including those presented for the benefit of visiting foreign dignitaries, such as King                      
 Hussain of Jordan, and Mr. Demichev, Vice President of the USSR, as well as for major                        
 International Conferences. Special programmes were also arranged at Bangalore for the                        
 functions hosted by the Prime Minister, the External Affairs Minister and the Foreign                        
 Secretary for the Heads of State and Government and other delegates for the SAARC Summit.                    
 -89>                                                                                                         
                                                                                                              
 The Council sponsored the visit of over 33 cultural troupes and separately provided travel                   
 assistance to a number of artistes to perform abroad in 1986-87. These included troupes                      
 sent out to participate in the Adelaide Festival in Australia, the Cervantes Festival in                     
 Mexico, the Seoul Asian Games and the Hydra Arts Festival in Athens.                                         
                                                                                                              
 The Council arranged over 46 eminent Indians including scholars, academicians, artistes,                     
 playwrights, critics and journalists to travel abroad and present different facets of                        
 India's culture before international audiences.                                                              
                                                                                                              
 As the official agency entrusted with the task of implementing India's Cultural Exchange                     
 Programmes (CEP) with foreign countries, particularly in the field of performing arts, the                   
 Council received a large number of performing troupes during the year. These included the                    
 Bamberg Symphony Orchestra from the FRG, the Soviet Circus, the Stanislavsky Ballet troupe                   
 and the Kransnoyarsk Dance Group from the USSR, the Volos Theatre from Greece, Folk Dance                    
 Troupe from Bulgaria, and the Ramayana Ballet from Kampuchea etc.                                            
                                                                                                              
 The Council received over 50 distinguished personalities including scholars, academicians,                   
 writers, poets, painters and sculptors from abroad.                                                          
                                                                                                              
 The Council also organised over 20 exhibitions at home and abroad. Some of the important                     
 ones included a photographic exhibition on the life and work of Fujii Guruji from Japan, a                   
 Polish Graphics exhibition (April-May 1986), an exhibition of Mexicans Bark Painting                         
 (December 1986) and for the first time in India, an exhibition of 60 original graphics of                    
 Pablo Picasso from the Museum of Spain. The Council also sponsored the work of artistes                      
 abroad, including an exhibition of painting and sculptures by Shri P.T. Reddy (May-June                      
 1986), an exhibition of Contemporary Indian paintings for display in Frankfurt during the                    
 Frankfurt Book Fair from 1 to 8 October 1986 and an exhibition of Indian Musical                             
 Instruments in China (September 1986).                                                                       
 -90>                                                                                                         
                                                                                                              
 The Council awarded 30 scholarships to foreign students under its Cultural Scholarship                       
 Scheme for 1986-87. It also disbursed scholarships on behalf of other agencies of the                        
 Government of India.                                                                                         
                                                                                                              
 The Council organised a meeting of the Foreign Students Advisors in July 2, 1986 to                          
 discuss the problems being faced by the foreign students in India. Thereafter steps have                     
 been taken to upgrade and streamline the entire range of facilities available for foreign                    
 students.                                                                                                    
                                                                                                              
 During the period under review, the Council organised four study tours for foreign                           
 students to places like, Bhopal, Ajanta, Ellora, Bombay, Goa, Alwar, Chittorgarh, Calcutta                   
 and the Sunderbans. Receptions were hosted for foreign students on the occasion of the                       
 Indian Independence Day, the Republic Day and the Foreign Student's Day at Headquarters                      
 and in Regional Offices and in Missions abroad. The Council also organised Orientation                       
 Courses for foreign students and for IFS Probationers.                                                       
                                                                                                              
 The Council continued to publish six quarterly journals namely, 'Indian Horizons,' 'Africa                   
 Quarterly,' 'Gagnanchal'in Hindi,' Thaqfatual Hind' in Arabic, 'Recontre Avec L'Inde'in                      
 French and 'Paples de la India,'in Spanish. However, the Council has shifted from letter                     
 press to offset printing of these journals. A special issue of 'Gagnanchal' was brought                      
 out in the last quarter of 1986 on Maithilisaran Gupt on the occasion of his birth                           
 centenary. In addition to these journals, the Council also undertook the publications of                     
 art books, the Azad Memorial Lectures and books in literature and other aspects of Indian                    
 Culture.                                                                                                     
                                                                                                              
 The Council collaborated with the Indira Gandhi National Centre for Arts in organizing a                     
 seminar on 'Inner & Outer Space'from 18 to 22 November 1986 at New Delhi. The Council also                   
 organised during 24 February-5 March 1987 a seminar on 'Tradition : a Continual Renewal'                     
 involving over 40 foreign participants.                                                                      
 -91>                                                                                                         
                                                                                                              
 For promoting a greater awareness and appreciation of the Indian cultural heritage abroad,                   
 the Council has established Indian Cultural Centres in Suva (Fiji), Georgetown (Guyana)                      
 and Paramaribo (Surinam). A Cultural Window has also been in operation in Bonn (FRG) since                   
 1984. Indian Music, Dance and language are taught by Indian teachers posted by the Council                   
 at these Centres. These Centres also maintain libraries and reading rooms and organise                       
 lectures, symposia, exhibitions, essay competitions, staging of plays, screening of films,                   
 cultural evenings, publications of news bulletins besides developing contacts with a wide                    
 cross section of local citizens including students, teachers, intellectuals and cultural                     
 personalities. The Council has decided to open new Cultural Centres at Port Louis in                         
 Mauritius and at Jakarta in Indonesia during 1987-88.                                                        
                                                                                                              
 The Council deputes Visiting Professors of Indology, Languages and allied subjects in                        
 foreign universities. Presently there are visiting Professors of Hindi on deputation to                      
 universities in Romania, Poland, Bulgaria, the GDR and Mexico; a visiting Professor of                       
 Sanskrit in the university of Mexico; an associate Professor of Tamil in the university of                   
 Poland; and visiting Professors of Sociology and Modern Indian History in the universities                   
 of the West Indies and Indonesia respectively. The deputation of visiting Professors to                      
 Thailand, Turkey, Poland and China is being finalised in consultation with the receiving                     
 countries.                                                                                                   
                                                                                                              
 Under the guidelines issued by the Central Cultural Committee of the Government of India                     
 in 1971, the Foreign Cultural Centres and Libraries in places other than those in which                      
 foreign missions had diplomatic or consular representation, will be managed and supervised                   
 by the ICCR. In pursuance of this the management of British Libraries and the House of                       
 Soviet Culture at Trivandrum and the supervision of the Max Muller Bhavans and the                           
 Alliances Francaise in India have been undertaken by the Council. During the year the ICCR                   
 administered the British Libraries located at Ahmedabad, Bangalore, Bhopal, Hyderabad,                       
 Lucknow, Patna, Pune, Ranchi and Trivandrum and the House of Soviet Culture at Trivandrum.                   
                                                                                                              
 The Council functions as the Secretariat for the Indo-US Sub- Commission on Education and                    
 Culture. The Joint Media Sub- Committee and the Joint                                                        
 -92>                                                                                                         
                                                                                                              
 Museum Sub-Committee of the Sub-Commission held their meetings in Bangalore and New Delhi                    
 respectively from 5 to 10 January 1987 wherein the work programme for 1987-88 was                            
 finalised. The Sub- Commission is expected to meet on 16-17 March 1987 at Austin, Texas                      
 USA to consider the recommendations of the two Sub- Committees.                                              
                                                                                                              
 The meetings of the General Assembly of the Council were held in April 1986 and February                     
 1987. The Council set up a Departmental Promotion Committee in February 1987 for the                         
 purpose of confirmation/promotion of officials. Recruitment of staff on both regular and                     
 contractual basis were done to meet the expanding work of the Council. Computerisation of                    
 some of the activities of the Council has also been undertaken. The Council undertook                        
 upgraded/renovated facilities such as Auditorium stage, construction of parking lot,                         
 construction of electric sub-station for un-interrupted power supply for presentation of                     
 cultural programmes, and installation of an electronic telephone exchange etc.                               
                                                                                                              
 The Council has decided to set up a Centre for Africa and a Centre for South and South                       
 East Asian Cultural Studies within the ICCR. These are expected to commence functioning in                   
 April 1987.                                                                                                  
                                                                                                              
 The Council procured and despatched art objects, musical instruments and publications to                     
 various Indian Missions on request. It also despatched over 100 sets of musical                              
 instruments to Mauritius. The Council also despatched busts of Mahatma Gandhi to San                         
 Marino and Madrid, in Spain and a bust of Indira Gandhi to Port Louis, in Mauritius.                         
                                                                                                              
 The Council organised the Azad Memorial Lecture on 23 January 1987. The lecture was                          
 delivered by Dr. Robert Mugabe, Prime Minister of Zimbabwe at a function held in the Teen                    
 Murti Auditorium which was attended among others by Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi.                             
                                                                                                              
 The Council provides the Secretariat for the Jawaharlal Nehru Award for International                        
 Understanding. The award for 1985 was posthumously conferred                                                 
 -93>                                                                                                         
                                                                                                              
 on the late Mr. Olaf Palme, Prime Minister of Sweden and was presented at a special                          
 ceremony held in New Delhi on 27 January 1987.                                                               
                                                                                                              
 During the year under review the Council assisted in the organisation of "Africa Day" on 2                   
 May. The 45th Anniversary of the UN Day was celebrated at the Council's premises on 24                       
 October. A special stamp was released on the occasion. The Council organised the                             
 "International Solidarity Day with the Palestinian People," on 29 November at Azad Bhavan.                   
 The Council also observed the death anniversary of Maulana Abul Kalam Azad on 19 February                    
 1987.                                                                                                        
 -94>                                                                                                         
                                                                                                              
 CHAPTER XIII                                                                                                 
                                                                                                              
 INDIANS OVERSEAS                                                                                             
                                                                                        Top                   
 Persons of Indian origin have settled in many countries all over the world. Indian                           
 nationals are also travelling and residing abroad on an increasing scale. The Indians                        
 Overseas are increasingly being recognised as a potential bridge of understanding and                        
 co-operation. They in turn have evinced greater interest in developing their cultural and                    
 economic ties with India to which the Government of India has responded positively with                      
 due regard for the mutual benefit of India and of the host country. Therefore, while it is                   
 the consistent policy of the Government of India that persons of Indian origin who have                      
 taken the nationality of the countries of their domicile should identify themselves with                     
 the country of their adoption, the Government of India continues to respond to their need                    
 to maintain cultural contacts with India and remains alive to their interest and welfare.                    
 The Government of India also takes due responsibility for the protection of the rights and                   
 interests of Indian citizens living abroad.                                                                  
                                                                                                              
 The Indian Missions abroad are the first point of contact for the Indians Overseas. Our                      
 Missions are frequently called upon to respond to queries or demands on a wide range of                      
 subjects. The Ministry of External Affairs is trying to play an active role in collecting                    
 and disseminating information to our Missions. Building up the database is being done                        
 through greater interaction with other Departments/Ministries of the Government. Our                         
 Missions have been requested to maintain close contacts with the Indians Overseas and to                     
 render effective service to them. The Government of India has set up a Consultative                          
 Committee for Non- Resident Indians (NRIs). This Committee comprises of representatives                      
 from the Ministries of Finance, Commerce, Industry and External Affairs, the India                           
 Investment Centre, representatives of trade and industry and 12 NRIs from different                          
 regions of the world who will be represented by rotation. Through this Committee, the NRIs                   
 interested in investment and collaboration in India will be in a better position to                          
 represent their views to the Government. This Ministry has been actively participating in                    
 the meetings of the Committee.                                                                               
 -95>                                                                                                         
 PROTOCOL                                                                                                     
                                                                                        Top                   
 During 1986-87, the Heads of Missions of the following 18 countries left India on                            
 completion of their tenure :                                                                                 
                                                                                                              
 Argentina, Philippines, Peru, Brazil, Uganda, Oman, Canada, Spain, Ireland, Bangladesh,                      
 Ecquador, Burma, Afghanistan, Zambia, Egypt, Belgium, Nicaragua and Norway.                                  
                                                                                                              
 During the same period, the Heads of the following 29 countries presented their                              
 credentials to the President of India :                                                                      
                                                                                                              
 Bhutan, Rwanda, Yugoslavia, Kampuchea, Iraq, Norway, Argentina, Zaire, Kuwait, Peru,                         
 Uganda, Liberia, Ireland, Spain, Oman, Bangladesh, Fiji, Philippines, Canada, Palestine                      
 Liberation Organisation, South-West African People's Organisation, East European                             
 Community, Afghanistan, Burma, Belgium, Guatemala, the People's Democratic Republic of                       
 Yemen, Saharawi Arab Democratic Republic and Zambia.                                                         
                                                                                                              
 India opened its first Resident Mission in Angola.                                                           
                                                                                                              
 Liberia opened its first Resident Mission in New Delhi on 21 May 1986, Brigadier General                     
 Rudolf F. Kolaco assumed charge as Ambassador of Liberia on 12 August 1986.                                  
 -96>                                                                                                         
                                                                                                              
 The Saharawi Arab Democratic Republic also opened its first Resident Mission in New Delhi.                   
 Mr. Aliyen Habib Kentaoue assumed charge as Ambassador of the Saharawi Arab Democratic                       
 Republic on 19 January 1986.                                                                                 
                                                                                                              
 A list of Heads of State/Government who visited India during 1986 is at Appendix XVII.                       
 -97>                                                                                                         
 PASSPORT AND CONSULAR SERVICES                                                                               
                                                                                        Top                   
 -108>                                                                                                        
                                                                                                              
 As part of its continuing efforts to render better and faster service to the public in                       
 Passport Offices, further streamlining of procedures, simplification of formalities and                      
 rationalisation of the organisational set-up was undertaken during 1986-87.                                  
                                                                                                              
 There are now 20 Passport Offices all over India under the administrative control of the                     
 Ministry of External Affairs. These offices cover almost all the major States. A statement                   
 showing the number of passports/miscellaneous services, applications received and the                        
 number of yassports issued/miscellaneous services rendered during the period January to                      
 December 1986 is given at Appendix VI. During the calendar year 1986, these offices earned                   
 a total revenue of Rs. 9.04 crores towards passport/miscellaneous service fee and incurred                   
 an expenditure of Rs. 3.36 crores towards office establishment resulting in a net revenue                    
 of Rs. 5.68 crores to the Government. A detailed statement of revenue and expenditure is                     
 given at Appendix VII.                                                                                       
                                                                                                              
 While the Passport Office, Vijaywada (Andhra Pradesh) was closed with effect from 1 May                      
 1986 followed by its merger with the Passport Office, Hyderabad, it has since been decided                   
 to close the Passport Office, Jalandhar shortly, followed by its merger with the Regional                    
 Passport Office, Chandigarh. It has also been decided by this Ministry to take over                          
 passport work from the Goa Administration. The Passport Office at Panaji under the control                   
 of this Ministry is likely to start functioning by the beginning of the financial year                       
 1987-88.                                                                                                     
                                                                                                              
 The annual All India Passport Officers' Conference was held at New Delhi from 4 to 6                         
 December 1986 with a view to monitoring the implementation of the                                            
 -98>                                                                                                         
                                                                                                              
 policy and procedural aspects, besides examining the feed back from the Passport Offices                     
 towards the practical aspects of the implementation of the procedures etc. Other                             
 participants in the Conference were representatives from the Ministry of Home Affairs, the                   
 Ministry of Labour, the Ministry of Law, the Ministry of Posts and Telegraphs, the                           
 Department of Electronics and the India Security Press, Nasik. The Conference was                            
 inauguarted by Shri K. Natwar Singh, Minister of State in the Ministry of External                           
 Affairs, who gave the guidelines for prompt services in the Passport Offices. Shri N. D.                     
 Tiwari, Minister for External Affairs, who addressed the closing session, emphasized the                     
 need for the quicker issue of passports, qualitative and courteous service to the general                    
 public, besides attending to their grievances. The Minister for External Affairs also                        
 impressed upon the need to keep the office premises and its surroundings neat and clean.                     
                                                                                                              
 During the year 1986 intensive physical inspections of various Passport Offices was                          
 carried out on 21 occasions by the Inspectors from the Ministry as a sequel to which                         
 bottlenecks at various stages were spotted and, thereafter, remedial measures taken.                         
 Consequently, there has been considerable improvement in quality and in the service to the                   
 public, particularly in removing various short-comings existing hitherto in certain                          
 Passport Offices.                                                                                            
                                                                                                              
 Special emphasis has also been laid on the training of the personnel from the Central                        
 Passport Organisation in various subjects like Cash & Accounts, Administration, Public                       
 Relations, Vigilance matters etc. in the Institute for Secretarial Training Management                       
 (ISTIM) New Delhi, besides practical training to some staff members in computer work by                      
 making arrangements with the suppliers.                                                                      
                                                                                                              
 Computerisation in Passport Offices                                                                          
                                                                                                              
 In pursuance of the Government's decision to computerise Passport Offices in India in a                      
 phased manner, computers have since been installed in the Passport Offices at Delhi and                      
 Madras, which have become functional. Computer installation work in Passport Offices at                      
 Cochin and Bombay is in progress and computers are likely to be operative at these                           
 stations also in the near future. It is proposed to undertake computerisation of another                     
 12 Passport Offices in India during 1987-88.                                                                 
 -99>                                                                                                         
                                                                                                              
 Steps taken to streamline the Procedures for issue of Passports                                              
                                                                                                              
 With a view to expediting the issue of passports without undermining the security aspects,                   
 the categories exempted from the requirements of identity and security verification have                     
 been reviewed and further enlarged.                                                                          
                                                                                                              
 The policy regarding (a) grant of passport facilities to Indian nationals seeking asylum                     
 abroad and (b) issue of duplicate passports in lieu of lost passports has been reviewed                      
 and comprehensive guidelines issued to all Indian Missions and Posts abroad to deal with                     
 such cases, in a cautious but pragmatic manner.                                                              
                                                                                                              
 Complaints and Grievances Cell in Passport Offices                                                           
                                                                                                              
 During the year 1986, approximately 1725 cases of complaints regarding delay in issue of                     
 fresh passports or renewal thereof were received against various Passport Offices in India                   
 by the Complaints & Grievances Cell of the Ministry of External Affairs. Out of the total,                   
 872 complaints were settled by issuing passports and rendering the services applied for.                     
 The reasons for delay were generally either non-receipt or delayed receipt of police/CID                     
 reports, besides non-compliance of formalities by the applicants themselves. The                             
 applicants are kept informed of the reasons for delay in issuance of passports to the                        
 extent possible.                                                                                             
                                                                                                              
 Appeals against refusal of issue of Passports                                                                
                                                                                                              
 55 cases of appeal against the order of impounding or refusal of passport facilities to                      
 Indian nationals by the Passport Offices were received. In about 25 cases, Joint Secretary                   
 (CPB) and Chief Passport Officer heard the appeals and passed orders allowing or rejecting                   
 the requests. Other cases of appeal are in the process of consideration.                                     
 -100>                                                                                                        
                                                                                                              
 Miscellaneous Matters                                                                                        
                                                                                                              
 About 47 cases of forgery of the entries in the passports or visas were reported to the                      
 Ministry. Investigations are being made in all these cases of forgeries.                                     
                                                                                                              
 240 applications were received for issue of certificates of Identity to Stateless persons,                   
 most of them being Tibetan refugees. In most cases, Certificates of Identity have been                       
 issued to the applicants in consultation with the Territorial Division and the Ministry of                   
 Home Affairs. Only a few cases received recently are pending disposal, but are in the                        
 process of being disposed of.                                                                                
                                                                                                              
 Introduction of revised Passport Application Forms                                                           
                                                                                                              
 On the recommendation of the All India Passport Officers' Conference held during 1984, all                   
 the passport application forms were revised by a committee to make them                                      
 computer-compatible. The old application forms were substituted by the revised computer-                     
 compatible application forms by the Passport (Second Amendment) Rules, 1985 and were                         
 introduced on priced basis in all the Passport Offices in India with effect from 1                           
 September 1986 and in the Indian Missions with effect from the date of receipt of these                      
 forms.                                                                                                       
                                                                                                              
 Consular Matters                                                                                             
                                                                                                              
 During 1986, a total of 2711 cases of deportation came to the notice of the Ministry. Of                     
 these as many as 2564 were from United Arab Emirates (UAE). In addition, about 352 Indians                   
 were evacuated from Aden (PDRY) at Government cost in January 1986 due to the outbreak of                    
 Civil War there. Indian Missions/Posts abroad repatriated 227 persons who were in distress                   
 in foreign countries besides extending financial assistance, wherever necessary.                             
                                                                                                              
 Cases of 172 Indian nationals arrested in various countries (excluding cases in the                          
 neighbouring countries), were reported to the Government. All possible Consular assistance                   
 was given to them and where possible, their release and return to India were facilitated                     
 by the Missions concerned.                                                                                   
 -101>                                                                                                        
                                                                                                              
 782 cases of the death of Indian nationals abroad came to the notice of the Ministry and                     
 action was initiated to claim wage dues, death compensation for the heirs of the deceased                    
 through respective Indian Missions. 169 cases of the death of foreign nationals in India                     
 were also handled.                                                                                           
                                                                                                              
 Consular Attestation of Documents                                                                            
                                                                                                              
 1,22,303 documents submitted by the public for production to foreign authorities were                        
 attested/authenticated by the Consular section. The procedure for authentication of                          
 documents, which was streamlined so as to enable the persons concerned to get back all the                   
 documents the same day, was found to be working to the satisfaction of the public.                           
                                                                                                              
 Consular Convention between India & USSR                                                                     
                                                                                                              
 A fresh Consular Convention to regulate consular relations between India and the USSR was                    
 signed on 27 November 1986 during General Secretary Gorbachev's visit to India. The                          
 previous Consular Convention, which was signed on 29 November 1973 expired on 30 July 1986                   
 but was kept in operation through exchange of Notes verbal between the Government of India                   
 and the Government of the USSR. The present convention will enter into force on the 30th                     
 day after the exchange of instruments of ratification by the two contracting parties. It                     
 will remain in force for a period of 5 years and will be extendable for another 5 years.                     
                                                                                                              
 Extradition Treaties with various Countries                                                                  
                                                                                                              
 Talks are in progress for entering into an Extradition Treaty with the UK, and an                            
 Extradition Treaty and Agreement on Judicial Assistance in criminal matters with the                         
 Federal Republic of Germany (FRG). An Extradition Treaty was signed between India and                        
 Canada in February 1987.                                                                                     
 -102>                                                                                                        
                                                                                                              
 Regional Meetings of Consular Officers                                                                       
                                                                                                              
 A Regional Consular Officers meeting was held in London from 15 to 17 December 1986. It                      
 was attended by Consular Officers from our Missions in France, Italy, Sweden, Belgium, the                   
 FRG and the Netherlands.                                                                                     
                                                                                                              
 A similar Regional Meeting for the Gulf region was held in Dubai from 20 to 21 December                      
 1986. It was attended by Consular Officers from our Missions in the UAE, Saudi Arabia,                       
 Iran and Kuwait. The Head of the Consular, Passport and Visa Division of the Ministry                        
 addressed these two regional conferences. The objective of the regional conference is to                     
 study the problems facing the Visa and Consular Affairs in rendering smooth, efficient and                   
 prompt services to the Indian and Foreign nationals.                                                         
                                                                                                              
 During the period under report several important changes have been brought about in Visa                     
 matters. The Visa application form has been simplified considerably with a view to                           
 facilitate and attract tourism. The Visa fees in respect of nationals of nearly 50                           
 countries have been reviewed and brought at par with the fees being charged by these                         
 countries from Indian nationals. Similar exercise in respect of many other countries is                      
 under active consideration. The requirement of Visa for travel to India for the Danish                       
 diplomatic as well as official passport holders has been dispensed with on reciprocal                        
 basis. Like-wise discussions were also held with certain West European countries for                         
 obtaining liberal Visa facilities for Indian nationals on reciprocal basis. A joint                          
 delegation from the Ministry of External Affairs and the Ministry of Home Affairs at the                     
 level of Joint Secretaries visited London and Dubai during December 1986 in order to                         
 monitor the functional aspects of Visa sections in both the Indian Missions. The                             
 delegation also held talks with the Indian Visa officers in Western Europe and the Gulf                      
 countries with a view to improve further the existing arrangements towards issue of Visas                    
 to foreigners.                                                                                               
 -103>                                                                                                        
 ADMINISTRATION AND ORGANISATION                                                                              
                                                                                        Top                   
 Shri B.R. Bhagat relinquished charge as Minister for External Affairs on 12 May 1986. From                   
 the same date Shri P. Shiv Shanker took over as Minister for External Affairs and of                         
 Commerce. He relinquished the External Affairs portfolio on 22 October 1986 when Shri N.D.                   
 Tiwari took over as Minister for External Affairs. Shri K.R. Narayanan remained as                           
 Minister of State in this Ministry upto 22 October 1986 on which date Shri K. Natwar Singh                   
 took over as Minister of State in the Ministry. Shri Eduardo Faleiro has remained as                         
 Minister of State in the Ministry since 12 May 1986.                                                         
                                                                                                              
 Shri Romesh Bhandari relinquished charge as Foreign Secretary on 31 March 1986 on                            
 retirement and Shri A.P. Venkateswaran took over as the new Foreign Secretary. On 20                         
 January 1987 Shri Venkateswaran sought voluntary retirement from service. Shri K.P.S.                        
 Menon took over as Foreign Secretary from 16 February. Shri N.P. Jain continued as                           
 Secretary (E & ER) till 9 October 1986 when he left to take over as Ambassador of India to                   
 Belgium and to the European Community. Dr. J. S. Teja relinquished charge as Secretary                       
 (West) in the Ministry on 22 August 1986 on being posted as Permanent Representative to                      
 the UN offices in Geneva and Shri A. S. Gonsalves, whom he replaced, took over as                            
 Secretary (West).                                                                                            
                                                                                                              
 S/Shri M. Dubey and P. L. Sinai have continued as Additional Secretaries. Shri A.G. Asrani                   
 took over as Additional Secretary (Pol) with effect from 12 August 1986 and Shri A.K.                        
 Banerjee took over as Additional Secretary (FA) with effect from 25 September 1986.                          
 -104>                                                                                                        
                                                                                                              
 The total sanctioned strength of IFS and IFS(B) both at Headquarters and in Indian                           
 Missions abroad is 3351. The Cadre- wise strength is given in Appendices VIII and IX. In                     
 addition there are 1518 locally recruited staff in Indian Missions/Posts abroad.                             
                                                                                                              
 The Ministry has 136 resident Missions/Posts abroad manned by officials from India. It has                   
 Honorary Consulate Generals/Consulates at 22 places. During the year under review, a new                     
 Mission was opened at Luanda in Angola and a Consulate General at St. Denis, Reunion                         
 Islands.                                                                                                     
                                                                                                              
 During the year under review, the Foreign Service Inspectors inspected Missions at Kabul,                    
 Tehran, Kathmandu, Colombo, Dhaka, Rome, Milan, Athens, Dublin, Panama, Caracas, Lima and                    
 Bogota in order to effect improvements in the overall working conditions in these                            
 Missions.                                                                                                    
                                                                                                              
 A list showing the number of Officers of this Ministry who have qualified in various                         
 foreign languages is given in Appendix X.                                                                    
                                                                                                              
 The Welfare Unit of the Ministry continued to render assistance of a varied nature                           
 including in matters of admissions to vocational institutions of children of personnel of                    
 this Ministry and medical assistance. As many as 12 serving officials of this Ministry                       
 died during the year. The Unit rendered all possible help to the bereaved families. The                      
 Unit, after a lapse of almost 8 years, revived the Foreign Office Club which would look                      
 after the various social activities of the Ministry as a whole. The Unit observed Flag Day                   
 collections on National and Red Cross Days.                                                                  
                                                                                                              
 The Ministry took care to implement the various Government directives on the welfare of                      
 Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe employees of this Ministry. A special cell is already                    
 functioning to look after the interests of the employees belonging to these communities. A                   
 statement showing the total number of employees in this Ministry in various groups and the                   
 number of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes among them is attached as per                                
 -105>                                                                                                        
                                                                                                              
 Appendix XIII. Another statement showing the number of appointments made and vacancies                       
 filled by candidates belonging to reserved categories during 1986 is at Appendix XIV.                        
 During the year under review, the premises of the erstwhile Akbar Hotel were taken over by                   
 the Ministry for accommodating many of its offices. About 1100 employees of the Ministry                     
 are now housed in Akbar Bhavan. Consequent to the move, about 130 ex- employees of Akbar                     
 Hotel were offered purely temporary employment in the Ministry.                                              
                                                                                                              
 The Ministry continued to pursue its policy of acquiring and constructing properties                         
 abroad for the Indian Missions and Personnel. In early 1986, the Ministry's policies                         
 regarding acquisition, construction, renovation and maintenance of properties abroad were                    
 reviewed by the Public Accounts Committee of the Parliament. As a result, the Ministry's                     
 activities in this field have been substantially intensified.                                                
                                                                                                              
 The 30-year dispute with the Government of the People's Republic of China regarding the                      
 properties of the Indian Embassy in Beijing was resolved and the present premises of the                     
 Chancery and the Ambassador's residence were acquired on a long lease in addition to the                     
 acquisition of a plot of land in Beijing for the purpose of additional construction for                      
 the Embassy. Chanceries were purchased in Lisbon and Madrid and residences were purchased                    
 for officers and staff in Tunis, West Berlin, Sydney, Canberra and Paris.                                    
                                                                                                              
 The renovation of the High Commissioner's residence in Canberra was completed while that                     
 of High Commissioner's residence at Wellington was in the final stages. By the end of the                    
 year under review various obstacles facing the construction projects at Islamabad and                        
 Colombo were successfully cleared and the progress of work on these projects became                          
 satisfactory. The construction of the Chancery at Nicosia and staff residences at Nairobi                    
 were nearing completion. Of all new projects of construction of Chanceries and/or                            
 residences abroad in various countries assigned to the Indian architects, the projects at                    
 Kuwait and Riyadh were approved and the planning of these projects was proceeding                            
 satisfactorily.                                                                                              
 -106>                                                                                                        
                                                                                                              
 Since its inception in June 1982, the Conference Cell of the Ministry of External Affairs                    
 has been providing logistical support for various International Conferences held in India.                   
 As in the past, during the year under review, arrangements were made for various                             
 Conferences/delegations. A list of such conferences is given at Appendix XV. Facilities                      
 provided included assistance in arranging the venue of the meetings, simultaneous                            
 translation and documentation in principal foreign languages, and general guidance in                        
 various formalities associated with the holding of important Conferences. Arrangements                       
 were also made for the reception/seeing off of important delegates attending international                   
 Conferences in India. All these measures have brought down considerably the expenditure                      
 involved in organising Conferences by various departments of the Government.                                 
                                                                                                              
 A special mention needs to be made of two important Conferences arranged by the Conference                   
 Cell during 1986, namely, the Meeting of the Co-ordinating Bureau of the Non-aligned                         
 Countries attended by the Foreign Ministers from all Non-aligned Countries and the Summit                    
 Meeting of the South Asian Association for Regional Co-operation. The latter Conference                      
 was held at Bangalore. In spite of several limitations, arrangements made by the                             
 Conference Cell were found to be most satisfactory.                                                          
 -107>                                                                                                        
 FOREIGN SERVICE TRAINING INSTITUTE (FSTI)                                                                    
                                                                                        Top                   
 The Foreign Service Training Institute (FSTI) was established to cater to the specific                       
 professional training needs of the Ministry viz., induction and refresher training for all                   
 categories of officials. It is located at Akbar Bhavan, Satya Marg, New Delhi. Its                           
 programmes are designed with reference to the guidelines on civil service training issued                    
 by the Department of Personnel and Training, Ministry of Personnel etc., and the specific                    
 conditions and requirements of the foreign service.                                                          
                                                                                                              
 The FSTI registered significant progress in training activities during the period under                      
 review. The training of new recruits to the IFS(A) was streamlined in the form of a                          
 comprehensive and integrated "Professional Course in Diplomacy & International Relations"                    
 which the new recruits (effective from 1985 batch) are now required to undergo at the FSTI                   
 after the Foundational Course at the Lal Bahadur Shastri Academy, Mussoorie. The duration                    
 of the course is approximately five months. The topics covered include : India's Foreign                     
 Policy & External Relations; India's National Security; India's Foreign Trade;                               
 International Law; Diplomatic Practice; Behavioural Skills and handling of political,                        
 commercial, consular, administrative, cultural and external publicity work. Although this                    
 Course is targeted primarily at the IFS(A) new recruits, relevant segments of it are also                    
 open to any other interested potential beneficiaries including foreign service wives.                        
                                                                                                              
 The highlights of the period were three Refresher Courses of 5 to 8 days' duration                           
 organised for Indian Ambassadors/High Commissioners which were attended by 58 Heads of                       
 Missions and many senior officers from headquarters.                                                         
                                                                                                              
 Altogether 122 officers/staff etc. availed of the training programmes organised by the                       
 Institute during the year under review. A similar cycle of programmes is planned for 1987.                   
 USE OF HINDI IN OFFICIAL WORK                                                                                
                                                                                        Top                   
 During the year, the Ministry continued with its efforts for more use of Hindi in official                   
 work, both at Headquarters and in Missions abroad and monitored the progress in this                         
 regard.                                                                                                      
                                                                                                              
 Since 1986, a Hindi Advisory Committee is functioning in the Ministry under the                              
 Chairmanship of the External Affairs Minister. During the year under review, the Committee                   
 met three times and besides reviewing the use of Hindi in the Ministry, gave suggestions                     
 for its greater utilisation in official work. In addition, an Official Language                              
 Implementation Committee of the Ministry also met three times during 1986.                                   
                                                                                                              
 In pursuance of the target fixed in the annual programme issued by the Department of                         
 Official Language, the Ministry inspected its Passport Offices at Lucknow, Bareilley,                        
 Guwahati, Calcutta, Bhubaneshwar and Hyderabad with a view to assessing the progress in                      
 the use of Hindi in these offices. Necessary instructions were issued to the concerned                       
 offices for compliance with Government orders regarding the Official Language.                               
                                                                                                              
 In addition, the Committee of Parliament on Official Language inspected the Passport                         
 Offices at Hyderabad and Cochin. The Committee also visited this Ministry on 22 January                      
 1987 and the Passport Offices at Delhi and Ahmedabad on 2 and 3 February for assessing the                   
 progress in the use of Hindi.                                                                                
                                                                                                              
 During 1986, Hindi Workshops were conducted in the Ministry in which a number of officials                   
 participated. A 'Hindi-Week' was organised in the month                                                      
 -109>                                                                                                        
                                                                                                              
 of September 1986, during which a Hindi Essay Competition and a Hindi Typing Competition                     
 were organised and awards were distributed to the winners.                                                   
                                                                                                              
 The Ministry also made efforts to propagate Hindi abroad. A number of Hindi standard books                   
 were sent to various Missions abroad on Indian Literature, Culture and Religion, for                         
 building standard Hindi Libraries in them. In addition, teaching materials and typewriters                   
 were sent as requested.                                                                                      
                                                                                                              
 As in the previous years, OSD (Hindi) of the Ministry was sent to PMI, New York to assist                    
 the Indian delegation to the UN, in case any member chose to speak in Hindi. OSD (Hindi)                     
 was also sent to Port-of-Spain, Georgetown and Paramaribo to assess the position of Hindi                    
 in these countries.                                                                                          
 -113>                                                                                                        
 APPENDIX I Meetings/Conferences held under the aegis of NAM                                                  
                                                                                        Top                   
 Meetings/Conferences held under the aegis of the Non-aligned Movement during 1986                            
  Sl. No.  Name of Meeting/Conference                  Venue            Date                                  
  (1)      (2)                                         (3)              (4)                                   
  1.       Expert Level Meetings in the                                                                       
           field of Health                             Havana           24-28 February                        
                                                                        1986                                  
  2.       Meeting of Senior Officials                                                                        
           in the field of Sports                      Havana           11-13 March 1986                      
  3.       Meeting of the NAM Co-ordina                                                                       
           ting Countries in the Sphere                                                                       
           of Monerary and Financial                                                                          
           Co-operation                                Antananarivo     24-28 March 1986                      
  4.       Second Conference of Ministers                                                                     
           of Education and Culture                    Havana           1-4 April 1986                        
  5.       Fifth Meeting of Co-ordinating                                                                     
           Countries of APEC (Action Prog-                                                                    
           ramme for Economic Co-operation)New Delhi   7-11 April 1986                                        
  6.       Ministerial Meeting of the Co-ordi-                                                                
           nating Bureau of Non-aligned                                                                       
           Countries                                   New Delhi        16-19 April 1986                      
  7.       Experts Level Meeting of Non-ali-                                                                  
           gned Coordinating Countries in                                                                     
           the Sphere of Standardisation,                                                                     
           Measurement and Quality                                                                            
           Control                                     Havana           5-9 May 1986                          
  8.       10th Meeting of Ministers of                                                                       
           Health and held during 39th                                                                        
           World Health assembly Session               Geneva           7 May 1986                            
  9.       Second Confence of Ministers and                                                                   
           Other high ranking officials of                                                                    
           Physical Education and Sports               Pyongyang        5-8 July 1986                         
  10.      Third Conference of Co-ordina-                                                                     
           ting Countries in the field of                                                                     
           Food and Agriculture                        Rabat            28-31 July 1986                       
  11.      Eighth Conference of Heads of                                                                      
           State and Governments of                                                                           
           Non-aligned Countries                       Harare           1-7 September 1986                    
  12.      Meeting of Ministers and Heads                                                                     
           of Delegations of the Non-                                                                         
           aligned Countries to the                                                                           
           41st Session of the UN                                                                             
           General Assembly                            New York         2 October 1986                        
  13.      Seminaron Literary and increase                                                                    
           in enrolment of Schoolage                                                                          
           Children                                    Pyongyang        22-27 October 1986                    
  14.      Consultative Meeting on the Ext-                                                                   
           ernal Debt of the Non-aligned                                                                      
           and Developing Countries                    Lima             12-14 November                        
                                                                        1986                                  
                                                                        -114>                                 
 APPENDIX II Treaties/Conventions/Agreements                                                                  
                                                                                                              
 Treaties/Conventions/Agreements Concluded or renewed by India with other countries in 1986                   
  Sl.  Title of Convention/Treaty/           Date of     Date of                 Date of                      
  No.  Agreement                             signature   Ratification/Accession  entry in                     
                                                                                 to force                     
                                                                                                              
  (1)  (2)                                   (3)         (4)                     (5)                          
                                                                                                              
                                                                                                              
  MULTILATERAL Asia-Pacific Institute for Broadcasting Development                                            
                                                                                                              
  1.   Agreement establishing the            20-5-1980   25-2-1986               25-2-1986                    
       Asia-Pacific Institute for                                                                             
       Bro-adcasting Development (Kuala                                                                       
       Lumpur, 12 August 1977) European                                                                       
       Economic Community                                                                                     
                                                                                                              
                                                                                                              
                                                                                                              
  2.   Financial Agreement between the       7-5-1986    7-5-1986                                             
       Republic of India and the European                                                                     
       Community for Supply of Fertilisers                                                                    
       (1985) and Counterpart Funding of                                                                      
       Related Rural Development Projects                                                                     
       (Agreement No.NA/85-12) Jute and                                                                       
       Jute Products                                                                                          
                                                                                                              
  3.   International Agreement on Jute and   23-6-1986   26-8-1986                                            
       Jute Products (Geneva, 1 October                                                                       
       1982)Pollution from Ships                                                                              
                                                                                                              
                                                                                                              
  4.   International Convention for the      24-9-1986   24-12-1986                                           
       Prevention of Pollution from ships,                                                                    
       1973, as amended by the Protocol of                                                                    
       1978 Safety of Life at Sea                                                                             
                                                                                                              
  5.   Protocol of 1978 relating to the      3-4-1986    3-6-1986                                             
       International Convention for the                                                                       
       Safety of Life at Sea, 1974                                                                            
       Telecommunications                                                                                     
                                                                                                              
  6.   International Telecommunications      8-1-1986    8-1-1986                                             
       Convention,1982 Tropical Timber                                                                        
                                                                                                              
  7.   International Tropical Timber         19-2-1986   19-2-1986                                            
       Agreement (Geneva,18 November                                                                          
       1983)*This list is not                                                                                 
       exhausive.United Nations Development                                                                   
       Programme                                                                                              
                                                                                                              
                                                                                     -115>                    
                                                                                                              
  8.   Agreement between India and the       13-1-1986   13-1-1986                                            
       United Nations Development                                                                             
       Prog-ramme regarding Project No.                                                                       
       IND/85/067/A/01/21-Establi-shment of                                                                   
       a Centre for Digital Techniques in                                                                     
       Broadcasting in india                                                                                  
                                                                                                              
  9.   Agreement between India and the       29-1-1986   29-1-1986                                            
       United Nations Development Programme                                                                   
       regarding Project No.                                                                                  
       IND/85/028/A/01/13-Studies on                                                                          
       Deterioration and Conser-vation of                                                                     
       Metals                                                                                                 
                                                                                                              
  10.  Agreement between India and the       25-2-1986   25-2-1986                                            
       United Nations Development Programme                                                                   
       regarding Project No.                                                                                  
       IND/86/005/A/01/01-Development of                                                                      
       Expertise in Training for Integrated                                                                   
       Operation and Control of                                                                               
       PowersSystems                                                                                          
                                                                                                              
  11.  Agreement between India and the       12-3-1986   12-3-1986                                            
       United Nations Development Programme                                                                   
       regarding Project No.                                                                                  
       IND/86/008/A/01/01- Upgradation of R                                                                   
       and D facilities at RDSO, Lucknow                                                                      
                                                                                                              
  12.  Agreement between India and the       27-3-1986   27-3-1986                                            
       United Nations Development Programme                                                                   
       regarding Project No.                                                                                  
       IND/85/070/A/01/99-Establishment of                                                                    
       an Automotive Certification                                                                            
       Laboratory                                                                                             
                                                                                                              
  13.  Agreement between India and the       9-4-1986    9-4-1986                                             
       United Nations Development Programme                                                                   
       regarding project No.                                                                                  
       IND/86/014/A/01/01-Modelling and                                                                       
       Control of Water System in Coal                                                                        
       Mining Environment                                                                                     
                                                                                                              
  14.  Agreement between India and the       9-4-1986    9-4-1986                                             
       United Nations Development Programme                                                                   
       regarding Project No.                                                                                  
       DP/048/A/01/37-Chemical Recovery                                                                       
       Plant for Small Pulp Mills using                                                                       
       Non-Woody Materials,Phase I                                                                            
                                                                                                              
  15.  Agreement between India and the       30-4-1986   30-4-1986                                            
       United Nations Development Programme                                                                   
       regarding Project No.                                                                                  
       IND/85/035/B01/11-Manage-ment                                                                          
       Development in the Const-ruction                                                                       
       Industry.                                                                                              
                                                                                                              
  16.  Agreement between India and the       20-5-1986   20-5-1986                                            
       United Nations Development programme                                                                   
       regarding Project NO.                                                                                  
       IND/85/060/A/01/99-Strength-ening of                                                                   
       Design and Development of                                                                              
       Construction and Earth Moving                                                                          
       Machinery                                                                                              
                                                                                                              
                                                                                 -116>                        
                                                                                                              
                                                                                                              
  17.  Agreement between India and the       30-5-1986   30-5-1986                                            
       United Nations Development Programme                                                                   
       regarding Project No.                                                                                  
       IND/86/019/A/01/37-Instituting                                                                         
       Computerised Woven or Printed                                                                          
       Textile Designs with Added                                                                             
       Advanatage of Shade Matching                                                                           
                                                                                                              
  18.  Agreement between India and the       30-6-1986   30-6-1986                                            
       United Nations Development Programme                                                                   
       regarding Project No.                                                                                  
       IND/86/003/B/01/12-Development and                                                                     
       Demonstration of Bioferti-lizers                                                                       
                                                                                                              
  19.  Agreement between India and the       18-7-1986   18-7-1986                                            
       United Nations Development Programme                                                                   
       regarding Project No.                                                                                  
       IND/86/A/01/20-Modernisation of                                                                        
       In-house Training Facilities in                                                                        
       Radio Monitoring and Spectrum                                                                          
       Management                                                                                             
                                                                                                              
  20.  Agreement between India and the       18-7-1986   18-7-1986                                            
       United Nations Development Programme                                                                   
       regarding Project No.                                                                                  
       IND/85/074/A/01/37-Systems                                                                             
       Applications Engineering in Fibre,                                                                     
       Optics Technology Phase II                                                                             
                                                                                                              
  21.  Agreement between India and the       29-7-1986   29-7-1986                                            
       Nations Development Programme                                                                          
       regarding Project No.                                                                                  
       IND/85/020/A/01/12-Advanced Centres                                                                    
       on Postgraduate Agricultural                                                                           
       Education and Research                                                                                 
                                                                                                              
  22.  Agreement between India and the       18-8-1986   18-8-1986                                            
       United Nations Development Programme                                                                   
       regarding Project No.                                                                                  
       IND/86/012/B/01/12-Strengthening                                                                       
       Postgraduate Education in Food and                                                                     
       Nutrition and Child Devel-opment at                                                                    
       Agricultural Universities                                                                              
                                                                                                              
  23.  Agreement between India and the       26-8-1986   26-8-1986                                            
       United Nations Development Programme                                                                   
       regarding Project                                                                                      
       No.IND/85/040/A/01/99-Establ-ishment                                                                   
       of Sub-Centres for Package Testing                                                                     
       and Development                                                                                        
                                                                                                              
  24.  Agreement between India and the                                                                        
                                                                                                              
       United Nations Development Pro-                                                                        
                                                                                                              
       gramme regarding Project No.                                                                           
                                                                                                              
       IND/86/011/01/01-Water Resources                                                                       
                                                                                                              
       Development and Management                                                                             
                                                                                                              
       (Phase II), Madras                    18-9-1986   18-9-1986                                            
                                                                                                              
                                                                                                              
  25.  Agreement between India and the                                                                        
                                                                                                              
       United Nations Development Pro-                                                                        
                                                                                                              
       gramme regarding Project No.                                                                           
                                                                                                              
       IND/86/008/A/01/20-New Tech-                                                                           
                                                                                                              
       niques for the National Tele-                                                                          
                                                                                                              
       communication Network                 26-9-1986   26-9-1986                                            
                                                                                                              
                                                                                 -117>                        
                                                                                                              
                                                                                                              
  26.  Agreement between India and the                                                                        
                                                                                                              
       United Nations Development pro-                                                                        
                                                                                                              
       gramme regarding Project No.                                                                           
                                                                                                              
       IND/85/072/B/01/31-Knowledge                                                                           
                                                                                                              
       Based Computer System Devel-                                                                           
                                                                                                              
       opment Programme                      28-11-1986  28-11-1986                                           
                                                                                                              
  27.  Agreement between India and the                                                                        
                                                                                                              
       United Nations Development Pro-                                                                        
                                                                                                              
       gramme regarding Project No.                                                                           
                                                                                                              
       IND/86/010/B/01/31-Telematics                                                                          
                                                                                                              
       Development and Promotion                                                                              
                                                                                                              
       Programme                             28-11-1986  28-11-1986                                           
                                                                                                              
                                                                                                              
  28.  Agreement between India and the                                                                        
                                                                                                              
       United Nations Development pro-                                                                        
                                                                                                              
       gramme regarding Project No.                                                                           
                                                                                                              
       IND/86/009/B/01/31-Education and                                                                       
                                                                                                              
       Research in Computer Networking       28-11-1986  28-11-1986                                           
                                                                                                              
                                                                                                              
  29.  Agreement between India and the                                                                        
                                                                                                              
       United Nations Development Pro-                                                                        
                                                                                                              
       gramme regarding Project No.                                                                           
                                                                                                              
       IND/86/036/A/01/01-Updating                                                                            
                                                                                                              
       Design, Instrumentation and sur-                                                                       
                                                                                                              
       veillance Technology for Dams                                                                          
                                                                                                              
       and other Hyd aulic Structures        9-12-1986   9-12-1986                                            
                                                                                                              
                                                                                                              
  30.  Agreement between India and the                                                                        
                                                                                                              
       United Nations Development Pro-                                                                        
                                                                                                              
       gramme regarding Project No.                                                                           
                                                                                                              
       DP/IND/85/074/A/01/37-Jute                                                                             
                                                                                                              
       Research and Development              16-12-1986  16-12-1986                                           
                                                                                                              
                                                                                                              
  31.  Agreement between India and the                                                                        
                                                                                                              
       United Nations Development Pro-                                                                        
                                                                                                              
       gramme regarding Project No.                                                                           
                                                                                                              
       IND/86/038/A/01/37-Use of Unco-                                                                        
                                                                                                              
       nventional Fibres for the Man-                                                                         
                                                                                                              
       facture of Fabrics, SITRA,                                                                             
                                                                                                              
       Coimbatore Wheat Trade Convention     31-12-1986  31-12-1986                                           
                                                                                                              
                                                                                                              
                                                                                                              
                                                                                                              
                                                                                                              
  32.  Wheat Trade Convention, 1986          24-9-1986   24-9-1986                                            
       BILATERAL Algeria                                                                                      
                                                                                                              
  33.  Agreement on Co-operation in                                                                           
                                                                                                              
       the Railway Sector between the                                                                         
                                                                                                              
       Government of the Democratic                                                                           
                                                                                                              
       and Popular Republic of Algeria Bang  23-4-1986   23-4-1986                                            
       adesh                                                                                                  
                                                                                                              
                                                                                                              
  34.  Exchange of Letters between                                                                            
                                                                                                              
       India and Bangladesh extending                                                                         
                                                                                                              
       the Trade Agreement Benin             16-5-1986   16-5-1986                                            
                                                                                                              
                                                                                                              
                                                                                 -118>                        
                                                                                                              
                                                                                                              
                                                                                                              
                                                                                                              
  35.  Cultural Agreement between the                                                                         
                                                                                                              
       the Government of India and the                                                                        
                                                                                                              
       Government of the People's Re-                                                                         
                                                                                                              
       public of Benin Bulgaria              10-7-1986   10-7-1986                                            
                                                                                                              
                                                                                                              
  36.  Agreed Minutes of the Indo-                                                                            
                                                                                                              
       Bulgarian Working Group on                                                                             
                                                                                                              
       Trade (New Delhi, 19-22                                                                                
                                                                                                              
       May 1986)                             22-5-1986   22-5-1986                                            
                                                                                                              
                                                                                                              
  37.  Protocl of the Eighth Session                                                                          
                                                                                                              
       of the Bulgarian/Indian Joint                                                                          
                                                                                                              
       Commission for Economic, Sci-                                                                          
                                                                                                              
       entific and Technical Co-                                                                              
                                                                                                              
       operation Canada                      9-10-1986   9-10-1986                                            
                                                                                                              
                                                                                                              
                                                                                                              
                                                                                                              
                                                                                                              
  38.  Agreement between the Govern-                                                                          
                                                                                                              
       ment of India and the Govern-                                                                          
                                                                                                              
       ment of Canada for the Avoi-                                                                           
                                                                                                              
       dance of Double Taxation and                                                                           
                                                                                                              
       the Prevention of Fiscal                                                                               
                                                                                                              
       Evasion with respect to                                                                                
                                                                                                              
       Taxes Income                          30-5-1986   16-9-1986               16-9-1986                    
                                                                                                              
  39.  Amendment on the Development                                                                           
                                                                                                              
       Loan Agreement of 21 November                                                                          
                                                                                                              
       1981 between the President of                                                                          
                                                                                                              
       India and the Government of                                                                            
                                                                                                              
       Canada Czechoslovakia                 5-3-1980    5-3-1986                                             
                                                                                                              
  40.  Exchange of Letters between                                                                            
                                                                                                              
       India and Czechoslovakia rega                                                                          
                                                                                                              
       ding the Third Agreement on                                                                            
                                                                                                              
       Economic Cooperation of Dece-                                                                          
                                                                                                              
       mber 1973 Denmark                     19-9-1986   19-3-1986                                            
                                                                                                              
                                                                                                              
  41.  Agreement between the Gover-                                                                           
                                                                                                              
       nment of India and the Gover-                                                                          
                                                                                                              
       nment of Denmark on a Danish                                                                           
                                                                                                              
       Government loan to India France       30-10-1986  30-10-1986                                           
                                                                                                              
                                                                                                              
  42.  Financial Protcol between India                                                                        
                                                                                                              
       and France relating to the                                                                             
                                                                                                              
       purchase of helicopters by the                                                                         
                                                                                                              
       Helicopters Corporation of India      20-3-1986   20-3-1986                                            
                                                                                                              
                                                                                                              
                                                                                                              
  43.  Memorandum of Understanding                                                                            
                                                                                                              
       between Department of Posts,                                                                           
                                                                                                              
       Government of India and                                                                                
                                                                                                              
       Directoate General of Posts,                                                                           
                                                                                                              
       France                                6-5-1986    8-5-1986                                             
                                                                                                              
                                                                                                              
  44.  Financial Protocol between India                                                                       
                                                                                                              
       and France relating to the Pro-                                                                        
                                                                                                              
       ject of Hazira-Bijapur-Jagdish-                                                                        
                                                                                                              
       pura gas pipeline                     12-5-1986   12-5-1986                                            
                                                                                                              
                                                                                                              
  45.  Credit Agreement between the                                                                           
                                                                                                              
       Republic of Indai and the                                                                              
                                                                                                              
       French Banks for Five hundred                                                                          
                                                                                                              
       and fortyeight million French                                                                          
                                                                                                              
       Francs Germany, Democratic Republic   15-7-1986   15-7-1986                                            
       of                                                                                                     
                                                                                                              
                                                                                 -119>                        
                                                                                                              
  46.  Trade and Payments Agreement                                                                           
                                                                                                              
       between the Government of the                                                                          
                                                                                                              
       Republic of India and the Gov-                                                                         
                                                                                                              
       ernment of the German Dem-                                                                             
                                                                                                              
       ocratic Republic Germany, Federal     1-11-1985   1-1-1986                                             
       Republic of                                                                                            
                                                                                                              
  47.  Agreement between the Govern-                                                                          
                                                                                                              
       ment of the Republic of India                                                                          
                                                                                                              
       and the Government of the                                                                              
                                                                                                              
       Federal Republic of Germany                                                                            
                                                                                                              
       concerning Financial Co-                                                                               
                                                                                                              
       operation                             20-5-1986   20-5-1986                                            
                                                                                                              
                                                                                                              
  48.  Agreed Minutes on Development                                                                          
                                                                                                              
       Co-operation between the                                                                               
                                                                                                              
       Government of the Republic of                                                                          
                                                                                                              
       India and the Government of                                                                            
                                                                                                              
       the Federal Republic of Germany                                                                        
                                                                                                              
       (Bonn, 15-17 July 1986)               17-7-1986   17-7-1986                                            
                                                                                                              
                                                                                                              
  49.  Agreement between the Governme-                                                                        
                                                                                                              
       nt of the Republic of India and                                                                        
                                                                                                              
       the Government of the Federal                                                                          
                                                                                                              
       Republic of Germany concerning                                                                         
                                                                                                              
       Financial Co-operation in 1986        17-7-1986   17-7-1986                                            
       Indonesia                                                                                              
                                                                                                              
  50.  Exchange of Letters extending                                                                          
                                                                                                              
       the Agreement between the                                                                              
                                                                                                              
       Government of India and the Go-                                                                        
                                                                                                              
       vernment of the Republic of In-                                                                        
                                                                                                              
       donesia on Co-operation rega-                                                                          
                                                                                                              
       rding the Utilisation of                                                                               
                                                                                                              
       Nuclear Energy for Peaceful                                                                            
                                                                                                              
       Purposes for a period of                                                                               
                                                                                                              
       five years Iran                       19-9-1986   19-9-1986                                            
                                                                                                              
                                                                                                              
                                                                                                              
                                                                                                              
                                                                                                              
  51.  Exchange of Letters between                                                                            
                                                                                                              
       India and the Iran amending                                                                            
                                                                                                              
       the Agreement for setting up                                                                           
                                                                                                              
       an Indo-Iran Joint Commission                                                                          
                                                                                                              
       for Economic, Trade, Sci-                                                                              
                                                                                                              
       entific, Technical and Cul-                                                                            
                                                                                                              
       tural Co-operation Italy              26-7-1986   26-7-1986                                            
                                                                                                              
                                                                                                              
  52.  Agreement between the Gover-                                                                           
                                                                                                              
       nment of India and the Gover-                                                                          
                                                                                                              
       nment of Italy for the Avoi-                                                                           
                                                                                                              
       dance of Double Taxation and                                                                           
                                                                                                              
       the Prevention of Fiscal                                                                               
                                                                                                              
       Evasion with respectto taxes                                                                           
                                                                                                              
       on Income Japan                       12-1-1981   8-4-1986                                             
                                                                                                              
                                                                                                              
  53.  Exchange of Notes between India                                                                        
                                                                                                              
       and Japan regarding Japanese                                                                           
                                                                                                              
       loan of thirty billion Yen for                                                                         
                                                                                                              
       the Assam Gas Turbine Power St-                                                                        
                                                                                                              
       ation and Transmission Line                                                                            
                                                                                                              
       Construction Project                  18-2-1986   18-2-1986                                            
                                                                                                              
                                                                                                              
                                                                                 -120>                        
                                                                                                              
                                                                                                              
  54.  Exchange of Notes between India                                                                        
                                                                                                              
       and Japan regarding Japanese                                                                           
                                                                                                              
       Development grant of nine                                                                              
                                                                                                              
       billion five hundred eighty                                                                            
                                                                                                              
       four million, five hundred                                                                             
                                                                                                              
       sixteen housand Yen                   18-2-1986   18-2-1986                                            
                                                                                                              
                                                                                                              
  55.  Exchange of Notes between India                                                                        
                                                                                                              
       and Japan regarding Japanese grant                                                                     
                                                                                                              
       of forty-three million Yen for                                                                         
                                                                                                              
       supply of equipment to the                                                                             
                                                                                                              
       Viswa-Bharti University               18-2-1986   18-2-1986                                            
                                                                                                              
                                                                                                              
  56.  Exchange of Notes between India                                                                        
                                                                                                              
       and Japan regarding Japanese                                                                           
                                                                                                              
       Project Loan of forty-eight                                                                            
                                                                                                              
       billion four hundred and                                                                               
                                                                                                              
       forty-three million Yen               18-2-1986   18-2-1986                                            
                                                                                                              
                                                                                                              
  57.  Exchange of Notes between India                                                                        
                                                                                                              
       and Japan regarding Japanese Gr-                                                                       
                                                                                                              
       ant of one billion nine hundred                                                                        
                                                                                                              
       and seventy-three million Yen                                                                          
                                                                                                              
       for the Sanjay Gandhi Post-grad-                                                                       
                                                                                                              
       uate Institute                        8-10-1986   8-10-1986                                            
                                                                                                              
                                                                                                              
  58.  Agreement between the Govern-                                                                          
                                                                                                              
       ment of India and Japan inter-                                                                         
                                                                                                              
       national Co-operative Agency                                                                           
                                                                                                              
       regarding scope of work for                                                                            
                                                                                                              
       the study on Modernisation of                                                                          
                                                                                                              
       Rolling Stock Workshop in India       17-10-1986  17-10-1986                                           
       Kampuchea                                                                                              
                                                                                                              
  59.  Exchange of Letters between                                                                            
                                                                                                              
       India and Kampuchea regar-                                                                             
                                                                                                              
       ding restoration of the Angk-                                                                          
                                                                                                              
       or Wat Temple. Libya                  17-10-1986  17-10-1986                                           
                                                                                                              
                                                                                                              
  60.  Cultural Agreement between the                                                                         
                                                                                                              
       Government of the Republic of                                                                          
                                                                                                              
       India and the Socialist Peop-                                                                          
                                                                                                              
       le's Libyan Arab Jamahiriya New       24-8-1985   4-7-1986                4-7-1986                     
       Zealand                                                                                                
                                                                                                              
                                                                                                              
  61.  Trade Agreement between the                                                                            
                                                                                                              
       Government of the Republic of                                                                          
                                                                                                              
       India and the Government of                                                                            
                                                                                                              
       New Zealand Nicaragua                 17-10-1986  17-10-1986                                           
                                                                                                              
                                                                                                              
  62.  Memo andum of the Underst-                                                                             
                                                                                                              
       anding between the Govern-                                                                             
                                                                                                              
       ment of the Republic of India                                                                          
                                                                                                              
       and the Government of Republic                                                                         
                                                                                                              
       of Nicaragua                          10-9-1986   10-9-1986                                            
                                                                                                              
                                                                                                              
                                                                                                              
  63.  Credit Agreement between the                                                                           
                                                                                                              
       Government of the Republic of                                                                          
                                                                                                              
       India and the Government of the                                                                        
                                                                                                              
       Republic of Nicaragua Poland          11-9-1986   11-9-1986                                            
                                                                                                              
                                                                                                              
                                                                                 -121>                        
                                                                                                              
                                                                                                              
  (1)  (2)                                   (3)         (4)                     (5)                          
                                                                                                              
                                                                                                              
  64.  Trade and Payments Agreement                                                                           
                                                                                                              
       between the Government of the                                                                          
                                                                                                              
       Republic of India and                                                                                  
                                                                                                              
       Government of the Polish                                                                               
                                                                                                              
       People's Republic . . .               22-2-1986   1-1-1986                                             
                                                                                                              
                                                                                                              
                                                                                                              
  65.  Protocol of the Tenth Session                                                                          
                                                                                                              
       of the Indo-Polish Joint                                                                               
                                                                                                              
       Commission on Economic, Trade,                                                                         
                                                                                                              
       Scientific and Technical                                                                               
                                                                                                              
       Co-operation . . . .Qatar             2-4-1986    2-4-1986                                             
                                                                                                              
                                                                                                              
  66.  Agreement concerning the                                                                               
                                                                                                              
       Organisation of Manpower                                                                               
                                                                                                              
       Employment between the                                                                                 
                                                                                                              
       Republic of India and the                                                                              
                                                                                                              
       State of Qatar . . . .Republic of     11-4-1985   10-3-1986               10-3-1986                    
       Korea                                                                                                  
                                                                                                              
                                                                                                              
  67.  Convention between the                                                                                 
                                                                                                              
       Government of the Republic of                                                                          
                                                                                                              
       India and the Government of                                                                            
                                                                                                              
       the Republic of Korea for the                                                                          
                                                                                                              
       Avoidance of Double Taxation and                                                                       
                                                                                                              
       the Prevention of Fiscal Evasion                                                                       
                                                                                                              
       with respect to Taxes on Income       19-7-1985   1-8-1986                30-8-1986                    
       Romania                                                                                                
                                                                                                              
                                                                                                              
  68.  Long-Term Trade Payment                                                                                
                                                                                                              
       Agreement between the Government                                                                       
                                                                                                              
       of the Republic of India and the                                                                       
                                                                                                              
       Socialist Republic of Romania                                                                          
                                                                                                              
       for the years 1986 to 1990 Thailand   20-12-1985  1-1-1986                                             
                                                                                                              
                                                                                                              
                                                                                                              
  69.  Protocol for Scientific and                                                                            
                                                                                                              
       Technical Co-operation between                                                                         
                                                                                                              
       the Council of Scientific and                                                                          
                                                                                                              
       Industrial Research of India                                                                           
                                                                                                              
       (CSIR) and Thailand Institute                                                                          
                                                                                                              
       of Scientific and Technological                                                                        
                                                                                                              
       Research (TISTR). . . .               19-10-1986  19-10-1986                                           
                                                                                                              
                                                                                                              
                                                                                                              
  70.  Convention between the Government                                                                      
                                                                                                              
       of the Republic of India and the                                                                       
                                                                                                              
       Government of the Kingdom of                                                                           
                                                                                                              
       Thailand for the Avoidance of                                                                          
                                                                                                              
       Double Taxation and the                                                                                
                                                                                                              
       Prevention of Fiscal Evasion                                                                           
                                                                                                              
       with respect to Taxes on Income       23-3-1985   13-3-1986               13-3-1986                    
       Tanzania                                                                                               
                                                                                                              
  71.  Cultural Co-operation Agreement                                                                        
                                                                                                              
       between the Government of the                                                                          
                                                                                                              
       Republic of India and the                                                                              
                                                                                                              
       Government of United Republic                                                                          
                                                                                                              
       of Tanzania . . . . .Union of Soviet  17-1-1975   19-2-1986               19-2-1986                    
       Socialist Republics                                                                                    
                                                                                                              
  72.  Trade Agreement between the                                                                            
                                                                                                              
       Republic of India and the Union                                                                        
                                                                                                              
       of Soviet Socialist Republics         23-12-1985  1-1-1986                                             
                                                                                                              
                                                                                                              
                                                                                 -122>                        
                                                                                                              
                                                                                                              
  73.  Protocol on Deliveries of                                                                              
                                                                                                              
       Machinery and Equipment from                                                                           
                                                                                                              
       the USSR to the Republic of                                                                            
                                                                                                              
       India on Deferred Payment Terms       23-12-1985  1-1-1986                                             
                                                                                                              
                                                                                                              
  74.  Protocol of the Third Meeting                                                                          
                                                                                                              
       of the Working Group on Co-                                                                            
                                                                                                              
       operation in Oil Industry within                                                                       
                                                                                                              
       the frame-work of the Inter-                                                                           
                                                                                                              
       governmental Soviet-India                                                                              
                                                                                                              
       Commission in Economic,                                                                                
                                                                                                              
       Scientific and Technical Co-                                                                           
                                                                                                              
       operation . . . . .                   3-2-1986    3-2-1986                                             
                                                                                                              
  75.  Protocol of the Seventh Meeting                                                                        
                                                                                                              
       of the Working Group on Ferrous                                                                        
                                                                                                              
       Metallurgy in the framework of                                                                         
                                                                                                              
       the Inter-governmental Soviet-                                                                         
                                                                                                              
       India Commission in Economic                                                                           
                                                                                                              
       Scientific and Technical Co-                                                                           
                                                                                                              
       operation . . . . .                   4-4-1986    4-4-1986                                             
                                                                                                              
  76.  Agreement on Economic and                                                                              
                                                                                                              
       Technical Cooperation between                                                                          
                                                                                                              
       India and the Union of Soviet                                                                          
                                                                                                              
       Socialist Republics . . .United       27-11-1986  27-11-1986                                           
       Kingdom                                                                                                
                                                                                                              
                                                                                                              
                                                                                                              
                                                                                                              
  77.  Agreement between the Government                                                                       
                                                                                                              
       of India and the Government of                                                                         
                                                                                                              
       the United Kingdom of Great                                                                            
                                                                                                              
       Britain and Northern Ireland                                                                           
                                                                                                              
       concerning Public Officers                                                                             
                                                                                                              
       Pensions . . . . .United States of    12-6-1986   12-6-1986                                            
       America                                                                                                
                                                                                                              
  78.  Third Amendatory Agreement to                                                                          
                                                                                                              
       the Project Loan and Grant                                                                             
                                                                                                              
       Agreement between the President                                                                        
                                                                                                              
       of India and the United States                                                                         
                                                                                                              
       of America for Hill Areas Land                                                                         
                                                                                                              
       and Water Development Project                                                                          
                                                                                                              
       No. 386-0489 . . . .                  14-5-1986   6-5-1986                                             
                                                                                                              
                                                                                                              
  79.  Amendatory Agreement to Limited                                                                        
                                                                                                              
       Scope Grant Project Agreement                                                                          
                                                                                                              
       between the President of India                                                                         
                                                                                                              
       and the United States of America                                                                       
                                                                                                              
       for Rajasthan Medium Irrigation                                                                        
                                                                                                              
       Project-AID Project No.386-0467       20-8-1986   20-8-1986                                            
                                                                                                              
                                                                                                              
  80.  First Amendatory Agreement to                                                                          
                                                                                                              
       the Project Loan and the Grant                                                                         
                                                                                                              
       Agreement between the President                                                                        
                                                                                                              
       of India and the United States                                                                         
                                                                                                              
       of America for Biomedical                                                                              
                                                                                                              
       Research Support-AID Loan No.                                                                          
                                                                                                              
       386-U-241 and 241 'A' AID                                                                              
                                                                                                              
       Project No. 386-0492 . . .            29-8-1986   29-8-1986                                            
                                                                                                              
                                                                                                              
  81.  Fourth Amendatory Agreement to                                                                         
                                                                                                              
       the Project Grant Agreement                                                                            
                                                                                                              
       between the President of India                                                                         
                                                                                                              
       and the United States of America                                                                       
                                                                                                              
       for Integrated Rural Health and                                                                        
                                                                                                              
       Population-AID Project No. 386-                                                                        
                                                                                                              
       0468 . . . . . . .Yemen               10-9-1986   10-9-1986                                            
                                                                                                              
                                                                                                              
  82.  Agreement between the Government                                                                       
                                                                                                              
       of the Republic of India and the                                                                       
                                                                                                              
       Government of Yemen Arab Republic                                                                      
                                                                                                              
       for the Avoidance of Double                                                                            
                                                                                                              
       Taxation of Income derived from                                                                        
                                                                                                              
       International Air Transport           30-12-1986  30-12-1986                                           
                                                                                                              
                                                                                                              
                                                                                 -123>                        
 APPENDIX III Major International Conferences/Meetings/Seminars                                               
                                                                                                              
 Major International Conferences/Meetings/Seminars etc. organised by Inter-governmental                       
 Organisations at which Government of India was represented in 1986-87                                        
  Sl. No.  Title of Conferences etc.                     Venue         Date                                   
                                                                                                              
                                                                                                              
                                                                                                              
  (1)      (2)                                           (3)           (4)                                    
                                                                                                              
                                                                                                              
  1.       4th Meeting of Interaction Council            Tokyo         6-11 April 1986                        
           ..........                                                                                         
                                                                                                              
  2.       10th Session of ILO Petroleum Committee       Geneva        9-17 April 1986                        
           ......................                                                                             
                                                                                                              
  3.       42nd Session of ESCAP ..........              Bangkok       22 April to 2 May                      
                                                                       1986                                   
                                                                                                              
  4.       Annual Session of Executive Council of        Berne         22 April to 8 May                      
           Universal Postal Union                                      1986                                   
           .........................                                                                          
                                                                                                              
  5.       26th Session of UN Committee on Programme     New York      28 April to 30 May                     
           and Co-ordination ..                                        1986                                   
                                                                                                              
  6.       First Regular Session of ECOSOC               New York      29 April to 5 May                      
                                                                       1986                                   
                                                                                                              
  7.       ILO Preparatory Technical Maritime            Geneva        5-11 May 1986                          
           Conference .....                                                                                   
                                                                                                              
  8.       39th World Health Assembly .....              Geneva        5-16 May 1986                          
                                                                                                              
  9.       9th Session of UNCHS ..........               Istanbul      5-16 May 1986                          
                                                                                                              
  10.      Commonwealth Youth Affairs Council Meeting    Georgetown    10-14 May 1986                         
           ..............                                                                                     
                                                                                                              
  11.      Special Session of UNGA on Critical           New York      23 May 1986                            
           Situation in Africa ..                                                                             
                                                                                                              
  12.      233rd Session on ILO Governing Body ....      Geneva        26-31 May 1986                         
                                                                                                              
  13.      38th Session of WMO Executive                 Geneva        2-16 June 1986                         
           Council........                                                                                    
                                                                                                              
  14.      33rd Session of UNDP Governing Council        Geneva        2-27 June 1986                         
           ........                                                                                           
                                                                                                              
  15.      72nd Session of ILC ...........               Geneva        4-24 June 1986                         
                                                                                                              
  16.      23rd Plenary Session of Interim Mekong        Chiang Mai    30 June to 5 July                      
           Committee .......                             (Thailand)    1986                                   
                                                                                                              
  17.      2nd Regular Session of ECOSOC..               Geneva        2-25 July 1986                         
                                                                                                              
  18.      33rd Session of Trade & Development Board     Geneva        1-10 September 1986                    
           .............                                                                                      
                                                                                                              
  19.      125th Session of the Executive Board of       Paris         1 September to 8                       
           UNESCO .....                                                October 1986                           
                                                                                                              
                                                                                                              
                                                                                     -124>                    
                                                                                                              
                                                                                                              
  20.      4th Session of WMD Executive Council Working  Geneva        1-15 September 1986                    
           Group on Antarctic Meteorology ......                                                              
                                                                                                              
  21.      Commonwealth Finance Ministers'and Senior     St. Lucia     September 1986                         
           Finance Officials' Meeting .............                                                           
                                                                                                              
  22.      41st Session of UN General Assembly ........  New York      17 September to                        
                                                                       December 1986                          
                                                                                                              
  23.      Meeting of the Ministers of Industry and      Bangkok       22-24 September                        
           Technology ......                                           1986                                   
                                                                                                              
  24.      Conference of Commonwealth Postal             Montreal      29 September to 10                     
           Administrations ......                                      October 1986                           
                                                                                                              
  25.      4th Meeting of SAARC Technical Committee on   Male          3-6 October 1986                       
           Meteorology ......                                                                                 
                                                                                                              
  26.      ILO meeting on Settlement of Labour Disputes  Geneva        6-10 October 1986                      
           in the Public Services .....................                                                       
                                                                                                              
  27.      9th Session of WMO Commission for             Sofia         6-17 October 1986                      
           Atmospheric Sciences ......                                                                        
                                                                                                              
  28.      8th Commonwealth Health Ministers' Meeting    Nassau        13-17 October 1986                     
           ............                                                                                       
                                                                                                              
  29.      13th Session of the ESCAP Committee on        Bangkok       14-20 October 1986                     
           Natural Resources                                                                                  
                                                                                                              
  30.      7th Asian Conference on Remote Sensing        Seoul         23-26 October 1986                     
           (ACRS) ................                                                                            
                                                                                                              
  31.      SAARC Conference on South Asian Children in   New Delhi     27-29 October 1986                     
           Co-operation with UNICEF                                                                           
           ........................                                                                           
                                                                                                              
  32.      Annual Session of Asia Pacific Postal Union   Kuala Lumpur  5-12 November 1986                     
           (APPU) ...........                                                                                 
                                                                                                              
  33.      234th Session of ILO Governing Body           Geneva        10-21 November 1986                    
           ..........................                                                                         
                                                                                                              
  34.      90th FAO Council Meeting ......               Rome          17-28 November 1986                    
                                                                                                              
  35.      Meeting of the Policy and Co-ordination       Geneva        24-26 November 1986                    
           Advisory Committee of the WHO's special                                                            
           programmes of Research, Development Research                                                       
           traning in the Human Reproduction                                                                  
           .................                                                                                  
                                                                                                              
  36.      40th Session of International Conference on   Geneva        2-11 December 1986                     
           Education ......                                                                                   
                                                                                                              
  37.      11th Session of ILO Iron and Steel Committee  Geneva        3-11 December 1986                     
           ..............                                                                                     
                                                                                                              
                                                                                     -125>                    
 APPENDIX IV Major International Conferences/Meetings/Seminars                                                
                                                                                                              
 Major International Conferences/Meeting/Seminars etc. organised by Non-governmental                          
 organisations in which Indian experts participated in their personal capacity with                           
 Government assistance in 1986-87                                                                             
  Sl.  Title of Conferences etc.                       Venue            Date                                  
  No.                                                                                                         
  (1)  (2)                                             (3)              (4)                                   
  1.   14th Meeting of ISO/TC 113                                                                             
       Measurement of Liquid Flow in                                                                          
       Open Channels and its seven                                                                            
       subcommittees .................                 China            14-25 April 1986                      
  2.   Regional Liaison Officers                                                                              
       (RLOs) of ISO .................                 Geneva           1 June 1986                           
  3.   Second Meeting of Council                                                                              
       Commission on Conformity Assessment                                                                    
       (ISO/CASCO) ..................                  Geneva           2 June 1986                           
  4.   Meeting of ISO/TC 28 Petroleum                                                                         
       Product and Lubricants .......                  Norway 2-6 June                                        
                                                       1986                                                   
  5.   21st Meeting of Development                                                                            
       Committee of ISO (DEVCO) ....                   Geneva           5-6 June 1986                         
  6.   ISO/TC 126 Tobacco and Tabacco                                                                         
       Products and its subcommittee                                                                          
       meetings ......................                 Turkey           8-12 September,                       
                                                                        1986                                  
  7.   34th Meeting of ISO/TC 45                                                                              
       Rubber and Rubber Products and                                                                         
       its subcommittees and working                                                                          
       groups .......................                  Moscow           11-18 September,                      
                                                                        1986                                  
  8.   Third Meeting of Technical                                                                             
       Board of ISO .................                  Geneva           15 September, 1986                    
  9.   40th Meeting of ISO Council ..                  Geneva           16-18 September,                      
                                                                        1986                                  
  10.  International Conference to                                                                            
       study Alternative Transport                                                                            
       systems .....................                   London           29 September to 12                    
                                                                        October 1986                          
  11.  Meeting of IEC/TC 12 Radio                                                                             
       Communication ................                  Berlin           1-7 October 1986                      
  12.  Meeting of IEC Committee of                                                                            
       Action and IEC Council ......                   Berlin           2-8 October 1986                      
  13.  25th Conference of                                                                                     
       International Committee of                                                                             
       the Red Cross ...............                   Geneva           23-31 October 1986                    
  14.  Sixth Meeting of ISO/TC 102                                                                            
       Iron Ores 11th Meeting of                                                                              
       ISO/TC 102/SC 3 Physical                                                                               
       testing and first meeting of                                                                           
       ISO/TC/102/SC 5 Physical                                                                               
       Testing of Direct Reduction ..                  Tokyo            5-13 November 1986                    
  15.  Meeting of IEC/TC/SC B Low                                                                             
       Voltage Switch gear and                                                                                
       control gear and SC 28 A                                                                               
       Insulation Coordination for                                                                            
       low voltage equipment ........                  Hollywood        1-14 November 1986                    
  16.  Meeting of ISO/TC 34/SC 7                                                                              
       Spices and Condiments ........                  Paris            18-21 November                        
                                                                        1986                                  
                                                                        -126>                                 
 APPENDIX V Miscellaneous Major International Conferences etc                                                 
                                                                                                              
 Miscellaneous Major International Conferences etc. in 1986-87 at which Government of India                   
 was represented or in which Indian experts participated with Government of India's                           
 assistance in their personal capacity.                                                                       
  Sl. No.  Title of Conference etc.                          Venue            Date                            
  (1)      (2)                                               (3)              (4)                             
  1.       International Conference on Economics of Dryland  Canberra         1-14 March                      
           Degradation and Rehabilitation ............                        1986                            
  2.       Pre-WHA Meeting of Liaison Committee              London           4 March 1986                    
           .....................                                                                              
  3.       13th Session of WMO/ESCAP Panel on Tropical       Rangoon          25-31 March                     
           Cyclones ..........                                                1986                            
  4.       1st Session of WMO/CIMO W/G on Upper Air          Geneva           7-11 April                      
           Measurements ........                                              1986                            
  5.       Workshop on Laether Processing Technology         Madras           10-14 May                       
           ....................                                               1986                            
  6.       WMO First Informal Planning Meeting for World     Geneva           12-16 May                       
           Climate Research Programme ............                            1986                            
  7.       III International Symposium on Wave-Tidal, Small  Brighton (U.K.)  14-16 May                       
           Scale Hydro Energy ........................                        1986                            
  8.       International Conference on Population and the    Barcelona        19-22 May                       
           Urban Future                                                       1986                            
  9.       International Philatelic Exhibition-Ameripex      USA              20-31 May                       
           ...........                                                                                        
  10.      ESCAP Inter-governmental Meeting on               Bangkok          27-31 May                       
           Estabilshment of Regional Network for Training                     1986                            
           in Water Resources ...........                                                                     
  11.      8th Session of International Committee for        New York         2-6 June                        
           Science and Technology for Development ...                         1986                            
  12.      International Congress on Large Underground       Firenze (Italy)  8-17 June                       
           Openings .........                                                 1986                            
  13.      IWRA Seminar on Inter-Basin Water Transfer        Beijing          15-25 June                      
           ..............                                                     1986                            
  14.      Meeting of WMO International Satellite Cloud      Paris            23-25 June                      
           Climatory Project-Working Group on Data                            1986                            
           Management ...................                                                                     
  15.      54th Executive Council Meeting of ICOLD           Jakarta          28 June to 1                    
                                                                              July 1986                       
  16.      Regional Technical Study on Irrigation Service    Manila           21-25 July                      
           Fees ......                                                        1986                            
                                                                              -127>                           
 17. International Seminar on                                                                                 
     Commodities, Price Strategies                                                                            
     and Approaches for Developing                                                                            
     Countries .................... Kuala Lampur 21-25 July 1986                                              
 18. Palm Oil Familiarization                                                                                 
     Programme .................... Kuala Lumpur 2-12 August 1986                                             
 19. 1986 Session of CIGRE ........ Paris        27 August to 4 September 1986                                
 20. 35th Session of the UN Joint                                                                             
     Staff Pensions Board ......... Geneva       3-5 September 1986                                           
 21. Stockholm-86 Philatelic                                                                                  
     Exhibition ............        Stockholm    4-11 September 1986                                          
 22. Seminar on Human Rights in                                                                               
     the United Nations ........... Geneva       8-10 September 1986                                          
 23. International Seminar on                                                                                 
     Regional Development Planning                                                                            
     for Disaster Prevention ...    Nagoya       22 September to 1 october 1986                               
                                                 (japan)                                                      
 24. 37th International Executive                                                                             
     Meeting of ICID                Lahore       28 September to 3 November 1986                              
 25. Meeting on Financing                                                                                     
     Environmental Programme of                                                                               
     Developing Countries ......... Geneva       29-30 September 1986                                         
 26. III Session of RA-II Working                                                                             
     Group and RA-II meeting for                                                                              
     planning and implementation                                                                              
     of HOMs Sub Programme and                                                                                
     RA-II Working Group on                                                                                   
     Hydrology ................     Pokhra       4 October to 10 December 1986                                
                                                 (Nepal)                                                      
 27. FAO Project of Production of                                                                             
     Rice Bran Oil by pressing .... China        21 October 1986                                              
                                                 (for two weeks)                                              
 28. International Symposium on                                                                               
     Impact of Large Water                                                                                    
     Resources Projects on                                                                                    
     Environment at UNESCO                                                                                    
     headquarters ................. Paris        27-31 October 1986                                           
 29. 8th Session of WMO Commission                                                                            
     for Aeronautical Metereology   Geneva       4-15 November 1986                                           
 30. 5th Session of WMO Commission                                                                            
     for Marine Metereology Working                                                                           
     group on Marine Climatology... Geneva       10-14 November 1986                                          
 31. Ist Session of WMO/ICSU Joint                                                                            
     Scientific Committee Working                                                                             
     group on Data Management for                                                                             
     Global Precipitation Project   Washington   12-14 November 1986                                          
 32. WMO/International Workshop                                                                               
     on the validation of                                                                                     
     satellites precipitation ..... Washington   17-21 November 1986                                          
 33. 9th Session of WMO Commission                                                                            
     for Agricultural Metereology   Madrid       17-28 November 1986                                          
 34. WMO workshop on application                                                                              
     of mathematical models in                                                                                
     Operation Hydrology .......... Bandung      8-20 December 1986                                           
                                                 (Indonesia)                                                  
 35. Meeting of Group of 77 on                                                                                
     Water Resources Development                                                                              
     and Management in Developing                                                                             
     Countries .................... Zagreb       10-12 December 1986                                          
 36. Workshop on Regional                                                                                     
     Groundwater Modelling                                                                                    
     sponsored by UNESCO .......... Roorkee      12-17 December 1986                                          
                                                                                      -128>                   
 APPENDIX VI Statement showing number of Passports/Miscellaneous services                                     
                                                                                                              
 Statement showing number of Passports/Miscellaneous services applications received and                       
 number of Passports issued/miscellaneous service rendered during the period January to                       
 December 1986                                                                                                
  Sl.  Station            No. of Passport  No. of     No. of Applications for     No. of                      
  No.                     applications     Passports  Misc. services receive      Misc.                       
                          received         issued                                 services                    
                                                                                  rendered                    
  (1)  (2)                (3)              (4)        (5)                         (6)                         
  1.   Ahmedabad .......  86,277           87,292     31,421                      30,940                      
  2.   Bangalore .......  63,597           68,094     12,812                      13,510                      
  3.   Bareilly .......   64,034           62,736     15,892                      14,143                      
  4.   Bhopal ..........  14,126           16,503     9,428                       8,934                       
  5.   Bhubaneswar .....  2,929            3,191      1,147                       1,082                       
  6.   Bombay ..........  2,39,108         2,40,523   1,69,174                    1,73,687                    
  7.   Calcutta ........  45,724           38,830     18,917                      13,796                      
  8.   Chandigarh ......  60,783           58,567     25,544                      25,367                      
  9.   Cochin ........ .  73,835           76,331     68,653                      68,237                      
  10.  Delhi . . . .      1,12,008         1,09,603   70,253                      70,887                      
  11.  Guwahati . . .     3,357            3,295      1,187                       1,187                       
  12.  Hyderabad . .      57,436           58,688     41,486                      41,379                      
  13.  Jaipur . . .       34,153           35,481     14,611                      13,976                      
  14.  Jalandhar . .      62,409           59,230     37,919                      36,524                      
  15.  Kozhikode . .      61,458           64,641     65,780                      63,410                      
  16.  Lucknow . . .      35,371           37,447     12,466                      12,121                      
  17.  Madras . . .       76,936           89,380     46,793                      44,955                      
  18.  Patna . . . .      11,983           15,344     4,960                       4,699                       
  19.  Srinagar . . .     7,332            7,463      2,383                       2,348                       
  20.  Tiruchirapalli .   60,783           65,086     28,940                      27,368                      
       GRAND TOTAL .      11,73,639        11,97,745  6,79,366                    6,73,559                    
                                                                                  -129>                       
 APPENDIX VII Statement showing revenue and expenditure                                                       
                                                                                                              
 Statement showing revenue and expenditure in respect of Passport offices in India during                     
 the period January to December 1986                                                                          
  Sl. No.  Station                     Revenue earned (in  Expenditure incurred (in                           
                                       Rupees)             Rupees)                                            
  (1)      (2)                         (3)                 (4)                                                
  1.       Ahmedabad . . . . . . . .   63,54,161           22,04,903                                          
           . .                                                                                                
  2.       Bangalore . . . . . . . .   39,92,500           14,21,900                                          
           . .                                                                                                
  3.       Bareilly . . . . . . . . .  45,73,188           18,00,945                                          
           .                                                                                                  
  4.       Bhopal . . . . . . . . . .  11,53,660           5,81,594                                           
           .                                                                                                  
  5.       Bhubaneswar . . . . . . .   2,23,943            3,05,835                                           
           . .                                                                                                
  6.       Bombay . . . . . . . . . .  1,87,67,920         58,45,820                                          
           .                                                                                                  
  7.       Calcutta . . . . . . . . .  29,83,980           11,60,093                                          
           .                                                                                                  
  8.       Chandigarh . . . . . . . .  45,22,562           18,93,212                                          
           .                                                                                                  
  9.       Cochin . . . . . . . . . .  65,05,550           27,28,454                                          
           .                                                                                                  
  10.      Delhi . . . . . . . . . .   98,20,591           34,98,271                                          
           .                                                                                                  
  11.      Guwahati . . . . . . . . .  3,20,443            2,87,756                                           
           .                                                                                                  
  12.      Hyderabad . . . . . . . .   43,00,845           19,75,765                                          
           .                                                                                                  
  13.      Jaipur . . . . . . . . . .  21,82,467           13,03,566                                          
  14.      Jalandhar . . . . . . . .   57,60,598           16,70,176                                          
           .                                                                                                  
  15.      Kozhikode . . . . . . . .   48,65,060           14,40,384                                          
           .                                                                                                  
  16.      Lucknow . . . . . . . . .   27,75,895           12,57,865                                          
           .                                                                                                  
  17.      Madras . . . . . . . . . .  60,85,141           19,19,266                                          
  18.      Patna . . . . . . . . . .   8,43,093            4,58,590                                           
           .                                                                                                  
  19.      Srinagar . . . . . . . . .  5,86,713            2,89,173                                           
           .                                                                                                  
  20.      Tiruchirapalli . . . . . .  38,70,514           15,81,355                                          
           . .                                                                                                
           GRAND TOTAL . . . . . . .   9,04,88,824         3,36,24,923                                        
           .                                                                                                  
                                                           -130>                                              
 APPENDIX VIII Cadre Strength at Headquarters                                                                 
                                                                                                              
 Cadre Strength at Headquarters and 137 Missions/Posts abroad                                                 
 during                                                                                                       
 1986-87                                                                                                      
  Sl. No.  Cadre/Post                Posts at Headquarters  Posts at Missions  Total Posts                    
                                                            abroad                                            
  (1)      (2)                       (3)                    (4)                (5)                            
                                                                               IFS                            
  1.       Grade I . . . . . . .     3                      18                 21                             
  2.       Grade II . . . . . . .    3                      25                 28                             
  3.       Grade III . . . . . . .   18                     79                 97                             
  4.       Grade IV . . . . . . .    15                     65                 80                             
  5.       Sr. Scale . . . . . . .   56                     200                256                            
  6.       Jr. Scale . . . . . . .   5                      28                 33                             
  7.       Training Reserve (Jr.                                               27                             
           Scale) .                                                                                           
  8.       Training Reserve . . .                                              10                             
  9.       Leave Reserve . .                                                   19                             
  10.      Deputation Reserve .                                                20                             
                                                                               IFS (B)                        
  1.       Grade I . . . . . . .     61                     63                 124                            
  2.       Grade II & III . . . . .  166                    154                320                            
  3.       Grade IV . . . . . . .    365                    361                726                            
  4.       Grade V & VI . . . . . .  450                    197                647                            
  5.       Grade II of Cypher        81                     118                199                            
           Sub-Cadre                                                                                          
  6.       Selection Grade of Steno                                                                           
           Grade                                                                                              
           of IFS (B) . . . . . .    16                     35                 51                             
  7.       Grade I of Steno's        31                     144                175                            
           IFS(B). .                                                                                          
  8.       Grade II of Steno's       192                    165                357                            
           Cadre. .                                                                                           
  9.       Grade III of Steno's      42                     79                 121                            
           Cadre .                                                                                            
                                                                               -131>                          
 APPENDIX IX Cadre Strength of IFS                                                                            
                                                                                                              
 Cadre Strength of IFS during 1986-87                                                                         
  Sl.No.  Grades                                                        Total Posts                           
  (1)     (2)                                                           (3)                                   
  1.      Grade I . . . . . . . . . . . . .                             21                                    
  2.      Grade II . . . . . . . . . . . . .                            28                                    
  3.      Grade III . . . . . . . . . . . . .                           97                                    
  4.      Grade IV . . . . . . . . . . . . .                            80                                    
  5.      Senior Scale of IFS . . . . . . . . . .                       256                                   
  6.      Junior Scale of IFS . . . . . . . . . .                       33                                    
  7.      Training Reserve (Junior Scale) . . . . . .                   27                                    
  8.      Training Reserve . . . . . .                                  10                                    
  9.      Leave Reserve in all Grades                                   19                                    
  10.     Deputation Reserve . . . . . .                                20                                    
          TOTAL .                                                       591                                   
                                                                                     -132>                    
 APPENDIX X Foreign Language Chart                                                                            
                                                                                                              
 Foreign Language Chart                                                                                       
  Sl. No.  Language                                Total No.of Officers Passed/Know the                       
                                                   Language                                                   
  (1)      (2)                                     (3)                                                        
  1.       Arabic . . . . . . . . . . . .          20                                                         
  2.       Burmese . . . . . . . . . . . .         2                                                          
  3.       Chinese . . . . . . . . . . . .         47                                                         
  4.       Czech . . . . . . . . . . . . .         1                                                          
  5.       Dutch . . . . . . . . . . . . .         2                                                          
  6.       French . . . . . . . . . . . . .        150                                                        
  7.       German . . . . . . . . . . . . .        76                                                         
  8.       Gorkhali . . . . . . . . . . . . .      10                                                         
  9.       Hungarian . . . . . . . . . . . . .     1                                                          
  10.      Bhasa (Bahasa)-Indonesia . . . . . . .  13                                                         
           .                                                                                                  
  11.      Italian . . . . . . . . . . . . .       8                                                          
  12.      Japanese . . . . . . . . . . . . .      30                                                         
  13.      Kiswahili . . . . . . . . . . . . .     14                                                         
  14.      Malay-Bahasa . . . . . . . . . . . .    3                                                          
  15.      Persian . . . . . . . . . . . . .       29                                                         
  16.      Polish . . . . . . . . . . . . .        3                                                          
  17.      Portuguese . . . . . . . . . . . .      16                                                         
  18.      Pushtu . . . . . . . . . . . . .        1                                                          
  19.      Romanian . . . . . . . . . . . . .      0                                                          
  20.      Russian . . . . . . . . . . . . .       81                                                         
  21.      Serbo-Croatian . . . . . . . . . . .    6                                                          
  22.      Spanish . . . . . . . . . . . . .       67                                                         
  23.      Swedish . . . . . . . . . . . . .       3                                                          
  24.      Thai . . . . . . . . . . . . .          4                                                          
  25.      Tibetan . . . . . . . . . . . . .       3                                                          
  26.      Turkish . . . . . . . . . . . . .       3                                                          
  27.      Vietnamese . . . . . . . . . . . . .    3                                                          
                                                   -133>                                                      
 APPENDIX XI Revenue expenditure of the Ministry                                                              
                                                                                                              
 Revenue expenditure of the Ministry during the Financial year                                                
 1986-87                                                                                                      
     Estimates                                                                                                
     expenditure of the ministry (Rs. in lakhs)                                                               
     Headquarters . . . . . . . . . . .                                         15,23.98                      
     Missions/Posts a broad . . . . . . . . . . .                               75,39.85                      
     Supply Wings, Washington & London . . . . . . . .                          1,51.00                       
     Other Items                                                                                              
     Contribution to UN, Commonwealth Secretariat and Other                                                   
     International Institutions                                                 3,56.75                       
     Central Passport Organisation . . . . . . . . .                            9,14.00                       
     Special Diplomatic Expenditure . . . . . . . . .                           60,60.93                      
     Other Misc. Items . . . . . . . . . . . .                                  19,65.49                      
     Aid                                                                                                      
     Aid to Bangladesh . . . . . . . . . . . .                                  2,23.00                       
     Aid to Bhutan . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                    58,11.00                      
     Aid to Nepal . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                     15,63.00                      
     Aid to Other Developing Countries . . . . . . . .                          31,06.00                      
     ITEC Programmes . . . . . . . . . . . . .                                  10,50.00                      
     Total .                                                                    3,02,65.00                    
                                                                                     -134>                    
 APPENDIX XII Expenditure on Indian Missions/Posts abroad and Headquarters                                    
                                                                                                              
 Expenditure on Indian Missions/Posts abroad and Headquarters                                                 
 during                                                                                                       
 1986-87                                                                                                      
                                                                                                              
 The estimated expenditure on Headquarters Organisation of the Ministry during the                            
 financial year 1986-87 is expected to be Rs. 1523.98 lakhs out of which Rs. 274.20 lakhs                     
 will be on External Publicity, Rs. 287.59 lakhs on Travel Expenses, Rs. 484.01 lakhs on                      
 Salaries and Wages of Establishment, Rs. 5.20 lakhs on Subsidy to Departmental Canteen and                   
 Rs. 472.98 lakhs on Other Items.                                                                             
                                                                                                              
 The total estimated expenditure on Indian Missions abroad including Supply Wings,                            
 Washington and London is expected to be Rs. 7690.85 lakhs. This amount comprises Rs.                         
 2882.03 lakhs on Salaries, Wages and Allowances including Foreign Allowance, Rs. 1220.45                     
 lakhs on Transfer and Home Leave Passages and Local Tours, Rs. 1773.77 lakhs on Rents,                       
 Rates and Taxes as well as on maintenance and repairs of accommodation rented abroad; and                    
 Rs. 1814.60 lakhs on other miscellaneous items of contingent nature. The average                             
 expenditure per Mission abroad is expected to be Rs. 55.73 lakhs.                                            
                                                                                                              
 The expenditure mentioned above on Headquarters and Missions/Posts abroad including                          
 expenditure on Publicity, works out to approximately 30.45% of the total Revenue                             
 Expenditure of this Ministry. The remaining 69.55% of the Revenue Estimates of the                           
 Ministry are being spent on various aid programmes to neighbouring and other developing                      
 countries, contributions to United Nations and Other International Bodies, Passport                          
 Organisation, Special Diplomatic Expenditure and Other Items.                                                
 -135>                                                                                                        
 APPENDIX XIII Statement showing the total number of employees                                                
                                                                                                              
 Statement showing the total number of employees (both permanent and temporary in the                         
 Ministry of External Affairs under various groups and representation of Scheduled Castes                     
 and Scheduled Tribes therein (Position as on 31-12-1986)                                                     
 Group           Total Number of employees        Scheduled % of total Scheduled % of total                   
                                                  Castes    employees  Tribes    employees                    
 (1)             (2)                              (3)       (4)        (5)       (6)                          
 Group 'A' . . . 796                              98        12.20%     35        4.40%                        
 .                                                                                                            
 Group 'B' . . . 1916                             159       8.29%      23        1.20%                        
 .                                                                                                            
 Group 'C' . . . 2509                             293       11.67%     86        3.42%                        
 .                                                                                                            
 Group 'D'                                                                                                    
 (Excluding      711                              161       22.64%     20        2.81%                        
 Sweepers).                                                                                                   
 Group 'D'       89                               80        89.88%     4         4.49%                        
 (Sweepers) .                                                                                                 
                                                                                 -136>                        
 APPENDIX XIV Statement showing the number of appointments                                                    
                                                                                                              
 Statement showing the number of appointments (both by direct recruitment and promotion)                      
 made in various Groups in the Ministry of External Affairs and reserve vacancies filled by                   
 Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes during the year 1986                                                       
  Group        Total No. of  Number of vacancies  Number of   Number of vacancies                             
               vacancies     reserved for         reserved    dereserved due to non                           
               filled        Scheduled            candidates  availability of reserved                        
                             Castes/Scheduled     appointed   candidates Scheduled                            
                             Tribes               Scheduled   Castes/Scheduled Tribes                         
                                                  Castes                                                      
                                                  /Scheduled                                                  
                                                  Tribes                                                      
  (1)          (2)           (3)        (4)       (5)   (6)   (7)        (8)                                  
  Group 'A' .  12            2          1         2     1                                                     
  Group 'B' .  72            19         11        13    4     6          7                                    
  Group 'C' .  54            10         7         9     9     1          1                                    
  Group 'D'    28            4          2         4     2                                                     
  (Excluding                                                                                                  
  Sweepers) .                                                                                                 
                                                                         -137>                                
 APPENDIX XV International Conferences/Meeting hosted by the Ministries/Departments                           
                                                                                                              
 International Conferences/Meeting hosted by the Ministries/Departments of the Government                     
 of India during 1986 for which logistical arrangements were made by the Conference Cell                      
 of the Ministry of External Affairs                                                                          
 Sl. No. Title of Conference/Meeting                             Date                                         
 (1)     (2)                                                     (3)                                          
 1.      Special Convocation to confer an Honorary                                                            
         Degree of Doctor of Letters (Honoris Causa)                                                          
         on Prof. Andreas George Papandreou, Prime                                                            
         Minister of the Republic of Greece, during                                                           
         his visit to India . . . . . .                          28 January 1986                              
 2.      86 International Marketing Congress . .                 6 to 9 January 1986                          
 3.      Asia-Pacific Microwave Conference . .                   24 to 28 February 1986                       
 4.      Press Conference of the Prime Minister                                                               
         of the Republic of Korea                                4 March 1986                                 
 5.      A Symposium on Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan on                                                           
         World Unity . .                                         24 March 1986                                
 6.      2nd Annual Conference of "Women                                                                      
         Parliamentarians for Peace"                             2 to 3 April 1986                            
 7.      Grant of National Award for help in the                                                              
         welfare of the handicapped . . . .                      4 to 5 April 1986                            
 8.      Press Conference of Mr. Turgert Ozal, Prime                                                          
         Minister of Turkey . . . . . .                          10 April 1986                                
 9.      Meeting of the Co-ordinating Bureau of the                                                           
         Non-aligned Countries . . . . .                         16 to 19 April 1986                          
 10.     10th Session of the Indo-Soviet Joint                                                                
         Commission . . . .                                      23 to 26 April 1986                          
 11.     Press Conference of Dr. Helmut Kohl,                                                                 
         Chancellor of the Federal Republic of                                                                
         Germany . . . . . .                                     30 April 1986                                
 12.     Assistance to the Ministry of Human                                                                  
         Resources Development regarding Ministerial                                                          
         Meeting of SAARC Countries on "Women in                                                              
         Development" in Shillong . . . .                        6 to 8 May 1986                              
 13.     Special Convocation to confer an Honorary                                                            
         Degree of Doctor of Laws (Honoris Causa) on                                                          
         Mr. Oliver Tambo, President, African                                                                 
         National Congress of South Africa . .                   9 May 1986                                   
 14.     Africa Day Celebration . . . .                          25 May 1986                                  
                                                                                                              
                                                                 -138>                                        
 15.     Ist Refresher Course for Heads of Indian                                                             
         Missions from Neighbouring Countries .                  2 to 6 June 1986                             
 16.     Seminar on Parliamentarians Action for                                                               
         Removal of Apartheid . . . .                            22 to 24 July 1986                           
 17.     2nd Refresher Course for Heads of Indian                                                             
         Missions from Africa                                    23 july to 1 August 1986                     
 18.     International Seminar on Non-alignment :                                                             
         Retrospect and Prospects . . . .                        1 to 3 August 1986                           
 19.     Meeting in honour of Mr. Daniel Ortega                                                               
         Saavedra, Commander of the Revolution and                                                            
         President of the Republic of Nicaragua                  10 September 1986                            
 20.     Seminar on Africa . . . . . .                           29 September 1986                            
 21.     SAARC Conference on South Asian Children                                                             
         in Co-operation with UNICEF . . . .                     27 to 29 October 1986                        
 22.     3rd Refresher Course for Heads of Indian                                                             
         Missions from East and Southeast Asian                                                               
         Countries . . . . . .                                   3 to 8 November 1986                         
 23.     Second SAARC Summit at Bangalore . . .                  10 to 17 November 1986                       
 24.     Conference of the Chief Justices of the                                                              
         Commonwealth African Countries . . .                    8 to 10 December 1986                        
                                                                 -139>                                        
 APPENDIX XVI Training programmes organised by the Foreign Service Training                                   
                                                                                                              
 Training programmes organised by the Foreign Service Training Institute (FSTI) during 1986                   
 Sl. No.  Title of the Training Programme                        Date                                         
 (1)      (2)                                                    (3)                                          
 1.       Orientation for IFS Probationers of 1985                                                            
          Batch . . . . . .                                      16 to 18 January 1986                        
 2.       India's Foreign Trade-Seven-week course                                                             
          oragnised at the Indian Institute of                                                                
          Foreign Trade . . . . .                                20 January to 21                             
          February                                               1986 and 10 to 21 march                      
                                                                 1986                                         
 3.       Diplomatic Practice; Security . . .                    5 to 7 March 1986                            
 4.       National Security in the Nuclear Age . .               21 April to 2 May 1986                       
 5.       India's Foreign Policy and External                                                                 
          Relations . . . . . .                                  21 to 30 May 1986                            
 6.       International Law: Current and Emerging                                                             
          issues of importance to India . . .                    2 to 6 June 1986                             
 7.       Refresher Course for Heads of Diplomatic                                                            
          Missions (HOMs)-(1)                                    2 to 6 June 1986                             
          (Neighbouring/Gulf Countries)                                                                       
 8.       Administration & Accounts . . . .                      9 to 27 June 1986                            
 9.       Consular and Passport Work . . . .                     1 to 11 July 1986                            
 10.      Refresher Course for HOMs-(2) . .                      23 July to 1 August 1986                     
          (Africa)                                                                                            
 11.      Communications . . . . . .                             6 to 12 August 1986                          
 12.      Orientation for IFS Probationers of                                                                 
          1986 Batch . . . . . . .                               11 to 23 August 1986                         
 13.      Behavioural Skills . . . . .                           18 to 23 August 1986                         
 14.      Cultural Work . . . . . . .                            1 to 12 September 1986                       
 15.      External Publicity . . . . .                           15 to 30 September 1986                      
 16.      Consular, Passport & Protocol work (for                                                             
          newly recruited SOs-1984 and 1985                                                                   
          batches) . . . . . . . .                               1 to 31 October 1986                         
 17.      Refresher Course for HOMs-(3) . . .                    3 to 8 November 1986                         
          (East and Southeast Asia)                                                                           
                                                                 -140>                                        
          No. of those who availed of programmes                                                              
          organiesed by FSTI during 1986                                                                      
          Heads of Indian Diplomatic Missions . . . . . . .      58                                           
          Defence Attaches . . . . . . .                         2                                            
          IFS Probationers (1985 batch) . . . . . . .            12                                           
          IFS Probationers (1986 batch) . . . . . . . . .        12                                           
          Deputy Secretaries . . . . . . .                       6                                            
          Under Secretaries . . . . . . . . .                    14                                           
          Section Officers . . . . . . . . .                     7                                            
          Assistants . . . . . . . . .                           1                                            
          LDCs . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                       2                                            
          Foreign Service wives . . . . . . . . .                8                                            
          Total                                                  122                                          
          NOTE -All programmes except 7, 10, 16 & are 17                                                      
          mandatory for IFS                                                                                   
 (A)      new recruits.                                                                                       
                                                                 -141>                                        
 APPENDIX XVII VVIP visits to India during 1986-87                                                            
 VVIP visits to India during 1986-87                                                                          
                                                                                                              
 Sl.No. Heads of State/Government                              Date                                           
 (1)    (2)                                                    (3)                                            
 1.     H.E. Mr. Turgut Ozal, Prime Minister of                                                               
        Turkey . . . .                                         9-14 April 1986                                
 2.     H.E. Mr. France Albert Rene, President                                                                
        of Seychelles . . . . .                                21-28 April 1986                               
 3.     H.E. Dr. Helmut Kohl, Chancellor of the                                                               
        Federal Republic of Germany . . .                      27-30 April 1986                               
 4.     H.E. Mr. Sam Nujoma, President of SWAPO .              22-27 May 1986                                 
 5.     H.E. Mr. H.M. Ershad, President of                                                                    
        Bangladesh . . . . .                                   14-16 July 1986                                
 6.     H.E. Mr. Branko Mikulic, President of                                                                 
        Federal Executive Council of the Socialist                                                            
        Federal Republic of Yugoslavia . .                     28 July to 1 August 1986                       
 7.     H.E. Mr. Daniel Ortega Saavedra, President                                                            
        of Nicaragua . . . . .                                 8-11 September 1986                            
 8.     Rt. Hon. K.S.K. Musokotwane, Prime Minister                                                           
        of Zambia . . . .                                      22 September to 1 October                      
                                                               1986                                           
 9.     H.M. King Hussein I, King of Jordan .                  6-15 October 1986                              
 10.    H.E. Mr. Bettino Craxi, Prime Minister                                                                
        of Italy . . . . .                                     4-5 November 1986                              
 11.    H.E. Mr. Mikhail S. Gorbachev, General                                                                
        Secretary of CPSU . . .                                25-28 November 1986                            
 12.    H.E. Mr. Paul Schlueter, Prime Minister                                                               
        of Denmark . . . . .                                   11-18 January 1987                             
 13.    H.E. S. Ramphal, Secretary General of                                                                 
        Commonwealth . . . .                                   16-22 January 1987                             
 14.    H.E. Dr. Alan Garcia Perez, President of                                                              
        the Republic of Peru . . .                             23-29 January 1987                             
 15.    H.E. Y.A.B. Datuk Seri Dr Mahathir Mohamed,                                                           
        Prime Minister of Malaysia . .                         29 January to 1 February                       
                                                               1987                                           
 16.    H.E. Dr. Mauno Henrik Koivisto, President                                                             
        of Republic of Finland . .                             2-6 February 1987                              
        FOREIGN MINISTERS                                                                                     
 1.     Rt. Hon. Sir Geoffrey Howe, Secretary of                                                              
        State of UK . . . .                                    30 March to 2 April 1986                       
 2.     H.E. Mr. Pierre Aubert, Foreign Minister                                                              
        of Switzerland . . . .                                 31 March to 7 April 1986                       
 3.     H.E. Lyonpo Dawa Tshering, Foreign Minister                                                           
        of Bhutan . . . .                                      1 April 1986 & 25 May 1986                     
 4.     H.E. Mr. Frederic Affo Minister for Foreign                                                           
        Affairs of Benin . . .                                 5-10 July 1986                                 
 5.     H.E. Dr. Ali Akbar Velayati, Foreign                                                                  
        Minister of Iran . . .                                 21-22 August 1986                              
                                                               -142>                                          
                                                                                                              
External website that External website that External website that External website that External website that 
opens in a new window opens in a new window opens in a new window opens in a new window opens in a new window 

    Address : Patiala House, Annexe - BNew Delhi                              
   -110001                                           Page last updated on: 09 
    Telephone: 23389073, 23382694, 23073685;                  December, 2013  
   Fax: 23386340, 23387700;Feedback :            Site designed and maintained 
   dirlibmea.gov.in                                  by: National Informatics 
    Officer In-charge:-                                         Centre (NIC), 
    (c)Content Owned by MEA Library Ministry of   DeitY, MoCIT, Government of 
   External Affairs, Government of India                               India. 
   Terms & Conditions | Privacy Policy |         Visitors:                    
   Copyright Policy | Hyperlinking Policy |      
   Accessibility Statement | Help                

   java script is required for this page
   MEAs App twitter Facebook Google plus YouTube flickr
   loading
