   java script is required for this page java script is required for this
   page java script is required for this page java script is required for
   this page java script is required for this page java script is required
   for this page

   Fri, February 06, 2015 at 05:20:21 IST Indian Flag
   Ministry of                      Print Content Small Font Medium Font      
    External       MEA Library      Large Font                                
    Affairs,   Ministry of External   * Sitemap                               
   Government  Affairs, Government    * Contact Us                            
    of India         of India         * Feedback                              
                                      * _____________________           [  ]  

     * Home
     * Director's Office
          * Director Lib & Info
          * Library Officers & Staff
     * Journals
          * Current Journals
          * Online Journals
          * CD-ROMs Databases
     * Online Services
          * Business Monitor Online
          * EIU
          * JSTOR
          * Janes Online Services
          * Kessing World News Archive
          * Marketline MDIC
          * Online Service Links
     * Newspapers
          * E-Newspapers
          * Subscribed Print Newspapers
     * Library Bulletins
          * Foreign Affairs Documentation Bulletin
          * Recent Additions
          * Chronicle of Events
     * Alert
          * Book Alert
          * Article Alerts
     * Important Abbrevations

 Annual Reports Prior to 1999                                                             
   * Home >   Annual Reports Prior to 1999 >   Annual Report 1980-81      * Home          
 Annual Report 1980-81                                                    * Director's    
                                                                            Office        
 Contents                                                                 * Journals      
 Introduction                                                             * Online        
 SL.No.  CHAPTERS                                                PAGES      Services      
 I.      India's Neighbours                                      1-8      * Newspapers    
 II.     South-East Asia                                         9-15     * Alert         
 III.    East Asia                                               16-18    * Important     
 IV.     West Asia and North Africa                              19-23      Abbrevations  
 V.      Africa (South of the Sahara)                            24-26    * Back          
 VI.     Europe                                                  27-35                    
 VII.    The Americas                                            36-40                    
 VIII.   United Nations and International Conferences            41-55                    
 IX.     Foreign Economic Relations                              56-60                    
 X.      External Publicity                                      61-65                    
 XI.     Cultural Relations                                      66-68                    
 XII.    Protocol                                                69                       
 XIII.   Passport, Emigration and Consular Services              70-72                    
 XIV.    Administration and Organisation                         73-74                    
 XV.     Use of Hindi in Official Work                           75-77                    
         Appendices                                              79-10                    
                                                                                          
                                                                                          
                        APPENDICES                                                        
                                                                                          
 NUMBER                                               PAGES                               
                                                                                          
    I. Major International Conferences/Meetings/Semi-                                     
       nars etc. organised by Inter-Governmental Orga-                                    
       nisation at which the Government of India was                                      
       represented in 1980-81                         81-85                               
                                                                                          
   II. Major  International  Conferences/Meetings/                                        
       Seminars organised by  Non-Governmental                                            
       Organisation (such as Asian Productivity                                           
       Organisation, International Co-operation Alliance,                                 
       International Organisation for Standardisation                                     
       etc.) in which Indian experts participated in their                                
       personal capacity with the Government assistance                                   
       in 1980-81 (April 1980 to March 1981)          86-87                               
                                                                                          
  III. Miscellaneous Major International Conferences                                      
       etc. in 1980-81 (April 1980 to March 1981) at                                      
       which the Govt. of India was represented or in                                     
       which Indian experts participated with Govern-                                     
       men of India's assistance in their personal capa-                                  
       city                                          88-89                                
                                                                                          
   IV. International Organisation of which India became                                   
       a member or ceased to be a member during the                                       
       year 1980-81 (from April 1980 to March 1981)     90                                
                                                                                          
    V. Treaties/Conventions/Agreements concluded or                                       
       renewed by India with other countries in                                           
       1980                                          91-98                                
                                                                                          
   VI. Statement showing number of  passport/miscel-                                      
       laneous services applications received  and                                        
       number of passports  issued/miscellaneous                                          
       services granted in the calendar year 1980    99                                   
                                                                                          
  VII. Statement showing the total number of employ-                                      
       ees (both permanent and temporary) in the                                          
       Ministry of External Affairs under various groups                                  
       and representation of Scheduled Castes  and                                        
       Scheduled Tribes therein  (Position as on                                          
       Dec 31, 1980)                             100                                      
                                                                                          
 VIII. Statement showing  the number of appointments                                      
       (both by direct recruitment and by promotion)                                      
       made to various groups of posts and reserved                                       
       vacancies filled by Scheduled Castes  and Sche-                                    
       duled Tribes during the year 1980            101                                   
                                                                                          
   IX. Revenue expenditure of the Ministry  during the                                    
       Financial Year 1980-81                       102                                   
                                                                                          
    X. Expenditure on Headquarters and Missions/                                          
       Posts abroad during 1980-81              103-104                                   
                                                                                          
   XI. Strength of IFS & IFS (B) Cadres,  Combined                                        
       Research Cadre and Interpreters Cadre     105                                      
                                                                                          
  XII. Foreign Language Chart                  106                                        
                                                                                          
 Dec 31, 1980                                                                             
                                                                                          
 INTRODUCTION                                                                             
 The general international situation                                                      
                                                                                          
 This report of the Ministry of External Affairs covers a particularly                    
 difficult period in international relations in which there was a sharp                   
 intensification in great power rivalries and competition. The matching                   
 of skills, unfortunately, was not for the benefit of mankind in such                     
 constructive spheres as socio- economic development or the arts and                      
 sciences, but in the dangerous realm of military preparedness. From                      
 India's point of view, this is all the more alarming as the active                       
 theatre of this game of conflict and confrontation shifted away from                     
 Europe to the developing world, particularly Asia and Africa. The                        
 Indian Ocean became an almost continuous arc of critical situa- tions,                   
 full of simmering tensions some of which erupted into armed conflicts.                   
                                                                                          
 It is true that many of these developments were a result of internal                     
 upheavals among countries of the region or of conflicts among them                       
 originating from local causes. However, it did provide the external                      
 powers with the opportunity to exploit such situations to extend their                   
 political and military influence, as well as their economic control,                     
 over the governments and peoples of the non-aligned and other                            
 developing countries. This was attempted in a number of subtle and not                   
 so subtle ways-the unstated but implied threat of using nuclear                          
 weapons against non-nuclear weapons states, the enormous build-up and                    
 wide deployment of conventional military and naval forces, the foster-                   
 ing of local differences by sowing seeds of suspicion or with                            
 carefully regulated doses of arms supplies, overt or covert inter-                       
 vention or interference in the internal affairs of the third world and                   
 frustrating, in manifold ways, the urgent need to evolve a new                           
 international economic order.                                                            
                                                                                          
 Against this background, the efforts of the less powerful countries,                     
 who sought to strengthen their political independence as well as their                   
 economic self-reliance in an atmosphere free from outside interference                   
 and with honour and dignity acquired an even greater significance.                       
 There was growing realisation among them that it was only through                        
 unity and determination, through imaginative policies of collective                      
 self-reliance, that they                                                                 
                                                                                          
 (ii)                                                                                     
                                                                                          
 could strive successfully to bring about a new world order in which                      
 their hopes and aspirations would be translated into reality.                            
 Accompanying this was a growing recognition that the philosophy and                      
 principles of non-alignment whose validity and relevance was greater                     
 than ever before, should continue to guide the struggle in this                          
 direction.                                                                               
                                                                                          
 This was the international setting that posed countless challenges for                   
 Indian diplomacy during, the, period covered by this report. In the                      
 following pages an attempt will be made to describe the initiatives                      
 and the well considered responses of the Government of India to the                      
 evolving international situa- tion.                                                      
                                                                                          
 Non-Alignment : New Delhi Conference of Foreign Ministers                                
                                                                                          
 A Conference of the Foreign Ministers of Non-Aligned Coun- tries was                     
 held in New Delhi from Feb 09, 1981 to 13 February 1981. 91 countries                    
 and 2 liberation movements participated in the Conference along with                     
 15 observer delegations and 22 guest delegations. At the inaugural                       
 session on 9 February 1981, the Conference was privileged to hear a                      
 key note address by the Prime Minister of India. A special                               
 commemorative session was convened on 11 February to celebrate the                       
 20th Anniversary of the First Summit Conference of Non-aligned                           
 countries, held in Belgrade in 1961. The Prime Minister addressed the                    
 comme- morative session. The Conference itself was chaired by the                        
 Minister of External Affairs.                                                            
                                                                                          
 The New Delhi Conference, was preceded by more than usual speculation                    
 in interested quarters questioning the validity of the Movement of                       
 Non-aligned countries. Some critics fore- cast that the unity of the                     
 Movement would be fractured and its strength and vitality eroded. This                   
 kind of speculation was proved totally unfounded. To ensure the                          
 success of the Con- ference, India conducted extensive pre-conference                    
 consultations with a number of non-aligned countries. These,                             
 consultations helped to create a favourable climate and to prevent a                     
 polarisa- tion and excessive dissipation of attention on specific                        
 issues and bilateral problems. Finally, the Conference ended in a                        
 spirit of harmony with the adoption of the New Delhi Declaration which                   
 covers all the burning issues of the day. This Declaration represents                    
 an important contribution to the strengthening of the role of the                        
 Movement, the policy of Non-alignment, of the independence and                           
 sovereignty of all States, of the consolidation                                          
                                                                                          
 (iii)                                                                                    
                                                                                          
 of international peace and security and of universal detente and                         
 genuine disarmament. It has reinforced the struggle against                              
 colonialism, racism, and all forms of foreign aggression and                             
 intervention and interference.                                                           
                                                                                          
 On the economic plane, the Conference emphasised the need for global                     
 negotiations to begin as soon as possible. On the vital issue of                         
 energy, it called for appropriate measures on energy, supply on a                        
 priority basis for importing non-aligned and other developing                            
 countries without prejudice to the national interests of all                             
 countries. Underscoring the vital importance of furthering economic                      
 cooperation among developing countries, it was agreed that the                           
 forthcoming high level Caracas Conference should result in adoption of                   
 positive action oriented and agreed modalities, projects, arrangements                   
 and programmes of coopera- tion in a time-bound framework.                               
                                                                                          
 The unity and solidarity of the Movement of Non-aligned Countries has                    
 been considerably strengthened as a result of the New Delhi                              
 Conference. Thus, even on some issues where there were differing                         
 points of view among nonaligned countries, con- sensus was achieved.                     
 India's constructive role and efforts, as also the objective and                         
 non-partisan manner in which it guided the deliberations as Chairman                     
 of the Conference, came in for high appreciation.                                        
                                                                                          
 Nuclear and Military build-up by Great Powers                                            
                                                                                          
 New doctrines of nuclear strategy are being evolved, the acceptance of                   
 which would have a tragic effect on the ability of the non-aligned and                   
 developing countries to maintain and strengthen their political                          
 independence.                                                                            
                                                                                          
 The dangers of an accidental nuclear holocaust being trigger- ed off                     
 as a result of the present irrational nuclear build-up, are ever                         
 present.                                                                                 
                                                                                          
 Non-aligned countries need to recognise the danger to each of them of                    
 the nuclear threat which has today become a real possibility.                            
                                                                                          
 India has proclaimed time and again her firm opposition to nuclear                       
 weapons; government are firmly committed to the peaceful utilisation                     
 of nuclear energy, to oppose any moves or measures which are                             
 discriminatory in nature and which come in the way of India's                            
 programmes for the peaceful use of nuclear energy. India has                             
 reiterated this viewpoint in the UN General Assembly as well as in                       
 other fora during the year.                                                              
                                                                                          
 (iv)                                                                                     
                                                                                          
 Developments in the Indian Ocean                                                         
                                                                                          
 The Indian Ocean today sees the largest military build-up by external                    
 powers that has ever taken place. Recent develop- ments in the region                    
 have been used as a pretext to justify this increased presence. The                      
 build-up included the expansion of the Diego Garcia base and the                         
 reported decision that it would be built up as a major air, naval and                    
 perhaps nuclear facility. This decision was accompanied by a rapid                       
 increase in the num- ber of naval vessels and military aircraft                          
 deployed by major non-littoral powers, and the plans of the USA for                      
 the creation of a rapid deployment force of 110,000 personnel for use                    
 pri- marily in, the Indian Ocean. Reports about seeking of fuelling,                     
 re-stocking and rest and recreation facilities at littoral ports and                     
 attempts to acquire base facilities have caused serious concern to the                   
 Government of India and other non-aligned states.                                        
                                                                                          
 There has also been a significant increase in the naval presence of                      
 the USSR, UK and France, and attempts to seek facilities which would                     
 enable a higher level of long-term naval presence have been reported.                    
                                                                                          
 India has consistently opposed great power military presence in the                      
 Indian Ocean as it introduces new tensions and conflicts in its                          
 neighbourhood and constitutes a threat to peace and stabi- lity. India                   
 is working in concert with other non-aligned littoral and hinterland                     
 states to obtain early implementation of the 1971 Declaration of the                     
 Indian Ocean as a Zone of Peace. To this end, in the UN Ad Hoc                           
 Committee on the Indian Ocean, India is trying to promote agreement on                   
 the convening of the confer- ence on the Indian Ocean in Sri Lanka as                    
 scheduled.                                                                               
                                                                                          
 Afghanistan                                                                              
                                                                                          
 The independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity and non- aligned                    
 status of Afghanistan, a country which is vital to its security, is of                   
 direct concern to India.                                                                 
                                                                                          
 During 1980-81 there were some signs that the parties con- cerned had                    
 realised that the problem of Afghanistan could only be solved by                         
 peaceful political means. The Government of India had, right from the                    
 beginning, taken the position that an attitude of confrontation or                       
 condemnation would not help in resolving this matter. The wider                          
 acceptance of the need to find a political solution is something which                   
 the Government of                                                                        
                                                                                          
 (v)                                                                                      
                                                                                          
 India welcomes. India's position was clearly enunciated on several                       
 occasions-namely, that it was opposed to the presence of foreign                         
 troops and bases, in any country and that all forms of intervention                      
 and interference in the internal affairs of Afghanistan must cease.                      
                                                                                          
 During the year the Government of India have been in touch with the                      
 countries of the sub-continent as well as other countries in an effort                   
 to defuse tensions and work towards a solution Which would preserve                      
 the traditional status of Afghanis- tan as an independent, sovereign                     
 and non-aligned nation.                                                                  
                                                                                          
 India's relations with other neighbours                                                  
                                                                                          
 The change of Government in India stirred some speculation about                         
 India's policy towards its neighbours. In recognition of this, one of                    
 the first acts of the new Government was to spell out the central                        
 theme of this policy, viz. India's desire to pro- mote the                               
 establishment of peace in the region to enable individual countries to                   
 pursue their efforts for economic and social amelioration of their                       
 peoples, free from outside interfer- ence. Through the visits of high                    
 level emissaries, India sought to strengthen mutual trust and friendly                   
 relations and to step up bilateral cooperation with all its                              
 neighbours, based on principles of sovereign equality of states and                      
 non-interference in one an- other's internal affairs with the                            
 objective of paving, the way for further meaningful cooperation in the                   
 region. Reciprocity, based on sovereign equality of States, would thus                   
 form the basis of good neighbourly relations.                                            
                                                                                          
 This sincerity of approach was appreciated. While one year is too                        
 short a period to find lasting solutions to all long- standing                           
 problems, there were encouraging signs of a forward movement in many                     
 areas of significance.                                                                   
                                                                                          
 A general improvement in the climate marked India's rela- tionship                       
 with Bangladesh. There was movement towards reso- lution of a number                     
 of bilateral issues which had remained in a state of somewhat                            
 suspended animation. This was particularly true of such issues as rail                   
 transit, demarcation of land boundary as well as of maritime boundary.                   
 While no immediate solutions were forthcoming, specially on issues                       
 like the long term augmentation of the flow of the Ganges at Farakka,                    
 the pro- gress in negotiations was based on a better appreciation of                     
 each other's points of view and willingness for mutual accommoda-                        
 tion.                                                                                    
                                                                                          
 (vi)                                                                                     
                                                                                          
 The principal achievement of Indo-Bhutan relationship dur- ing the                       
 year was to safeguard and nurture the cherished relation- ship between                   
 the two countries. The Indo-Bhutan Treaty of Peace, and Friendship,                      
 signed in 1949, continued to be the cornerstone of this relationship,                    
 reflecting the, mature recognition by both sides of the abiding value                    
 of inevitable mutual inter- dependence, arising as much out of                           
 compulsions of history and geography as out of unshakable ties of                        
 culture.                                                                                 
                                                                                          
 During the year India's friendly relations with Burma were further                       
 strengthened and consolidated, particularly during, President Ne Win's                   
 visit to India. Various issues of mutual interest were discussed                         
 between the two sides. Possibilities of increasing economic and                          
 cultural exchanges were also consider- ed.                                               
                                                                                          
 India expressed its desire and willingness to discuss all out-                           
 standing issues with China, particularly the continued occupation by                     
 China of a part of Indian territory, in search of a peaceful solution.                   
 Chinese leaders also on several occasions expressed their keenness to                    
 see an improvement in India-China relations.                                             
                                                                                          
 India's preparedness for improved relations with China on the basis of                   
 equality and respect for each other's legitimate interests, however,                     
 would not be at the cost of its friendship with any other country.                       
                                                                                          
 In its quest to create a viable framework for cooperation, with its                      
 neighbours, India has undertaken to meet Maldives' essential                             
 requirements of food and other essential commodities even where such                     
 commodities are not on the list of exportable goods. The first                           
 resident Indian Ambassador to Maldives was appointed during the year.                    
                                                                                          
 Like India, Nepal also witnessed important internal deve- lopments                       
 during the year. Following a referendum to choose, the form of                           
 government-either the continuation of the partyless panchayat system                     
 or its replacement by a multi-party system- constitutional reforms of                    
 major significance were undertaken. Fresh elections are now scheduled                    
 to be held. A serious effort was made to place relations between the                     
 two countries on a firm footing, on the basis of equality, mutual                        
 trust and reci- procity. The long tradition of bilateral cooperation                     
 continued, particularly in the field of water resources development as                   
 reflected in the Karnali and Pancheshwar projects.                                       
                                                                                          
 India's endeavour has been to assure Pakistan of its conti- nued                         
 interest in good relations. India reiterated during 1980-81,                             
                                                                                          
 (vii)                                                                                    
                                                                                          
 its desire to normalise relations with Pakistan in accordance with the                   
 letter and spirit of the Simla Agreement of 1972 and on a: bilateral                     
 basis. Some positive developments were recorded during the year. India                   
 was, however, concerned with some actions of Pakistan which tended to                    
 cause a set-back to the process of normalisation. These included                         
 references to Kashmir at more than one international forum, which was                    
 not in keeping with the spirit of the Simla Agreement, and unwarranted                   
 inter- ference in India's internal affairs.                                              
                                                                                          
 The efforts of Pakistan to considerably expand its military capability                   
 could have an adverse effect on the regional stability and would also                    
 not be conducive to the creation of a climate of mutual confidence in                    
 relations between India and Pakistan. India has made it clear to                         
 Pakistan that it was only interested in working for normal good                          
 neighbourly relations with Pakistan on the basis of the Simla                            
 Agreement, and there was no threat whatsoever to that country from                       
 India. There have been per- sistent and disquieting reports in the                       
 media about Pakistan developing nuclear weapons. India has expressed                     
 the hope that Pakistan would abide by its assurances to direct its                       
 nuclear pro- grammes solely towards peaceful purposes.                                   
                                                                                          
 The even tenor of Indo-Sri Lanka relations continued un- affected                        
 through the year. India granted a Rs. 10 crore government to                             
 government credit to Sri Lanka. Mutual exchange of visits and growing                    
 commercial and cultural ex- changes took place. However, the                             
 resolution of the question of stateless persons of Indian origin in                      
 Sri Lanka, envisaged within the framework of the Indo-Sri Lanka                          
 agreement of 1964 and 1974 on the subject, did not fully come about.                     
                                                                                          
 Regional Cooperation in South Asia                                                       
                                                                                          
 India welcomed in principle the proposal made by President                               
 Zia-ur-Rehman of Bangladesh in April 1980 on the need for regional                       
 cooperation to preserve peace and stability and promote economic and                     
 social developments. However, it is India's con- sidered view that                       
 adequate preparations need to, be made to study the implications of                      
 the proposal indepth and to identity clearly and unambiguously the                       
 areas of regional cooperation which should naturally include all                         
 countries of the region. India has exchanged views with the other                        
 countries in the region on this proposal and the general reaction has                    
 been sympathetic.                                                                        
                                                                                          
 (viii)                                                                                   
                                                                                          
 Iran-Iraq conflict                                                                       
                                                                                          
 The outbreak of hostilities between Iran and Iraq on 22 September                        
 after border skirmishes resulting from the revival of long standing                      
 territorial differences between the two, caused India concern and                        
 distress.                                                                                
                                                                                          
 India was concerned that the continuance of the conflict would have                      
 grave implications for both regional and global peace and security.                      
 The Minister of External Affairs speaking at the United Nations                          
 General Assembly on 3 October 1980, stated that this would only weaken                   
 the solidarity of the nonaligned and deve- loping countries. He urged                    
 Iran and-Iraq to settle their differences peacefully in accordance                       
 with the principles and provisions of the UN Charter.                                    
                                                                                          
 Attempts were made by the United Nations, Islamic Con- ference, the                      
 Chairman of the P.L.O., Yasser Arafat and by a group of non-aligned                      
 nations, with whom India was associated, to bring this conflict to an                    
 end. Their efforts, however, failed to make any headway as both Iraq                     
 and Iran adhered to their respective positions.                                          
                                                                                          
 The nonaligned movement made strenuous efforts to resolve the                            
 differences between Iran and Iraq in a peaceful manner. The Conference                   
 of the Foreign Ministers in Delhi reiterated and emphasised the                          
 principles of the movement that no State should acquire or occupy                        
 territories by the use of force, that the terri- tory acquired in this                   
 way should be returned, that no act of ag- gression should be                            
 committed against any State, that the terri- torial integrity and                        
 sovereignty of all States should be res- pected, that no State should                    
 try to interfere or intervene in the internal affairs of other States                    
 and that all differences or claims which may exist between States                        
 should be settled by peaceful means in order that peaceful relations                     
 should prevail among other member States. To this end the Conference                     
 asked the Foreign Ministers of Cuba, India, Zambia and the Head of the                   
 Political Department of the P.L.O. to exert all peaceful efforts in                      
 order to, contribute to the implementation of the afore- mentioned                       
 principles. The creation of this Group of Four, after earlier efforts                    
 in a similar direction had not resulted in success, was a significant                    
 achievement to seek a solution to the conflict through the non-aligned                   
 forum of which both Iraq and Iran are members.                                           
                                                                                          
 (ix)                                                                                     
                                                                                          
 India's relations with Arab countries                                                    
                                                                                          
 A perceptible renewal of warmth characterised India's rela- tions with                   
 the Arab world. The Governments in West Asia and North Africa                            
 responded enthusiastically to the initiative taken by the new                            
 Government to foster closer political and eco- nomic relations with                      
 countries in the region.                                                                 
                                                                                          
 India continued to believe that the question of Palestine was at the                     
 core of the Arab-Israeli conflict. A just peace in the region could                      
 only be based on Israel's total and unconditional withdrawal from all                    
 the occupied Arab territories including Jerusalem, and the restoration                   
 of the inalienable national rights of the Palestinian people to                          
 self-determination, national independ- ence and sovereignty. As the                      
 sole and legitimate representative of the Palestinian people, the                        
 P.L.O.'s participation in any efforts aimed at, solving this problem                     
 was essential.                                                                           
                                                                                          
 India's relations with South East Asia                                                   
                                                                                          
 With countries in South East Asia, India shares abiding ties of                          
 history and culture.                                                                     
                                                                                          
 The people of Kampuchea have become enmeshed in the attempts by                          
 external powers to incite conflict, and to cause destabilisation, in                     
 all the States of Indo-China. India regrets that such attempts have                      
 not yet ceased.                                                                          
                                                                                          
 In view of the situation obtaining in that country and the urgent need                   
 to contribute to the, promotion of stability in the region, the                          
 Minister of External Affairs announced in Lok Sabha on 7 July 1980,                      
 India's decision to establish immediately diplo- matic relations with                    
 the Government of the People's Republic of Kampuchea headed by                           
 President Heng Samrin.                                                                   
                                                                                          
 India donated rice, to Kampuchea, besides giving other assistance.                       
                                                                                          
 India's relations with the other States of Indo-China continued to                       
 improve during the year. The visit of the Vietnamese Prime Minister in                   
 April 1980 gave an opportunity to further strengthen relations, with                     
 that country. With the Lao People's Democratic Republic, India's                         
 relations continued to be close and warm.                                                
                                                                                          
 India has welcomed the setting up of ASEAN since its incep- tion in                      
 1967. It has consistently lent support to the endeavours                                 
                                                                                          
 (x)                                                                                      
                                                                                          
 of these countries to make the region a zone of peace, freedom and                       
 neutrality, free of interference by external powers.                                     
                                                                                          
 India's relations with USSR and USA                                                      
                                                                                          
 India's relations with the Soviet Union were close, friendly, mature                     
 and stable.                                                                              
                                                                                          
 The President of India's visit to the Soviet Union in Septem-                            
 ber/October 1980 was followed by President Brezhnev's visit to India                     
 in December 1980. In addition to further strengthening the cooperation                   
 between the two countries, these high level ex- change of visits                         
 imparted a new dynamism and versatility to Indo-USSR relations. The                      
 signing of four agreements on econo- mic and technical cooperation, on                   
 trade matters, on cooperation in the field of cinematography and for                     
 cultural and scientific exchanges during President Brezhnev's visit                      
 underlined this reality.                                                                 
                                                                                          
 India's relations with the USA remained on an even keel and were                         
 characterised by regular exchange of official level visits, pro-                         
 viding an opportunity for greater mutual understanding on bilateral                      
 and multilateral issues.                                                                 
                                                                                          
 A problem which continued to cause concern during the year was the                       
 supply of nuclear fuel from the USA for Tarapore. While supply of one                    
 shipment was welcomed by India, the im- position of extraneous                           
 conditions for the supply of further ship- ments was regretted.                          
                                                                                          
 The question of access of Indian goods to markets in the USA also                        
 remained unresolved despite efforts for its speedy solution.                             
                                                                                          
 India's relations with Africa                                                            
                                                                                          
 India's relations with Africa, with which it has traditional ties                        
 going back several centuries and which have particularly been                            
 manifested through the common struggle against colonialism, continued                    
 to develop smoothly. One of the major problems facing the Non-aligned                    
 Movement is the continuance of the last vestige of colonialism in                        
 Namibia and of the continued practice of abhorrent racist doctrine of                    
 apartheid in South Africa. India has given both moral and material                       
 support to the African libera- tion movements in their struggle for                      
 freedom.                                                                                 
                                                                                          
 India attached importance to developing economic coopera- tion with                      
 African countries through trade, joint ventures, techni-                                 
                                                                                          
 (xi)                                                                                     
                                                                                          
 cal assistance and training of personnel. This will continue to be a                     
 major element of India's economic policy.                                                
                                                                                          
 Japan                                                                                    
                                                                                          
 India and Japan share a common cultural and religious tradition to                       
 which has been added wide-ranging economic co- operation as the                          
 foundation for further growth of their relation- ship. During the year                   
 this relationship developed through ex- change of visits and in a                        
 spirit of cooperation and mutual respect.                                                
                                                                                          
 Central and South America and the Caribbean The development of India's                   
 relations with the countries of Central and South America and the                        
 Caribbean proceeded at a quicker pace. In India's view the potential,                    
 particularly for economic cooperation with these countries was vast                      
 and the efforts of India were directed to ensuring that this potential                   
 was built up.                                                                            
                                                                                          
 India's cultural ties particularly with the countries of the Caribbean                   
 have been wide-ranging and it was the effort of India to further                         
 develop these ties during the year.                                                      
                                                                                          
 In recognition of the potential that this region offered for                             
 development of meaningful relations and cooperation, a con- ference of                   
 the Heads of Indian-Missions in the region, presided over by the                         
 Minister of External Affairs, was held in Mexico in October 1980.                        
                                                                                          
 Europe                                                                                   
                                                                                          
 The many-faceted and time-tested cooperation between India and                           
 socialist Countries of Eastern Europe-continued to progress                              
 satisfactorily during the year. Through mutual exchange of visits a                      
 number of new initiatives were taken by India to further develop and                     
 consolidate this relationship.                                                           
                                                                                          
 India's relations with the countries of Western Europe remain- ed                        
 cordial and were further strengthened by exchange of high level visits                   
 and intensive cooperation in economic, technical and cultural fields.                    
                                                                                          
 Commemoration of the Fifteenth Century of the Hijra Era                                  
                                                                                          
 The year coincided with the beginning of the Fifteenth Cen- tury of                      
 the Hijra Era. On this occasion, the President and the                                   
                                                                                          
 (xii)                                                                                    
                                                                                          
 Prime Minister sent messages of greetings to their counterparts in                       
 Islamic countries.                                                                       
                                                                                          
 New International Information Order                                                      
                                                                                          
 Non-aligned News Agencies Pool                                                           
                                                                                          
 India which had taken a leading part in the formation and subsequent                     
 work of the non-aligned news agencies pool, hosted the Sixth Meeting                     
 of the Coordinating Committee of the Non- aligned News Agencies Pool                     
 from 16 to 18 February in which 23 countries out of 25 members of the                    
 Coordinating Committee participated. In addition, eight other Members                    
 of the Pool and seven international organisations also attended. A                       
 number of Indian initiatives during this meeting were approved                           
 unanimously.                                                                             
                                                                                          
 New International Economic Order                                                         
                                                                                          
 Global economic relations today are characterised by the North-South                     
 divide, the attempts by the more prosperous and economically powerful                    
 nations to exercise control over the large number of nations who are                     
 economically weak; and the widening gap between rich and poor.                           
                                                                                          
 In this context, India's efforts during 1980-81, undertaken within the                   
 non-aligned movement and the Group of 77, have been directed at the                      
 following broad objectives :                                                             
                                                                                          
 (1) to evolve a united approach on matters related to the North-South                    
 dialogue and the forthcoming global round of negotiations and the                        
 establishment of a New International Economic Order.                                     
                                                                                          
 (2) to evolve action oriented programmes relating to:                                    
                                                                                          
 (i) Individual Commodity agreements;                                                     
                                                                                          
 (ii) Establishment and operation for the wider benefit of developing,                    
 commodity exporting countries, of a Common Fund, including its second                    
 window;                                                                                  
                                                                                          
 (iii) Countering the trends of protectionism through tariff and                          
 non-tariff barriers, in the trade poli- cies of the advanced                             
 industrial countries.                                                                    
                                                                                          
 (3) to evolve a practical and united strategy to further the trade and                   
 developmental objectives of the deve- loping countries.                                  
                                                                                          
 (xiii)                                                                                   
                                                                                          
 (4) to devise measures and plans by consensus for eco- nomic and                         
 technical cooperation among developing countries.                                        
                                                                                          
 India in its capacity as Chairman of the Group of 77 con- tinued to                      
 participate in the efforts to develop a dialogue with the developing                     
 countries, particularly at the 11th Special Session of the UN General                    
 Assembly.                                                                                
                                                                                          
 No substantial progress was made at any of the meetings. Nevertheless,                   
 India responded positively to the initiative taken by Austria and                        
 Mexico, in the wake of the near failure of the 11th Special Session                      
 for a restricted summit meeting to consider the problems of                              
 cooperation and development. India participat- ed in the meeting of                      
 the Foreign Ministers from 11 countries held in Vienna in November                       
 1980, for consultation regarding such a meeting. The second meeting is                   
 scheduled to take place in Vienna in March 1981 to finalise the list                     
 of participants and to consider the agenda and procedures for the                        
 summit meeting, The summit meeting is expected to take place in June                     
 1981.                                                                                    
                                                                                          
 The concept of economic and technical cooperation among developing                       
 countries has emerged as a major option for the future. At the meeting                   
 of the Commonwealth Heads of Gov- ernment of the Asia Pacific Region,                    
 held in Delhi in September 1980, this was an important theme for                         
 discussion and specific measures were discussed by which the countries                   
 of the region could cooperate with and help each other in economic                       
 matters.                                                                                 
                                                                                          
 In pursuance of this policy India has established over the years a                       
 large number of joint ventures in developing countries, as also the                      
 deputation of experts, grant of credits and provision for meeting                        
 requirements of essential commodities.                                                   
                                                                                          
 In the West Asia region, during the year some Rs. 2,000, crores worth                    
 of projects were allocated to Indian concerns.                                           
                                                                    TOP                   
                                                                                          
 INDIA'S NEIGHBOURS                                                                       
 CHAPTER I                                                                                
                                                                                          
 INDIA'S NEIGHBOURS                                                                       
                                                                                          
 India having close and friendly relations with Afghanistan, was                          
 seriously concerned over developments in that country. It was vitally                    
 interested in the security, independence, sovereignty, territorial                       
 integrity and non-aligned status of this traditionally friendly                          
 neighbour.                                                                               
                                                                                          
 With a view to defuse the situation, Shri R. D. Sathe, Foreign                           
 Secretary and Shri S. K. Singh, Additional Secretary in the Minis-                       
 try, visited Kabul and met the Afghan leaders. The Minister of                           
 External Affairs, on more than one occasion, held talks with the                         
 Foreign Minister of Afghanistan in New York. India also, discussed the                   
 problem with leaders of a number of other countries.                                     
                                                                                          
 India's stand on Afghanistan was guided by the principles that (i)                       
 there should be no interference or intervention in the affairs of one                    
 country by any other country by the use of, armed force, (ii) there                      
 should be no effort to destabilise existing regimes by interference or                   
 subversion from outside and (iii) there should be no destabilisation                     
 of the South Asian region by excessive in- duction of arms, the entry                    
 of great power influence and resultant confrontation. It was India's                     
 conviction that the primary need was to prevent escalation of tension                    
 and to work ceaselessly for finding a solution through political and                     
 diplomatic measures.                                                                     
                                                                                          
 India pursued its efforts to improve relations with Bangla- desh. A                      
 constructive dialogue was maintained by the two governments through a                    
 regular exchange of visits by Ministers and senior officials.                            
 Particular mention may be made of the meeting between the Bangladesh                     
 President and the Prime Minis- ter of India, during the former's visit                   
 to New Delhi in September 1980, in connection with the Second Regional                   
 Conference of Commonwealth Heads of Government. The visit of the                         
 External Affairs Minister to Dacca, from Aug 16, 1980 to 18 August                       
 1980, pro- vided an opportunity for wide-ranging discussions with the                    
 Bangladesh government on important bilateral questions such as the                       
 Land Boundary, the Maritime Boundary, illegal movement across the                        
 border and railway transit facilities. While imme-                                       
                                                                                          
 pg1                                                                                      
                                                                                          
 pg2                                                                                      
                                                                                          
 diate solutions could not be found for many of these questions, there                    
 was definite movement on a range of bilateral issues and a schedule                      
 for further action was drawn up.                                                         
                                                                                          
 In October 1980, official level talks were held in Delhi to expedite                     
 the implementation of the Indo-Bangladesh Land Boundary Agreement of                     
 1974. Specific programmes were drawn up with a view to completing                        
 demarcation by the end of the 1981-82 field season. Official level                       
 talks were resumed for the delimitation of the Maritime Boundary in                      
 December 1980, in Dacca. Six rounds of discussions had previously been                   
 held between 1974 and 1978.                                                              
                                                                                          
 As a follow up on Bangladesh's agreement in principle to provide rail                    
 transit facilities requested by India, a delegation from India visited                   
 Dacca in October 1980 for detailed discussions on arrangements for                       
 goods transit traffic between West Bengal and Tripura through                            
 Bangladesh. A technical sub-group inspect- ed possible sites for the                     
 construction of railway sidings, to con- nect the Bangladesh Railway                     
 system with the town of Agartala in Tripura. The discussions during                      
 the visit marked a signifi- cant advance towards establishing viable                     
 transit facilities. In the field of science, education, culture and                      
 social welfare acti- vities, India and Bangladesh decided to end the                     
 ad hoc approach followed during the last 4 years and, on 30 December                     
 1980, a Cultural Protocol ensuring regular exchanges was signed. This                    
 was done within the framework of the Cultural Cooperation Agreement                      
 concluded between the two countries on 30 Decem- ber 1972.                               
                                                                                          
 The visit of the Indian Commerce Minister, Shri Pranab Mukherjee, to                     
 Dacca in October 1980 gave a fillip to Indo- Bangladesh commercial                       
 exchanges. A new Trade Agreement between the two countries was signed.                   
 It will remain in force for an initial period of 3 years. During the                     
 same visit a Memo- randum of Understanding between India and                             
 Bangladesh was also signed by which the value ceiling of Taka 25                         
 crores on the export of Wet Blue Leather to India was raised to Taka                     
 40 crores and India agreed to buy urea fertiliser upto a quantity of 1                   
 lakh tons and to consider import of certain categories of drugs,                         
 furnace oil; Jamdani sarees and handicrafts. Bangladesh re- quested                      
 the supply of steam-coal during 1980-81, apart from showing interest                     
 in the import of pig iron, GI sheet, wheat seeds, oil-seeds and                          
 vegetable seeds.                                                                         
                                                                                          
 pg3                                                                                      
                                                                                          
 As stipulated in the Agreement on Sharing of Ganga Waters at Farakka                     
 and on Augmenting its Flows (1977), the first re- view to assess the                     
 working, impact, implementation and progress of the arrangements                         
 contained in the Agreement, was initialled at Dacca on 5 November.                       
 Another Ministerial level review meeting was held at Delhi in January                    
 1981. The two sides ex- changed reports on the subject, both in                          
 relation to the short- term sharing arrangements and the provisions                      
 concerning aug- mentation of the dry season flows of the Ganga at                        
 Farakka. The agreement required the Indo-Bangladesh Joint Rivers                         
 Commis- sion to submit recommendations to the two governments on an                      
 augmentation scheme within a period of three years. The JRC was unable                   
 in this period to even commence examination of the schemes proposed by                   
 India and Bangladesh respectively, for reasons made clear by the                         
 Indian side at the review meeting. By contrast, the short term sharing                   
 arrangements envisaged in the Agreement were faithfully and fully                        
 implemented.                                                                             
                                                                                          
 India's title to the newly-emerged New Moore Island was questioned by                    
 Bangladesh. India supplied Bangladesh with data establishing its title                   
 and further discussions are to be held with Bangladesh on this subject                   
 during which an attempt would be made to remove any doubts which might                   
 exist concerning India's rightful title.                                                 
                                                                                          
 A number of high-level visits exchanged with Bhutan testi- fied to                       
 India's close relations with that country. The Foreign Minister of                       
 Bhutan visited India in August 1980. The Minister of External Affairs                    
 exchanged views with him on matters of common interest and                               
 international issues when he met him in New York. The visit of the                       
 King of Bhutan from 9 to 11 January 1981 reaffirmed the unique bonds                     
 between India and Bhutan based on trust, understanding,                                  
 interdependence and mutuality of interests.                                              
                                                                                          
 Apart from these exchanges, several official delegations and officials                   
 from both countries exchanged visits to discuss a variety of bilateral                   
 and other issues.                                                                        
                                                                                          
 India continued to give economic and technical assistance to Bhutan.                     
 During the Fourth Five-Year Plan implemented by Bhutan with Indian                       
 economic and technical assistance, Bhutan made significant strides in                    
 the fields of education, public health, agriculture, industrial                          
 development and in the provision of social amenities and building of                     
 infra-structural facilities such as roads,                                               
                                                                                          
 pg4                                                                                      
                                                                                          
 bridges, communications and telecommunications, power, etc.                              
 Discussions are currently taking place with Bhutan on the size of                        
 India's participation in its Fifth Five-Year Plan.                                       
                                                                                          
 The services of Indian experts and consultants, as in the past, were                     
 provided to Bhutan on deputation. India also conti- nued to offer                        
 scholarships to Bhutanese students and trainees for higher studies in                    
 India.                                                                                   
                                                                                          
 President U Nc Win, accompanied by the Foreign Minister and senior                       
 officials, paid an official visit to India from 20 to 22 November. The                   
 Burmese leaders had talks with Indian leaders and senior officials.                      
 Various issues of mutual interest were discussed between the two                         
 sides. Possibilities of increasing economic and cultural exchanges                       
 were also considered.                                                                    
                                                                                          
 In response to an invitation from the President of Burma, former                         
 Burmese Prime Minister U Nu left India for Rangoon on 29 July.                           
                                                                                          
 Books on Buddhism and collected works of Mahatma Gandhi were presented                   
 by the Indian Ambassador in Rangoon to the Director General of Burma's                   
 Higher Education Depart- ment.                                                           
                                                                                          
 India's relations with Iran were marked by cordiality and by mutual                      
 appreciation of each other's point of view. Iranian leaders showed an                    
 increasing awareness of the potential for economic cooperation between                   
 the two, countries and, following talks held during the visit to New                     
 Delhi of Mr. Reza-Sadr, Iranian Minister of Commerce, in June 1980, it                   
 was decided to expand Indo-Iran cooperation in trade, industry,                          
 shipping, transport and railways, agriculture, planning and science                      
 and technology. An Engineering Export Promotion Council delegation                       
 also visited Iran from India in July and its visit was followed up by                    
 that of a delegation from the Association of Indian Engineering Indus-                   
 tries in September. Unfortunately, the outbreak of war bet- ween Iran                    
 and Iraq interrupted further progress in the develop- ment of economic                   
 cooperation between India and Iran. Signi- ficant progress in the                        
 development of such cooperation may be expected after the termination                    
 of hostilities.                                                                          
                                                                                          
 Shri R. Venkataraman, Finance Minister, visited Iran in September                        
 1980, as the Prime Minister's special envoy. He found the Iranian                        
 leadership fully appreciative of India's point of view with regard to                    
 India's classification among countries en- titled to concessional OPEC                   
 terms.                                                                                   
                                                                                          
 pg5                                                                                      
                                                                                          
 A delegation representing a cross-section of Iranian econo- mic and                      
 industrial organisations, led by Dr. Syed Ali Sattari- pour, Deputy                      
 Minister of Industry and Mines, paid a visit to the Engineering Trade                    
 Fair organised by the Association of Engi- neering Industry of India                     
 in New Delhi in February, 1981. Iran also continued to be a reliable                     
 source for oil supplies.                                                                 
                                                                                          
 There was notable Progress in India's relations with Maldives both in                    
 the political and economic spheres. The level of India's                                 
 representation in Male was raised with the appointment of a resident                     
 Ambassador.                                                                              
                                                                                          
 Talks for a bilateral trade agreement between India and Maldives were                    
 held in November 1980. An agreement is ex- pected to be                                  
 signed-shortly. Indo-Maldivian trade is expected to increase                             
 substantially after conclusion of the Agreement.                                         
                                                                                          
 The IAAI have nearly completed their contract for the Hulule airport                     
 expansion project in the Maldives. The runway is already complete. The                   
 terminal building and the ancillaries are expected to be completed by                    
 the middle of 1981.                                                                      
                                                                                          
 India continued its efforts to further develop and strengthen its                        
 multi-faceted relationship with Nepal.                                                   
                                                                                          
 During the visit of His Majesty, the King of Nepal, in March 1980,                       
 discussions covered bilateral relations including political, economic                    
 and technical matters. The situation in the region was also discussed,                   
 with both sides agreeing that efforts should be made by all the                          
 countries of the region as well as outside powers to reduce tension in                   
 the area. It was agreed that every effort should be made to expand                       
 Indo-Nepalese relations in mutually beneficial spheres and that there                    
 should be more fre- quent consultations between the governments of the                   
 two coun- tries to achieve these objectives.                                             
                                                                                          
 In July 1980 an agreement was signed with Nepal for the construction                     
 of a micro-wave link between Birganj and Raxaul. Under the agreement,                    
 technical and material assistance amount- ing to Rs. 1.2 million is to                   
 be offered to the Government of Nepal. The link will make 36 channels                    
 available for communi- cations between Nepal and India.                                  
                                                                                          
 Mr. Jagdish Shamshere Rana, the Nepalese Foreign Secre- tary, paid an                    
 official visit to New Delhi from 31 July to 3 August 1980, as part of                    
 the continuing bilateral consultations between the Foreign Secretaries                   
 of the two countries, Mr. Rana                                                           
                                                                                          
 pg6                                                                                      
                                                                                          
 and the Foreign Secretary, Shri R. D. Sathe, reviewed regional                           
 developments, including developments in Afghanistan, South East Asia                     
 and the Indian Ocean and discussed bilateral issues and other matters                    
 of mutual interest.                                                                      
                                                                                          
 During the visit of the Nepalese Irrigation Secretary, in August 1980,                   
 India stressed its determination to cooperate fully with Nepal in the                    
 development of water resources to the mutual benefit of the two                          
 countries.                                                                               
                                                                                          
 On the proposed Pancheshwar Hydel Project Mahakali River on the                          
 Indo-Nepal Border it was decided, following discussions with the                         
 Nepalese authorities in October, that Joint investiga- tions for the                     
 Pancheshwar Dam should start as soon as possible. It was also agreed                     
 that a meeting of the main Karnali Committee should be held as soon as                   
 possible.                                                                                
                                                                                          
 The main committee on the Karnali Project met in Kathmandu on 19 and                     
 20 January 1981. Both the Nepalese and the Indian side agreed to                         
 undertake a comprehensive study of the main Karnali Project under                        
 Joint sponsorship and on- going supervision of both countries. The                       
 Nepalese side agreed to actively pursue their request to the UNDP and                    
 the World Bank for financing of the comprehensive study and                              
 preparation of the detailed project report on the main Karnali                           
 Project. The Indian side also agreed to absorb power from the main                       
 Karnali Project on mutually agreed terms on a continuing and stable                      
 basis.                                                                                   
                                                                                          
 India continued to assist in the implementation of develop- ment                         
 programmes in Nepal. The outlay of Indian assistance to Nepal totalled                   
 approximately Rs. 14 crores for 1980-81. A major portion of this                         
 assistance was earmarked for ongoing pro- jects like the Devighat                        
 Hydro-electric Project and the East West Highway (Central Sector).                       
 India continued to make a major contribution towards development of                      
 technical, manpower re- sources in Nepal.                                                
                                                                                          
 Ever since assumption of office in January 1980, the Gov- ernment                        
 endeavoured to assure the Government and people of Pakistan of its                       
 continued interest in good relations with that country. The visit of                     
 Foreign Secretary, Shri R. D. Sathe (February 1980) and the special                      
 emissary of the Prime Minis- ter, Sardar Swaran Singh (April 1980), to                   
 Islamabad were part of the confidence-building exercise undertaken by                    
 India from time to time. The Prime Minister met President Zia-ul-                        
                                                                                          
 pg7                                                                                      
                                                                                          
 Haq of Pakistan in Salisbury and the Foreign Minister of Pakis- tan                      
 Mr. Agha Shahi also visited New Delhi in July 1980. Through these                        
 dialogues India hoped to promote trust and understanding between the                     
 two countries and to create a climate for speedy normalisation of                        
 relations.                                                                               
                                                                                          
 India was, however, concerned at some developments which tended to                       
 cause a setback to its efforts to improve relations. During the                          
 Islamic Foreign Ministers' Conference in January, 1981 and at the                        
 Islamic Summit held in the same month, Presi- dent Zia chose to raise                    
 the Kashmir question. He had referred to it earlier at the UN General                    
 Assembly Session on 3 October 1980. These attempts to internationalise                   
 Indo-Pak differences over Kashmir were in contravention of the Simla                     
 Agreement and were viewed by India as a trend towards retarding the                      
 progress of normalisation. Similarly, disturbances in Moradabad and                      
 some other places in August 1980, were commented upon by the offi-                       
 cial spokesman and the censored media in Pakistan and this too had a                     
 decelerating effect on improvement of relations between India and                        
 Pakistan. Time and again it was impressed on Pakis- tan that the                         
 raising of purely bilateral, controversial and emotional issues in a                     
 propagandist manner in international fora, had a nega- tive effect on                    
 India's efforts aimed at the creation of a climate in which these                        
 issues can be amicably resolved.                                                         
                                                                                          
 India was also disturbed to note the rather irresponsible speculation                    
 in Pakistani media about an impending conflict be- tween India and                       
 Pakistan. There was no substance in such reports and in a letter to                      
 President Zia, Prime Minister Indira Gandhi pointed out that "as                         
 always the people and the Govern- ment of India and I personally stand                   
 committed to the promotion of friendship, understanding and                              
 cooperation between our two peoples. We are equally committed to                         
 respect Pakistan's national unity, territorial integrity, political                      
 independence and sovereign equality".                                                    
                                                                                          
 Undeterred by minor set-backs to Indo-Pak relations, India tried to                      
 explore several concrete areas of cooperation with Pakis- tan. These                     
 included visits of pilgrims, trade, tourisms, sports and cultural                        
 exchanges and cooperation in various international fora on matters of                    
 common interests. In following this policy, India was inspired by the                    
 belief that political reconciliation, economic cooperation and greater                   
 cultural and people to people interaction would be of abiding benefit                    
 to the peoples of India and Pakistan and contribute to peace and                         
 stability in the sub-continent.                                                          
                                                                                          
 pg8                                                                                      
                                                                                          
 Indo-Sri Lankan relations continued to be warm and cordial. In                           
 September 1980, President Jayewardene, accompanied by his Foreign                        
 Minister, visited India. During this visit, President Jaye- wardene                      
 had discussions with the Prime Minister, Indira Gandhi, which helped                     
 to further strengthen the close and friendly relations between the two                   
 countries.                                                                               
                                                                                          
 India and Sri Lanka continued efforts to resolve the problem arising                     
 from stateless persons of Indian origin in Sri Lanka. Pro- gress in                      
 this regard was somewhat slower than anticipated, on account of                          
 complex reasons. The two governments are in touch with each other with                   
 a view to expediting resolution of the pro- blem.                                        
                                                                                          
 There were promising signs of increased economic coopera- tion with                      
 Sri Lanka over the coming years. In January 1981, an agreement was                       
 signed under which Sri Lankan entrepreneurs are increasingly becoming                    
 aware of Indian capabilities in the indus- trial sector. The                             
 micro-wave link between the two countries, being constructed with                        
 Indian financial assistance is expected to be completed during the                       
 coming years. India made available to Sri Lanka, further credit of Rs.                   
 100 million. The credit is to be utilised by Sri Lanka to purchase                       
 from India, motor spares, trans- port equipment, railway equipment and                   
 spares, amongst other items.                                                             
                                                                                          
 In the cultural field, exchanges in sports and the performing artistes                   
 continued as before. Aug 16, 1980                                                        
                                                                    TOP                   
                                                                                          
 SOUTH-EAST ASIA                                                                          
 CHAPTER II                                                                               
                                                                                          
 SOUTH-EAST ASIA                                                                          
                                                                                          
 Interested in the maintenance of peace and stability in South- East                      
 Asia, India showed concern at the interference in affairs of the                         
 region by the Big Powers. With its traditional ties of friend- ship                      
 bolstered by growing cooperation with both ASEAN coun- tries and the                     
 States of Indochina, it continued to lead support to the endeavours of                   
 the countries of the region to tackle their problems and resolve their                   
 differences through bilateral discus- sions so that the region could                     
 become a zone of peace, freedom and neutrality. India was of the view                    
 that development of rela- tions with South-East Asian States would                       
 enable it to assist in the solution of the problems confronting the                      
 region. Contact with the ASEAN was maintained when the Minister of                       
 External Affairs met his Philippines counterpart in New York in July                     
 1980, in the latter's capacity as the current Chairman of the ASEAN                      
 Standing Committee.                                                                      
                                                                                          
 India's relations with Indonesia were strengthened through exchange of                   
 a number of high level visits. The State visit of President Suharto,                     
 from Sep 01, 1980 to 4 December, 1980, marked a new stage in the                         
 developmental of bilateral ties. Discussion held during the visit                        
 revealed similarity of views on major international pro- blems. Both                     
 sides expressed their determination to further enlarge the areas of                      
 economic and technical co-operation between them. It was agreed that                     
 official and experts of the two coun- tries would meet to identify                       
 further areas of co-operation.                                                           
                                                                                          
 The momentum generated by President Suharto's visit for increased                        
 economic and industrial co-operation was sought to be carried forward                    
 through the visits to India of Mr. Ismail Saleh, Secretary to the                        
 Cabinet, Mr. Janari, Director Animal Diseases Research Centre and Dr.                    
 Rusil Hakim, Director Central Research Institute for Agriculture of                      
 Indonesia. Government of India have gifted quantities of wheat seeds                     
 for experimental plantation in Indonesia.                                                
                                                                                          
 Sardar Swaran Singh visited Indonesia in September as special envoy of                   
 the Prime Minister. The primary purpose of his visit was to seek                         
 Indonesia's support for India's desire to be                                             
                                                                                          
 pg9                                                                                      
                                                                                          
 pg10                                                                                     
                                                                                          
 in an appropriate category for compensation purposes, based on per                       
 capita consumption of oil by the OPEC. A team of the National Defence                    
 College visited Indonesia in October 1980.                                               
                                                                                          
 Prime Minister sent condolence to President Suharto and Mrs. Hatta on                    
 the passing away of Dr. Mohd. Hatta, former Vice-President and                           
 Co-Proclaimer of Indonesia's independence.                                               
                                                                                          
 The Prime Minister of Malaysia, Dato Hussain Onn, visited India in                       
 September 1980. The visit provided an opportunity for exchange of                        
 views at the highest level on matter of common interest.                                 
                                                                                          
 Bilaterial talks at the level of senior officials and the first                          
 meeting of the Joint Committee, set up under the terms of the                            
 Indo-Malaysian Economic and Technical Co-operation Agree- ment signed                    
 in January 1979, were held in September 1980. The discussions revealed                   
 a broad identity of views and perceptions and ways and means were                        
 considered to promote further cultural and scientific exchanges. Apart                   
 from further promoting pro- grammes of co-operation in such fields as                    
 industry, agriculture and science and technology, the Committee also                     
 reviewed the trends in bilateral trade and possibilities of further                      
 strengthening the bonds of industrial collaboration.                                     
                                                                                          
 The Minister of State for Commerce Shri Khurshid Alam Khan visited                       
 Kuala Lumpur in January, 1981 and held talks with Malaysian leader for                   
 intensifying commercial and industrial co-operation.                                     
                                                                                          
 The Indo-Malaysian ties in the economic and industrial fields were                       
 further developed with the implementation of new joint ventures. It is                   
 pertinent to note that Malaysia has the largest number of Indian joint                   
 ventures abroad. There were exchanges of trade-cum-study teams. A                        
 large delegation of the Rubber Industry Small Holders Authority of                       
 Malaysia visited India in February, 1981 to study cottage industries,                    
 horticulture and dairy. Another delegation of the Ipoh Indian Chamber                    
 of Com- merce visited India on a fact-finding-cum-study tour to,                         
 explore the scope of further industrial co-operation between the two                     
 countries. India also continued to provide training facilities to                        
 Malaysian students.                                                                      
                                                                                          
 The President sent a message of greetings to the Malaysian King on his                   
 coronation on 10 July 1980.                                                              
                                                                                          
 pg11                                                                                     
                                                                                          
 A team from the National Defence College visited Malaysia in October                     
 1980.                                                                                    
                                                                                          
 India participated in a number of international conference held in the                   
 Philippines. The Finance Minister, Shri R. Venkata- raman, visited the                   
 Philippines to attend the meeting of the Asian Development Bank. Shri                    
 N. D. Tiwari, Minister for Planning and Labour, took part in the Asian                   
 Labour Ministers Conference held in November. The Minister of State                      
 for Tourism Shri C. L. Chandrakar, led the Indian delegation to the                      
 World Tourism Conference held in the Philippines in September 1980.                      
                                                                                          
 A twenty four member trade-cum-study team from the Philippines visited                   
 India in October-November 1980.                                                          
                                                                                          
 Cultural relations were continued with the visit of the Indian                           
 magician, P.C. Sarkar Jr. and two Indian cultural troupes who gave                       
 performances at Manila.                                                                  
                                                                                          
 Relations with Singapore continued to be friendly and co-operative and                   
 were marked by exchange of a number of visits. The Army Chief of                         
 Singapore, Maj. General Winston Chu, visited India in October. India                     
 provided training facilities to RAFS trainees in mountaineering and                      
 two of India's NCC Air Cadets participated in NCC annual camp held in                    
 Singapore in May/June 1980. A team of the National Defence College                       
 visited Singapore in October 1980.                                                       
                                                                                          
 The trade between India and Singapore showed an upswing and new Indian                   
 joint ventures continued to be set up in that country. A number of                       
 important individuals and trade and industry delegations visited                         
 Singapore.                                                                               
                                                                                          
 The Prime Minister sent a message of congratulations and good wishes                     
 to the Prime Minister of Singapore on his victory in the Parliamentary                   
 elections. The Minister of External Affairs also sent his                                
 felicitations to the new Foreign Minister Mr. S. Dhanabalan.                             
                                                                                          
 India continued to receive trainees from Thailand under the Colombo                      
 Plan, ITEC and other international assistance program- mes for                           
 training in such fields as agriculture, metereology, standardisation,                    
 hydrology and data communication. Trade delegations and sale-cum-study                   
 teems from India visited Thailand including those from Bharat Chambers                   
 of Commerce and FIEO (Federation of Indian Export Organisations).                        
                                                                                          
 pg12                                                                                     
                                                                                          
 A wholly Indian Engineering Exhibition Indee'81 was held in Bangkok in                   
 January, 1981. It was inaugurated by the Thai Minister of Industry,                      
 Maj. Gen. Chatichai Choonhavan. The Minister of Commerce Shri Khurshid                   
 Alam Khan visited Thai- land on the occasion and held talks with Thai                    
 leaders during which they expressed interest in greater Indo-Thai                        
 industrial co-operation, including the setting up of export-oriented                     
 industries.                                                                              
                                                                                          
 A high-powered delegation of FICCI visited the ASEAN countries in                        
 January/February, 1981 to identify areas of increas- ed economic and                     
 industrial co-operation between India and the ASEAN countreis.                           
                                                                                          
 A 4-member delegation from the ASEAN countreis repre- senting                            
 Malaysia, Indonesia, Thailand and the Philippines visited India in                       
 January, 1981 to study the women's social welfare activiteis and                         
 programmes.                                                                              
                                                                                          
 The Vietnamese Vice-Foreign Minister, Mr. Vo Dong Giang, paid a visit                    
 to India from 5 to 7 January, 1981 to hold discussions concerning the                    
 Ministerial Conference of the Non- Aligned Countries and matters of                      
 bilateral interest. The Foreign Minister of Vietnam, Mr. Nguyen Co                       
 Thach paid a visit to India in the first half of February to attend                      
 the Non-Aligned Foreign Ministers Conference. They also called on the                    
 Foreign Minister and discussed matters concerning the conference, the                    
 situation in South-East Asia and subject of bilateral interest.                          
                                                                                          
 India's relations with Vietnam were further strengthened through                         
 economic co-operation. In August a credit agreement was signed between                   
 the Industrial Development Bank of India under which the bank would                      
 give a credit of Rs. 150 million to Vietnam machinery from India. In                     
 September a rice loan agreemnet was concluded under which India would                    
 make avail- able to Vietnam a loan of 50,000 tons of rice. A                             
 Memorandum on consultations on scientific and technological                              
 co-operation between the two countries was also signed. In the                           
 cultural field. a new Cultural Exchange Programme for 1980-81 was                        
 worked out between the two countries.                                                    
                                                                                          
 The Minister of External Affairs announced in Lok Sabha on 7 July, the                   
 decision of India to establish immediately diplo- matic relations with                   
 the Government of People's Republic of Kampuchea headed by President                     
 Heng Samsin. The ASEAN countries expressed disappointment and                            
 unhappiness over this                                                                    
                                                                                          
 pg13                                                                                     
                                                                                          
 decision of India. India, however, patiently explained the rationale                     
 of this decision and the positive results that could flow from it. It                    
 was pointed out that it was recognition of the reality of the                            
 political situation inside Kampuchea.                                                    
                                                                                          
 The Embassy of the People's Republic of Kampuchea started functioning                    
 in New Delhi in January 1981. The Indian Embassy in Phnom Penh also                      
 was opened during the same month. The first Ambassador of the People's                   
 Republic of Kampuchea to India, Mr. Dith Munty presented the letter of                   
 credence to the President on 6 February, 1981.                                           
                                                                                          
 The Prime Minister, in a message to the President of Kampuchea                           
 affirmed the ties of geography, history, shared traditions and values                    
 which bound India and Kampuchea. She also stated, "within our limited                    
 resources, India will be glad to provide assistance to the, people of                    
 Kampuchea in their dedicated efforts towards reconstruction and                          
 economic development." India donated 3,000 tons of rice on bilateral                     
 basis and 2,000 tons of rice through the UNICEF to Kampuchea, besides                    
 giving as gift stationery material worth Rs. 2.5 lakhs.                                  
                                                                                          
 India continued to maintain close ties with Lao People's Democratic                      
 Republic. The Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign Minister of Laos, Mr.                    
 Phoune Sipasouth, paid a visit to India in February to attend the                        
 Non-Aligned Foreign Ministers Con- ference and utilised the                              
 opportunity to discuss matters of com- mon interest with the Indian                      
 leaders.                                                                                 
                                                                                          
 One hundred buffaloes were given as a gift to that country and                           
 training undertaken for five Laotians in buffalo management at the                       
 National Dairy Research Institute, Karnal.                                               
                                                                                          
 The Prime Minister of Australia, Mr. Malcolm Fraser, visited India. He                   
 met Prime Minister Indira Gandhi during his visit and exchanged views                    
 on subjects of mutual interest.                                                          
                                                                                          
 Prime Minister Indira Gandhi sent greetings to Mr. Fraser on the                         
 victory of his coalition in the general elections held in October                        
 1980. The Minister of External Affairs felicitated Mr. A.M. Street on                    
 his assuming the office of the Foreign Minister of Australia.                            
                                                                                          
 The Australian Government deeply regretted the embarrass- ment caused                    
 to the Government of India and, in particular to the Prime Minister of                   
 India, as a result of the publication of a confidential despatch of                      
 the Australian High Commissioner in New Delhi in one of the Australian                   
 newspapers.                                                                              
                                                                                          
 pg14                                                                                     
                                                                                          
 The 12th round of Indo-Australian bilateral talks at official level                      
 was held in Canberra in July 1980 and the fifth meeting of the                           
 Indo-Australian Joint Trade Commission at the same place in November                     
 1980.                                                                                    
                                                                                          
 Air Chief Marshal, I.H. Latif and Mr. Justice Y. V. Chandra- chud                        
 visited Australia. Mr. V. F. Crabtree, the Minister of Police and                        
 Services of the, State of New South Wales paid a good- will visit to                     
 India in January 1981. Admiral R. L. Pareira, Chief of Naval Staff                       
 visited Australia from February 27 to March 7, 1981.                                     
                                                                                          
 The Prime Minister of New Zealand, Mr. R. D. Muldoon, visited India to                   
 take part in CHOGRM II. A number of trade delegations from India                         
 visited New Zealand. These included the Cashew Trade Delegation, the                     
 Leather Delegation, and a team from the Indian Institute of Foreign                      
 Trade. From the New Zealand side, an exhibition of wool and                              
 manufacturing techniques in New Zealand was organised jointly by the                     
 Wool Board and the International Wool Secretariat of India in Delhi                      
 and Varanasi. These visits reflected the economic contacts being                         
 maintained between India and New Zealand.                                                
                                                                                          
 The Visit of the Prime Minister of Fiji, Ratu Sir Kamisese Mara, was                     
 an important event in India's relations with that country. He called                     
 on the Prime Minister and discussed with her subjects or mutual                          
 interest. India sent Choudhry Dalbir Singh, Minister of State in the                     
 Ministry of Petroleum, Chemicals and Fertilizers, to represent the                       
 Prime Minister of India in the cele- brations of the tenth anniversary                   
 of the Independence of Fiji.                                                             
                                                                                          
 Professor Yash Pal, Director, Space Centre, Ahmedabad, visited Fiji                      
 and held discussion for the setting up of the ISRO Tracking Station                      
 for the Arian Passengers' Payload Experiment (Apple) Project.                            
                                                                                          
 The Water and Power Consultancy Services (India) Ltd. secured                            
 consultancy work for a hydro-power project in Western Samoa.                             
                                                                                          
 A small-scale industrial unit was established in Tonga with the                          
 efforts of an Indian expert loaned to that country under ITEC.                           
                                                                                          
 The Prime Minister sent greetings to Father Walter Lini, the Prime                       
 Minister of Vanuatu, on the occasion of the Independence of Vanuatu.                     
 The High Commissioner of India in Suva represented India at the                          
 Independence celebrations.                                                               
                                                                                          
 pg15                                                                                     
                                                                                          
 Greetings were also sent to Mr. Peter Konilorea, the Prime Minister of                   
 Solomon Islands on his re-election and to Sir Julius Chan on his                         
 assuming the office of the Prime Minister of Papua New Guinea.                           
                                                                                          
 Papua New Guinea is the first State in the South Paciffic which was                      
 admitted to the Non-alignment Movement with Guest status at the                          
 Non-aligned Foreign Ministers' Conference held in New Delhi in                           
 February 1981. Sep 01, 1980                                                              
                                                                    TOP                   
                                                                                          
 EAST ASIA                                                                                
 CHAPTER III                                                                              
                                                                                          
 EAST ASIA                                                                                
                                                                                          
 As part of the ongoing process of normalisation of India- China                          
 relations, exchanges in a wide range of fields were pro- moted on the                    
 basis of reciprocity and mutual benefit. In Novem- ber 1980, a PTI                       
 correspondent took up his post in Beijing, fol- lowing an                                
 understanding between the two Governments on ex- change of resident                      
 correspondents (PTI in Beijing and Xinhua in India). Several Indian                      
 journalists visited China during the year. Prof. M. G. K. Menon,                         
 Secretary, Department of Science and Technology visited China in                         
 August-September to attend an ESCAP sponsored conference. He held                        
 discussions with his Chinese counterparts on possible areas of                           
 cooperation.                                                                             
                                                                                          
 In early August, an Indian army detachment on a routine                                  
 familiarisation patrol strayed into Chinese territory. The return of                     
 the personnel was arranged in an amicable manner with both sides                         
 exercising due restraint, in keeping with the understanding of the two                   
 Governments to maintain tranquility on the border and to work towards                    
 improvement of relations.                                                                
                                                                                          
 On 4 November, Rao Birendra Singh, Minister of Agricul- ture, during                     
 his transit halt at Beijing had a friendly and cordial meeting with                      
 Vice Premier Wan Li. The Vice Premier said that China was ready to                       
 develop friendly relations with India and that there were broad                          
 prospects for cooperation in agricul- tural technology.                                  
                                                                                          
 A five-member Chinese team visited the Neyveli open cut coal mine from                   
 Oct 24, 1980 to 12 November 1980. A three-mem- ber Chinese delegation                    
 was invited to attend the session of the Indian Science Congress in                      
 Varanasi from 3 to 7 January 1981.                                                       
                                                                                          
 Two Chinese dancers were given scholarships to study Indian classical                    
 dance. A Chinese Gymnastic team visited India in January 1981, and an                    
 acrobatic troupe from China commenced its tour of India from the end                     
 of February 1981.                                                                        
                                                                                          
 An Air-India delegation visited Beijing, at the invitation of the                        
 Chinese counterpart, from 11 to 14 October 1980 and con- cluded an                       
 inter-line traffic agreement between the two airlines.                                   
                                                                                          
 pg16                                                                                     
                                                                                          
 pg17                                                                                     
                                                                                          
 India and Japan exchanged views at a high level on several occasions.                    
 Shri E. Gonsalves, Secretary (East) in the Ministry of External                          
 Affairs visited Tokyo in June 1980, for talks with Japanese officials.                   
 In August, 1980, Os Excellency Mr. M. Ite, Foreign Minister of Japan,                    
 visited New Delhi for exchange of views with Indian leaders, including                   
 the Prime Minister Mr. K. Aichi, Japanese Parliamentary Vice-Minister                    
 for Foreign Affairs, took the opportunity, presented by his visit to                     
 New Delhi in connection with the conference of Japanese envoys                           
 stationed in South Asia, to exchange ideas with the Minister of                          
 External Affairs. These exchanges highlighted the fact that there were                   
 no outstanding bilateral problems between India and Japan and that a                     
 spirit of co-operation and mutual respect marked these relations. The                    
 two countries shared the anxiety to defuse tension and work towards                      
 peaceful resolution of international conflicts, particularly their                       
 keenness to see peace and stability in South-East Asia. Of course,                       
 given the divergence in their res- pective historical, geopolitical                      
 and economic backgrounds, India and Japan did not have identical views                   
 on all international issues.                                                             
                                                                                          
 Japan continued to be one of India's most important econo- mic and                       
 trade partners. Possibilities of further promoting trade and economic                    
 relations between the two countries were discuss- ed at the Joint                        
 Meeting of the India-Japan Business Co-operation Committee, a                            
 non-official Organisation representing business com- munities of the                     
 two countries, held in New Delhi in December 1980.                                       
                                                                                          
 The Japanses Government sent a Science and Technology Study Mission to                   
 India in February 1981. This Mission visited leading scientific and                      
 technological centres in India. It is hoped that the visit will                          
 contribute to further co-operation between the two countries in this                     
 field.                                                                                   
                                                                                          
 Friendly relations were maintained with both the Democratic People's                     
 Republic of Korea (DPRK) and the Republic of Korea (ROK). In view of a                   
 number of high level visits from DPRK during the last few years, Shri                    
 E. Gonsalves, Secretary (East) in the Ministry of External Affairs,                      
 visited Pyongyang in June 1980, and held discussions with DPRK                           
 leaders. He also called M President Kim Il-Sung. In November 1980, an                    
 Inter-Ministerial delegation led by the Agricultural Minister, visited                   
 Pyongyang to explore the possibilities of economic co-operation                          
 between the two countries.                                                               
                                                                                          
 pg18                                                                                     
                                                                                          
 In November 1980, the ROK President's Special Envoy, Mr. Choi Kwang                      
 Suo, visited India.                                                                      
                                                                                          
 In its exchanges both with the DPRK and the ROK, India expressed                         
 itself in favour of the re-unification of the two Koreas through                         
 peaceful discussions between the two sides without any outside                           
 interference.                                                                            
                                                                                          
 The existing friendly relations between India and the Mongo- lian                        
 People's Republic (MPR) were further strengthened by the visit of a                      
 Mongolian Parliamentary delegation to India in December 1980. During                     
 the course of his calls on the Prime Minister and the Minister of                        
 Exteranl Affairs, the leader of the Mongolian delegation, Prof. B.                       
 Shirendyb, Deputy Chairman of the Great People's Khural of MPR,                          
 expressed appreciation of India's policy of non-alignment and its                        
 contribution towards promotion of peace, stability and co-operation in                   
 the world. Oct 24, 1980                                                                  
                                                                    TOP                   
                                                                                          
 WEST ASIA AND NORTH AFRICA                                                               
 CHAPTER IV                                                                               
                                                                                          
 WEST ASIA AND NORTH AFRICA                                                               
                                                                                          
 A serious development in West Asia was the outbreak of hostilities                       
 between Iran and Iraq on 22 September. This follow- ed increasing                        
 tension between the two countries subsequent to the revolution in Iran                   
 and border skirmishes resulting from the revival of a longstanding                       
 territorial dispute between the two countries.                                           
                                                                                          
 India looked with concern and distress at the continuing conflict                        
 between these two countries with both of whom it has close and                           
 longstanding ties. It was apprehensive that an escala- tion of this                      
 conflict would have, grave implications for both regional and global                     
 peace and security. India maintained close contacts with leaders of                      
 both the countries with the objective of bringing to an end the                          
 hostilities. The special emissary of Presi- dent Bani Sadr, Dr. Ali                      
 Saams Ardakhani, visited India and met the Prime Minister on Sep 20,                     
 1980. President Saddam Hussein of Iraq sent Mr. Jassim Mohammad                          
 al-Khalaf as his special envoy who met the Prime Minister on 8 October                   
 1980. Subsequently, the Prime Minister sent special emissaries to both                   
 Iran and Iraq at the end of October 1980 to hold discussions with the                    
 leaders of these countries. The Foreign Secretary, Shri R. D. Sathe,                     
 visited Iran and Shri Romesh Bhandari, Secretary hi the Ministry,                        
 visited Iraq in this connection. India took an active part in the                        
 efforts for formation of a group of non-aligned nations to offer their                   
 good offices to resolve the problem between Iran and Iraq.                               
                                                                                          
 One outcome of the conflict was the rush by foreigners, includ- ing                      
 Indian nationals, to leave the war affected areas, specially from                        
 Iraq. Indians in Iran were able to leave without too much difficulty.                    
 But their repatriation from Iraq initially was in a disorganised                         
 manner and led to some delays and difficulties at the border                             
 checkposts. Since it became evident that the war was, Rely to be                         
 prolonged, a special cell was created in the Ministry to co-ordinate                     
 arrangements to facilitate repatriation of those wishing to return to                    
 India. Two teams of officials were rushed to Kuwait and Amman to                         
 assist the Indian Missions there and the Mission in Iraq was                             
 strengthened. Arrangements made for                                                      
                                                                                          
 pg19                                                                                     
                                                                                          
 pg20                                                                                     
                                                                                          
 repatriation included assistance for issue of exit-transit visas,                        
 supply of travel documents on the spot, transportation, food and other                   
 facilities. Provision was made for special flights and issue of air                      
 tickets on credit. An officer in the Ministry was also specially                         
 designated to handle all queries relating to the welfare of Indian                       
 nationals caught in the war zones.                                                       
                                                                                          
 The total number of Indians repatriated came to approxi- mately                          
 11,000. Indian casualties were 17 killed, one missing and about 30                       
 injured. A number of Indian ships and sailing vessels got stranded in                    
 the Shatt-al-Arab. Of these, 9 sailing vessels and one ship were                         
 either sunk or badly damaged. The crew of most of these were                             
 repatriated to India or to; other safe places leaving only a skeleton                    
 staff on board each of them.                                                             
                                                                                          
 There were a number of visits from the Indian side. Ministers of                         
 Commerce, Energy, Works & Housing and the Chief of the Army Staff                        
 visited Iraq. The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Iraq visited India                     
 as a special envoy of President Saddam Hussein.                                          
                                                                                          
 The sixth session of the Indo-Iraq Joint Commission took place in New                    
 Delhi in April, The Commission identified new areas of co-operation in                   
 various fields including irrigation, agri- culture, oil and                              
 petrochemicals. The Protocol signed at the end of the meeting stated,                    
 inter alia, that India and Iraq should set "an example of co-operation                   
 in the economic field leading to national and collective self-reliance                   
 which should serve as an example to the rest of the developing world".                   
                                                                                          
 The year saw a significant increase in the number and value of                           
 projects awarded by Iraq to Indian companies. There were a number of                     
 major contracts both in private and public sector. The total value of                    
 Indian projects rose from Rs. 400 crores at the end of 1979 to Rs.                       
 1800 crores by the end of 1980.                                                          
                                                                                          
 India's growing co-operation with the countries in the Gulf gained                       
 momentum following the realisation by them of mutual, benefit in                         
 multifarious co-operation with India in the economic field. This was                     
 reflected in the exchange of visits that took place between them and                     
 India.                                                                                   
                                                                                          
 The Amir of Kuwait paid an official visit in September, this being the                   
 first such visit by any Amir of Kuwait to India. One of the principal                    
 subjects discussed during the visit was the pros- pects of Kuwait's                      
 investments in projects in India. Kuwait also agreed to give                             
 favourable consideration to the question of supply of oil to India. As                   
 a gesture of friendliness, the Amir donated                                              
                                                                                          
 pg21                                                                                     
                                                                                          
 an amount of Rs. 1.5 crores to the Prime Minister's National Relief                      
 Fund for flood relief, and another Rs. 1.2 crores for the construction                   
 of an indoor stadium in Delhi for the Asian Games to be held in, 1982.                   
                                                                                          
 The UAE Minister of State for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Rashid                                
 Abdullah-al-Haemai, visited India in connection with the Indo- UAE                       
 Joint Commission. The Commission discussed possibility of investments                    
 by UAE for projects in India, hi the light of the policy of                              
 liberalisation by India towards investments from oil exporting Arab                      
 countries. India agreed for the UAE to establish branches of two of                      
 its banks in India. Special joint venture pro- jects by India in, the                    
 UAE are also, under consideration.                                                       
                                                                                          
 Sheikh Suroor, Grand Chamberlain of the UAE, visited India in July as                    
 a special emissary of the President of that country. The Deputy Prime                    
 Minister of Oman visited India in February 1980 as a special envoy of                    
 the Sultan of Oman to congratulate the Prime Minister on the electoral                   
 victory of her party.                                                                    
                                                                                          
 There was favourable response by the Gulf countries, to make good the                    
 shortfall in India's crude imports caused by the Iran- Iraq was. The                     
 UAE agreed to increase its normal supply of one million tons a year to                   
 1.5 million Was from 1981. Kuwait and Qatar also supplied crude for                      
 the first time in response to India's requirements.                                      
                                                                                          
 India's relations with Saudi Arabia showed signs of greater economic                     
 and commercial co-operation. The Finance Minister of India visited                       
 that country as a special envoy of the Prime Minister in November.                       
 There was helpful response from Saudi Arabia to the request of India                     
 for oil supplies.                                                                        
                                                                                          
 A perceptible new warmth characterised India's relations with the Arab                   
 world. The Governments in West Asia and North Africa responded                           
 enthusiastically to the, initiative taken by the) new Government to                      
 foster closer, political and economic relations with countries in this                   
 region. The decision of the Government of India to accord full                           
 diplomatic status to the PLO was warmly welcomed. This was a clear                       
 demonstration of India's consistent, steadfast and sincere support to                    
 the Palestinian people. The Chairman of Palestine Liberation                             
 Organisation, Mr. Yasser Arafat, visited Delhi and had extensive                         
 discussions with the Prime Minister and the Minister of External                         
 Affairs. The visit of Arafat to India produced very favourable                           
 reactions among the Arab countries and several Heads of State                            
 personally expressed their appreciation for India's gesture.                             
                                                                                          
 pg22                                                                                     
                                                                                          
 India continued to affirm its principled stand in favour of the                          
 restoration of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people and                      
 withdrawal by Israel from all Arab territories under its, illegal                        
 occupation. It condemned the enactment by Israel of the so, called                       
 "Basic Law" on Jerusalem whereby that country had declared Jerusalem                     
 as its capital.                                                                          
                                                                                          
 Indo-Egyptian relations in the political sphere are friendly and                         
 amicable. The Egyptian Minister of State for Foreign Affairs, Dr.                        
 Boutros Ghali visited India from 2 to 4 April 1980.                                      
                                                                                          
 Airline services between India and Egypt which had been suspended in                     
 1979 were resumed.                                                                       
                                                                                          
 Indo-Syrian relations are very close and continued to be friendly and                    
 cordial. The Syrian Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs, H. E. Mr.                       
 Nasser Khaddour passed through Delhi in April 1980 and held mutual                       
 consulations.                                                                            
                                                                                          
 Relations with the People's Democratic Republic of Yemen continued to                    
 be friendly and cordial. After Mrs. Gandhi's elec- tion victory,                         
 PDRY's interest in India increased tremendously. The President of the                    
 PDRY is scheduled to visit Delhi in the near future. Foreign Minister,                   
 Salem Saleh Mohammed who came to attend the Non-Aligned Conference in                    
 Delhi as well as the Defence Minister Col. Antar met the Prime                           
 Minister and had a detailed exchange of views. Economic and Commercial                   
 relations also progressed further.                                                       
                                                                                          
 India's relations, with the Yemen Arab Republic in the politi- cal                       
 sphere are friendly and amicable. The visit of the Minis- ter of                         
 Communications in January 1981 gave a substantial fillip to these                        
 relations. The YAR Government has decided to open its Embassy in Delhi                   
 shortly. The conclusion of a Civil Aviation Agreement between the two                    
 countries and the starting of Yemen Airways flight to India was                          
 another landmark.                                                                        
                                                                                          
 The visit of the Algerian Foreign Minister to India in early 1980 was                    
 a part of the grownig Indo-Algerian bilateral relations in the                           
 political as well as in economic and commercial spheres. An                              
 Indo-Algerian Scientific and Technical Co-operation Agree- ment was                      
 signed during the Algerian Foreign Minister's visit.                                     
                                                                                          
 Economic cooperation with Libya accelerated sharply during the year                      
 which was evidence of the friendly and cordial relation- ship between                    
 the two countries. Indian companies are executing 50 projects in Libya                   
 of a total value of about Rs. 1,700/- crores.                                            
                                                                                          
 pg23                                                                                     
                                                                                          
 There are about 40,000 Indian nationals working in Libya in different                    
 capacities, including 4,000 experts deputed to various Departments of                    
 the Libyan Government.                                                                   
                                                                                          
 Shri P. C. Sethi, then Minister of Works & Housing, visited Tripoli as                   
 a special envoy of the Prime, Minister in October 1980. Dr. Charanjit                    
 Chanana, Minister of State for Industry, led the Indian delegation to                    
 the 3rd meeting of the Indo-Libyan Joint Commission held in Tripoli                      
 from 25 February to 2 March 1981, at which projects for future                           
 co-operation were identified and several decisions were taken to                         
 further widen the area of econo- mic cooperation.                                        
                                                                                          
 Shri S. B. Chavan, Minister of Education and Social Welfare, visited                     
 Rabat from 9 to 13 January 1981 and held discussions with the Prime                      
 Minister and Ministers of Foreign Affairs, Cultural and Education. An                    
 Indo-Moroccan Cultural and Scientific Co- operation Agreement was                        
 signed.                                                                                  
                                                                                          
 The Moroccan Foreign Trade Minister is expected to visit India in                        
 March 1981 to sign Indo-Morocco Trade Agreement and agreement on                         
 Economic and Technical cooperation.                                                      
                                                                                          
 A special envoy of the President of Tunisia visited Delhi in April                       
 1980. Tunisia opened a resident Mission in New Delhi at Ambassadorial                    
 level. Sep 20, 1980                                                                      
                                                                    TOP                   
                                                                                          
 AFRICA (SOUTH OF THE SAHARA)                                                             
 CHAPTER V                                                                                
                                                                                          
 AFRICA (SOUTH OF THE SAHARA)                                                             
                                                                                          
 India continued to pursue its policy of opposition to racial- ism,                       
 colonialism and apartheid. It extended moral and material support to                     
 the African liberation movements in their struggle for freedom and to                    
 realise their human and political rights.                                                
                                                                                          
 The policy of racial discrimination and apartheid followed by South                      
 Africa was condemned and total boycott of that country was observed in                   
 diplomatic, consular, commercial, cul- tural including sports and                        
 other fields. India condemned the illegal occupation by South Africa                     
 of South-West Africa (Namibia). It extended moral and material support                   
 to the South West African People's Organisation (SWAPO) fighting for                     
 the independence of Namibia. It was India's hope that the time-frame                     
 agreed to by SWAPO, the Frontline States and South Africa for starting                   
 the implementation of the U.N. resolution in March 1981 would result                     
 in the attainment of independence by Namibia by the end of 1981.                         
                                                                                          
 In pursuance of the UN Secretary General's report of Nov 24, 1980                        
 regarding implementation of Resolution 435, the Pre-Implementation                       
 Meeting was held in Geneva from 7 to 14 January, 1981. The purpose of                    
 the meeting was to agree to a date for the cease-fire and start                          
 implementing the Resolution 435, leading to Namibia's independence by                    
 the end of 1981. The meeting was attended by the SWAPO delegation                        
 headed by President of the SWAPO, Sam Nujoma and by the South Africa                     
 delegation headed by the South African Administrator General of                          
 Namibia, Danie Hough. The Frontline States and Nigeria, the GAU and                      
 the Contact Group of five Western powers also attended as observers.                     
 South Africa as usual showed its intran- sigence. Its delegate felt                      
 that the UN had disqualified itself from supervising free and fair                       
 elections in Namibia by recognis- ing SWAPO as the sole and authentic                    
 representative of the people of Namibia. He said South Africa could                      
 not agree to it definite date for implementation until the UN                            
 demonstrates its impartiality. The SWAPO delegate was reasonable in                      
 his approach and expressed his desire to sign a cease-fire agreement                     
 and to agree to a target date for the arrival of UNTAG in                                
                                                                                          
 pg24                                                                                     
                                                                                          
 pg25                                                                                     
                                                                                          
 Namibia. He said since South Africa had not agreed, SWAPO was left                       
 with no alternative but to continue with the liberation struggle.                        
                                                                                          
 India continued to strengthen its ties with the friendly coun- tries                     
 of Africa. The visit of President Kaunda of Zambia to India, in                          
 September, 1980, helped to promote friendly ties with that country. At                   
 the end of his visit four protocols were signed for cooperation with                     
 that country in the fields of trade, industry, agriculture and                           
 small-scale industries.                                                                  
                                                                                          
 The visit of the Minister of Foreign Trade and of the Minister of                        
 State for Ports and Surface Transport of Mozambi- que to India marked                    
 closer economic and technical cooperation with that country. India                       
 also gifted medicines and rice worth about Rs. 40 lakhs to Mozambique.                   
                                                                                          
 India welcomed the peaceful transition to democratically elected                         
 government in Uganda after more than 8 years of dic- tatorial rule of                    
 former President Idi Amin and one year of un- certain political                          
 situation. India contributed its share in this transition by way of                      
 deputing Shri K. R. P. Singh, a senior retired Indian Foreign Service                    
 official, as one of the Common- wealth Observers who observed the                        
 Ugandan elections which resulted in the coming to power of President                     
 Milton Obote. India expressed its desire to cooperate with the new                       
 Government in their task of national rehabilitation and development of                   
 their economy. During 1980 around 25 crores of rupees special                            
 commercial credits were extended to Uganda by Indian bank- ing                           
 institutions.                                                                            
                                                                                          
 India's traditional friendly relations with Kenya were further                           
 strengthened with the visit of Kenyan Minister of Education to India                     
 and the visit of the Speaker of the Lok Sabha to Kenya.                                  
                                                                                          
 Indo-Kenyan relations received a boost with the visit of President                       
 Daniel T. Arap Moi to India from 22 to 27 February 1981 during which                     
 three agreements-a Cultural Agreement, an Economic and Technical                         
 Cooperation Agreement and a Trade Agreement-were signed. These                           
 Agreements are expected to further expand and consolidate the already                    
 existing- friendly relations between the two countries. Major areas of                   
 cooperation envisaged in these agreements include research and                           
 training in the fields of education, science and technology, sports                      
 and mass media, exchange of personnel in the fields of engineering,                      
 medi- cine, education and agriculture expansion and diversification of                   
                                                                                          
 pg26                                                                                     
                                                                                          
 trade as well as setting up of joint ventures in various fields, and                     
 provision of training and manufacturing facilities.                                      
                                                                                          
 India welcomed the recent initiative taken by the Presidents of Kenya,                   
 Tanzania, Uganda and Zambia at their recent Summit held in Kampala,                      
 capital of Uganda in January 1981 to further strengthen the mutual                       
 cooperation for national economic deve- lopment and security.                            
                                                                                          
 The establishment of the resident Indian High Commission in Seychelles                   
 marked the consolidation of India's friendly rela- tions with that                       
 country.                                                                                 
                                                                                          
 Prime Minister Sir Seewoosagur Ramgoolam of Mauritious visited India                     
 in October/November 1980. The visit provided an opportunity for                          
 exchange of views at the highest level on subjects of mutual interest.                   
                                                                                          
 It was agreed with Angola to establish formal diplomatic relations.                      
                                                                                          
 Sardar Swaran Singh, Special Emissary of the Prime Minister, visited                     
 Nigeria in September 1980. The visit provided a use- ful opportunity                     
 for exchange of views on bilateral and inter- national matters. During                   
 the year several Parliamentary dele- gations and Governors of                            
 different Nigerian States visited India thereby giving opportunity for                   
 broader interaction between India and Nigeria.                                           
                                                                                          
 India and Senegal signed a memorandum of understanding on deputation                     
 of experts. An agreement was reached for co- operation in the field of                   
 science and technology in February 1980. The Senegalese Mission in New                   
 Delhi was one of the 22 missions closed down by the Government of                        
 Senegal during 1980 as a measure of overall economy. India was assured                   
 that this was a temporary economic measure and did not reflect. on                       
 close friendly relations between India and Senegal. Nov 24, 1980                         
                                                                    TOP                   
                                                                                          
 EUROPE WESTERN EUROPE                                                                    
 CHAPTER VI                                                                               
                                                                                          
 EUROPE                                                                                   
                                                                                          
 WESTERN EUROPE                                                                           
                                                                                          
 India's relations with the countries of Western Europe remained                          
 cordial and were further strengthened by exchange of high-level visits                   
 and intensive cooperation in economic, technical and cultural fields.                    
                                                                                          
 Western Europe is one of the most important areas of trade for India.                    
 The number of EEC countries increased to 10 with the inclusion of                        
 Greece from the beginning of 1981. They account for nearly 30% of                        
 India's global trade. Discus- sions continued on the signing of a new                    
 cooperation agreement with EEC. The President of the European                            
 Parliament, Madame Simone Veil and also an Euro-Parliamentary                            
 delegation are soon expected to visit India.                                             
                                                                                          
 Western Europe continued to be an important source of development                        
 cooperation assistance to India both multilaterally and bilaterally.                     
 The major donor countries have been UK, France, the FRG, the                             
 Netherlands, Sweden, Denmark and Norway. There was a certain                             
 curtailment of British assistance, as part of a global policy in this                    
 direction of the British Govern- ment. The countries of Western Europe                   
 were also an important source of technical and financial investment in                   
 India.                                                                                   
                                                                                          
 During the year, atention in Europe was focussed on the CSCE meeting                     
 in Madrid, the current state of detente, and the deteriorating                           
 economic situation. The Brandt Commission report and the efforts to                      
 find ways and means of implementing its recommendations also drew                        
 attention. The Minister of External Affairs attended the meeting of                      
 Foreign Ministers in Vienna for preparations for a meeting of Heads of                   
 Government in Mexico in 1981.                                                            
                                                                                          
 India took part in the Senior Commonwealth officials meet- ing in                        
 Nicosia in November 1980.                                                                
                                                                                          
 India's relations with UK were marked by frequent exchange of views on                   
 bilateral and international matters. Lord Carring- ton, speaking at                      
 the annual dinner of the Indo-British Association in London on Nov 19,                   
 1980 remarked that                                                                       
                                                                                          
 pg27                                                                                     
                                                                                          
 pg28                                                                                     
                                                                                          
 there were few countries with whom their relations were so rich as                       
 with India.                                                                              
                                                                                          
 The Indian Posts and Telegraphs Board issued a special stamp in                          
 commemoration of the late Lord Mountbatten.                                              
                                                                                          
 As promised in the Conservative Party manifesto for the 1979                             
 elections, a new British Nationality Law to define entitle- ment to                      
 citizenship and right of abode was proposed in British Parliament in                     
 January 1981. Earlier, the new Immigration Regulations came into force                   
 in March 1980. They contained measures to curtail the entry of                           
 immigrants as dependents or male fiances.                                                
                                                                                          
 In July 1980, a White Paper was published proposing a new Nationality                    
 Law. Basically, it proposes three categories of citizenship :                            
                                                                                          
 (i) British citizenship;                                                                 
                                                                                          
 (ii) Citizenship of British dependent territories, and                                   
                                                                                          
 (iii) British Overseas citizenship.                                                      
                                                                                          
 The proposal has been criticised as making immigrants second class                       
 citizens. The Indian High Commissioner presented an aide memoire to                      
 the British Home Secretary on 12 November 1980 conveying India's                         
 concern on some of the provisions contained in the new Nationality                       
 Law. India continued to remain in close touch with the British                           
 authorities on various matters concerning people of Indian origin                        
 settled in Britain and Indian visitors to that country.                                  
                                                                                          
 Prince Charles visited India from 23 November to 6 Decem- ber 1980.                      
 The visit of Prince Charles was essentially in the nature of a                           
 goodwill visit. His programme gave Mm exposure to a wide cross section                   
 of India as well as familiarity with its economic and social                             
 development efforts.                                                                     
                                                                                          
 An Italian company Ansaldo Amn, a subsidiary of Fin Mecanico, signed                     
 an agreement in October 1980 for construc- tion of the Ramagundam                        
 Super Thermal Power Station located in Andhra Pradesh. The project is                    
 partly financed by IDA credit (US dollars 200 million) and IBRD loan                     
 (US dollars 50 million).                                                                 
                                                                                          
 The first meeting of the Indo-Italian representatives under the                          
 Cultural Agreement of 1976 took place in 1980 and a 2 year programme                     
 of cultural exchanges was chalked out.                                                   
                                                                                          
 pg29                                                                                     
                                                                                          
 The Foreign Minister of Italy, H.E. Mr. Emilio Colombo, visited India                    
 in February 1981. The discussions covered the current international                      
 political and economic situation and a variety of bilateral questions                    
 and helped to strengthen relations between the two countries and their                   
 mutual cooperation.                                                                      
                                                                                          
 As a follow-up to the protocols for cooperation signed during the                        
 visit of the French President to India in January 1980, an agreement                     
 was signed on French assistance in setting up an Aluminium Complex in                    
 Orissa.                                                                                  
                                                                                          
 The multi-faceted relationship with the Federal. Republic of Germany                     
 progressed satisfactorily. The Prime Minister had an occasion for an                     
 exchange of views with Chancellor Schmidt in Belgrade while attending                    
 President Tito's funeral.                                                                
                                                                                          
 The President of the Federal Republic of Germany, H.E. Mr. Carl                          
 Carstens, made, a State visit to India in early March 1981. The                          
 President was accompanied by the Deputy Chan- cellor and Foreign                         
 Minister Mr. Genscher. The visit helped to further consolidate the                       
 friendly relations and cooperation bet- ween India and the FRG.                          
                                                                                          
 The visiting statesmen and Indian leaders held intensive discussions                     
 on promting detente and disarmament as well as the North-South                           
 dialogue.                                                                                
                                                                                          
 The FRG Government introduced visas for Indian visitors in July 1980.                    
 India, was forced to follow suit in October. The diplomatic and                          
 official passport holders will remain exempt. The FRG Government said                    
 that there was a growing increase in asylum seekers from many other                      
 developing coun- tries in that country as a result of the generous                       
 German asylum laws. The visa waiver arrangement with some other                          
 countries was also given up.                                                             
                                                                                          
 The close relations with the Netherlands saw an upturn with the                          
 holding of an exclusive Indian Engineering Goods Fair at Rotterdam.                      
 The Speaker of the Lok Sabha was present there on the occasion. More                     
 than 100 Indian companies participated in the Fair. The Dutch                            
 Government gave special attention to diversifying and further                            
 strengthening of bilateral relations and Prince Claus, Consort of                        
 Queen Beatrix and Adviser to the International Cooperation Ministry                      
 visited India in February 1981.                                                          
                                                                                          
 pg30                                                                                     
                                                                                          
 As regards the Iberian Peninsula, the Spanish Secretary of State for                     
 Foreign Affairs, Mr. Carlos Robbles Piquer, visited New Delhi for an                     
 exchange of views with the Minister of External Affairs and the                          
 Foreign Secretary. A cultural agreement between India and Portugal was                   
 signed in Lisbon. For this purpose, the Education Minister went to                       
 Portugal. Many Indian scholars took part in the second conference on                     
 Indo-Portuguese history in Portugal.                                                     
                                                                                          
 The President of the Republic of Cyprus, Spyros Kyprianou, visited                       
 India in October 1980. An agreement on cultural cooperation was signed                   
 by the Cyprus Foreign Minister and the Minister of Education and                         
 Social Welfare of India during the visit. India decided to open a                        
 resident diplomatic Mission in Nicosia. In the joint communique issued                   
 after the visit, India reiterated its stand of support for the                           
 sovereignty, territorial integrity, unity and Don-aligned satus of                       
 Cyprus, welcomed the resumption of inter-communal talks under the UN                     
 auspices and wished these talks success.                                                 
                                                                                          
 The Scandinavian countries continued to maintain close rela- tions                       
 with India. Their attitude was marked by their sympathy for the                          
 aspirations of the developing countries. The Prime Minister of                           
 Denmark, Mr. Anker Jorgensen, paid a visit on the invitation of the                      
 Indian Prime Minister. There was an exten- sive exchange of views on                     
 matters of international importance and of bilateral concern. An                         
 agreement for Danish assistance worth Rs. 18 crores was signed by the                    
 two Prime Ministers for strengthening of health services in sonic                        
 districts of Madhya Pradesh.                                                             
                                                                                          
 The Norwegian Foreign Minister Mr. Knut Frydenlund came to Delhi on 29                   
 December. Besides the Minister of External Affairs, he held meeting                      
 with the Ministers of Petroleum and Finance. An Agreement was signed                     
 by the Norwegian Foreign minister and the Finance Minister of India                      
 regarding technical and economic cooperation. This laid down the terms                   
 under which Norway would provide development assistance for projects                     
 as also for consultants, equipment and training.                                         
                                                                                          
 Parliamentary delegations from many West European coun- tries visited                    
 India.                                                                                   
                                                                                          
 The USSR and Eastern Europe                                                              
                                                                                          
 India's relations with the Soviet Union and other countries of Eastern                   
 Europe gained in dynamism and versatility through the                                    
                                                                                          
 pg31                                                                                     
                                                                                          
 working of the joint commissions for economic, industrial, techni- cal                   
 and scientific co-operation set up with those countries and through                      
 the exchange of high level visits.                                                       
                                                                                          
 The Indian President, Shri Neelam Sanjiva Reddy visited the Soviet                       
 Union from 29 September to 6 October 1980. During his stay in Moscow                     
 the Indian President had talks with President Brezhnev on topical                        
 international questions and ways and means of further strengthening                      
 Indo-Soviet relations. Besides Moscow the President also visited                         
 Leningrad, Volgograd and Tbilisi.                                                        
                                                                                          
 From the Soviet side, the most important visit was that of President                     
 Brezhnev to India from 7 to 11 December 1980. The Soviet President was                   
 accompanied by a distinguished delegation amongst whom were the                          
 Foreign Minister, Mr. A. A. Gromyko and the First Deputy Prime                           
 Minister, Mr. I. V. Arkhipov. During the stay of the Soviet President                    
 in Delhi he discussed with the Indian leaders a large number of                          
 questions, especially those of direct concern to the two countries. On                   
 the bilateral aspects, Lido-Soviet discussions focussed on the further                   
 strengthening of co-operation between the two countries.                                 
                                                                                          
 The Prime Minister of India and the President of the USSR signed an                      
 agreement on economic and technical co-operation. It provided inter                      
 alia, for development of Indo-Soviet co-operation in the field of                        
 power, coal mining and oil exploration over and above the traditional                    
 co-operation in ferrous metallurgy. The agreement also provided for a                    
 Soviet credit of Rbls. 520 million to finance the essential import                       
 requirements for some of these projects.                                                 
                                                                                          
 The three other documents signed were a trade agreement; a protocol on                   
 co-operation in the field of cinematography and a programme of                           
 cultural, scientific and educational exchanges for the year 1981-82.                     
                                                                                          
 In response to India's request, the Soviet side also agreed to,                          
 increase its supplies of crude oil from the current level of 1.5                         
 million tonnes to 2.5 million tonnes annually and of oil products from                   
 1.9 million tonnes to 2.25 million tonnes for the next five years.                       
                                                                                          
 On the political side, there were wide ranging discussions on                            
 bilateral and international matters including developments in our                        
 region.                                                                                  
                                                                                          
 The visits of Rao Birendra Singh, Minister of Agriculture top the                        
 USSR, from 1 to 8 September 1980, and of Shri N. D.                                      
                                                                                          
 pg32                                                                                     
                                                                                          
 Tiwari, Minister of Planning, from 20 to 29 October 1980, de-                            
 monstrated the desire of the two sides to strengthen cooperation in                      
 these fields.                                                                            
                                                                                          
 India's political and economic relations with countries of Eas- tern                     
 Europe were similarly strengthened during the year.                                      
                                                                                          
 The President of India, Shri Neelam Sanjiva Reddy visited the People's                   
 Republic of Bulgaria, from 7 to 12 October. During his stay in the                       
 capital city of Sofia, he had detailed talks on a wide range of                          
 subjects of mutual interest with the President of Bulgaria, Mr. Todor                    
 Zhivkov. The President also visited Stara Zagora and Varna.                              
                                                                                          
 Other distinguished visitors from India to Bulgaria included the                         
 Hon'ble Speaker, Shri Balram Jhakhar, from 8 to 12 Sep- tember 1980,                     
 the Vice President of the Council of Scientific and Industrial                           
 Research (CSIR), Professor Nurul Hasan from 6 to 10 August 1980 and                      
 the Minister of State for Education, Smt. Sheila Kaul from 2 to 8                        
 December 1980.                                                                           
                                                                                          
 India played host to a high level delegation from Bulgaria led by the                    
 BCP Central Committee Secretary and Politburo Member, Mr. Grisha                         
 Philipov. The delegation held discussions in Delhi and visited various                   
 industrial centres to acquaint themselves with India's industrial and                    
 economic development.                                                                    
                                                                                          
 Concurrent with the visit of the delegation, the session of the                          
 Indo-Bulgarian Joint Commission was held in Delhi from 20 June to 1                      
 July 1980. The Commission reviewed economic and indus- trial                             
 co-operation between the two countries and sought to identify new                        
 areas for developing still closer economic co-operation for mutual                       
 benefit.                                                                                 
                                                                                          
 H.E. Madame Lyudmila Zhivkova, Member of Politburo of the Central                        
 Committee of Bulgarian Communist Party and Chair- man of the Committee                   
 for Culture of the People's Republic of Bulgaria, visited India during                   
 February 1981. She held impor- tant discussions with the Minister for                    
 Education and Culture and signed a cultural exchange programme jointly                   
 with him. She attend- ed the inauguration of Bulgarian exhibition of                     
 Thracian Art and Culture at the National Museum, besides visiting                        
 various cultural and educational centres of interest. She also                           
 attended the first meeting of the Auroville International Advisory                       
 Council, of which she is a member, on 27 February 1981 under the                         
 Chairman- ship of the Minister of External Affairs.                                      
                                                                                          
 ADDENDUM                                                                                 
                                                                                          
 Add the following on page 32 of the report after the words "in these                     
 fields.":                                                                                
                                                                                          
 The Sixth Session of the Indo-Soviet Joint Commission for Economic,                      
 Scientific and Technical Cooperation was held on 22nd and 23rd                           
 January, 1981 to review the progress of the Indo-Soviet cooperation                      
 and to work out modalities for further cooperation. The deliberations                    
 of the Joint Com- mission indicated that substantial progress had been                   
 achieved in the implementation of the working programmes of                              
 cooperation in important fields like ferrous and non- ferrous                            
 metallurgy, coal industry, oil, machine building, power and                              
 irrigation. The Commission also discussed con- crete measures for                        
 implementation of various projects in vital sectors of the Indian                        
 economy such as ferrous metal- lurgy, coal, power, oil etc. envisaged                    
 in the Agreement on Economic and Technical Cooperation of 10th                           
 December, 1980. With a view to monitoring the implementation of the                      
 working programmes of cooperation in the fields of power and coal                        
 industries, the Commission decided to set up inter- governmental                         
 working groups in these two sectors. It was also agreed that a                           
 standing working group would be set up to coordinate and supervise the                   
 progress of implementation of the Long-Term Programme. The Sixth                         
 Session of the Joint Commission which reviewed the ongoing programmes                    
 of cooperation as well as explored new projects has given a further                      
 impetus to the strengthening of economic ties be- tween India and the                    
 Soviet Union.                                                                            
                                                                                          
 pg33                                                                                     
                                                                                          
 An Indian Parliamentary delegation, led by Shri Balram Jhakhar,                          
 visited Hungary from 1 to 8 September. During his stay in Budapest the                   
 Hon'ble Speaker had meetings with the Hunga- rian President. Mr. Pal                     
 Losonczi and the Hungarian Foreign Minister, Mr. Frigyes Puja.                           
                                                                                          
 Problems of trade and economic co-operation between India and Hungary                    
 came up for discussion during the visits of Shri Jyoti Basu, Chief                       
 Minister of West Bengal from 28 to 30 July 1980 and the Minister of                      
 Commerce, Shri Pranab Mukherjee from 14 to 17 September 1980.                            
                                                                                          
 The 4th session of the Indo-Hungarian Joint Economic Com- mission was                    
 held in New Delhi from 10 to 15 November 1980. The Protocol concluded                    
 at the end of the fourth session identified new areas of co-operation                    
 such as Codeine, computer peripherals, data systems, and the supply of                   
 equipment for Asian games. The two sides also agreed to explore new                      
 forms of increasing trade turnover through processing of intermediates                   
 and buy-back of finished products.                                                       
                                                                                          
 The Minister of Information & Broadcasting, Shri Vasant Sathe, visited                   
 Czechoslovakia from 27 June to 10 July 1980. It was agreed during his                    
 visit that Indo-Czechoslovak Coopera- lion in the field of information                   
 could be further strengthened.                                                           
                                                                                          
 A Parliamentary delegation led by the President of the Czech- oslovak                    
 National Assembly and Politburo Member, Mr. Alois Indra, visited India                   
 from 18 to 20 November 1980. The 9th session of the Indo-Czechoslovak                    
 Commission was held in Delhi from 15 to 18 December 1980. It reviewed                    
 the progress of Indo- Czechoslovak cooperation and identified some new                   
 areas for strengthening Indo-Czechoslovak cooperation.                                   
                                                                                          
 India's relations with Romania continued to develop to mutual benefit.                   
 The Minister of Commerce, Shri Pranab Kumar Muk- herjee visited                          
 Romania from 21 to 24 October leading the Indian delegation to the 5th                   
 session of the Indo-Romanian Joint Com- mission. The protocol of this                    
 session, besides reviewing the progress in the fields of Indo-Romanian                   
 cooperation in ferrous metallurgy and power, concretised projects for                    
 cooperation in the fields of automotive industries, metallurgical                        
 industry, electronics, petro-chemicals and pharmaceuticals.                              
                                                                                          
 A high powered delegation from Romania, led by Mr. Ion Avram visited                     
 India from 15 to 20 June to explore prospects for                                        
                                                                                          
 pg34                                                                                     
                                                                                          
 closer Indo-Romanian cooperation. During this stay in Delhi Mr. Avram                    
 had detailed discussions with various Ministers of the Gov- ernment of                   
 India. A long term trade and payments agreement between India and                        
 Romania was signed during the visit of Deputy Prime Minister Cornel                      
 Burtica to India from 1 to 5 December 1980.                                              
                                                                                          
 With Yugoslavia, India's relations have been marked by close                             
 cooperation in the Non-aligned Movement over the last twenty years. At                   
 the invitation of the Prime Minister, the President of the Federal                       
 Executive Council, Mr. Djuranovic, visited Delhi from 26 to 28                           
 September 1980. The two Prime Ministers dis- cussed important                            
 international questions and also ways and means of strengthening                         
 bilateral relations. Particular attention was devoted to ways of                         
 exploring how the Non-aligned Move- ment could become more effective                     
 in dealing with the challenges before it. It was agreed that the two                     
 countries would institu- tionalise contact between their planning                        
 organisations.                                                                           
                                                                                          
 The Thirteenth Session of the Indo-Yugoslav Joint Committee for                          
 Economic Cooperation was hold in New Delhi from 16 to 19 February                        
 1981. The Indian delegation was led by Shri Pranab Mukherjee, Union                      
 Minister of Commerce, Steel and Mines, and the Yugoslav delegation by                    
 H.E. Mr. Metod Rotar, their Foreign Trade Minister. At the conclusion                    
 of the meeting, the two Ministers signed a protocol setting out the                      
 objectives which the two countries aim to achieve in the fields of                       
 industrial cooperation, trade, science and technology, and banking and                   
 financial arrange- ments. An Indo-Yugoslav Programme of Cooperation in                   
 the fields of Science and Technology for the years 1981-82 was also                      
 signed.                                                                                  
                                                                                          
 The Fourth Session of the Indo-GDR Joint Commission on Economic,                         
 Scientific and Technical Cooperation was held in New Delhi from 12 to                    
 20 February 1981. A Protocol was signed by the Co-Chairmen of the                        
 Joint Commission, the Union Minister of State for Industry, Dr.                          
 Charanjit Chanana and H.E. Dr. Ger- hard Weiss, Deputy Chairman of the                   
 Council of Ministers of the Government of the German Democratic                          
 Republic. Among other things, the two sides agreed to expand and                         
 diversify the two way transfer of technology. It was agreed to make                      
 concert- ed efforts for increasing supply of industrial machinery and                    
 engi- neering goods from India to GDR particularly in the field of                       
 textile machinery. It was also decided to further intensify co-                          
 operation between the two countries in the field of third country                        
 projects. A number of such projects are being implemented in                             
                                                                                          
 pg35                                                                                     
                                                                                          
 Libya and more such projects have been identified in countries such as                   
 Angola, Algeria and Iraq.                                                                
                                                                                          
 The Polish Commerce Minister, who visited India from 15 to 18 January                    
 1981, had talks with the Indian Prime Minister, the Minister of                          
 External Affairs and the Commerce Minister. A long-term trade                            
 agreement was signed during his visit.                                                   
                                                                                          
 An Indian delegation, led by the Hon'ble Speaker, Shri Bal- ram                          
 Jhakhar, visited Berlin to attend the International Parliamen- tary                      
 Union. During his stay in the GDR, the Hon'ble Speaker was received by                   
 Mr. Horst Sindermann, President of the GDR National Assembly.                            
                                                                    TOP                   
                                                                                          
 THE AMERICAS                                                                             
 CHAPTER VII                                                                              
                                                                                          
 THE AMERICAS                                                                             
                                                                                          
 North America                                                                            
                                                                                          
 India's friendly relations with the United States remained on an even                    
 keel and were characterised by regular exchange of visits by officials                   
 of the two countries. This inter-change enhanced the stability of                        
 Indo-US relations by providing an opportunity to un- derstand in                         
 greater depth each other's approach to major bilateral and                               
 international issues. The continuing dialogue not only enabl- ed India                   
 and the United States to avoid misunderstandings, but also ensured                       
 that India's bilateral relations were founded on the basis of trust                      
 and understanding in spite of the fact that the two countries                            
 occasionally approached international issues from differ- ing                            
 perspectives. Both India and the United States realised the importance                   
 of working together to reduce world tensions and to achieve peace and                    
 cooperation in South Asia. During the course of the year, the Prime                      
 Minister of India and President Carter ex- changed several letters                       
 regarding matters of mutual concern, bila- teral relations and major                     
 developments in the sub-continent and in the world. This candid                          
 exchange of views was also instru- mental in fostering greater                           
 understanding of each other's points of view.                                            
                                                                                          
 During his visit to the United States to attend the United Nations                       
 General Assembly, the Minister of External Affairs, Shri P. V.                           
 Narasimha Rao, met US Secretary of State Edmund Muskie for talks in                      
 early October. Later in the same month, Indo-US bialteral talks were                     
 held in Washington during which both bila- teral relations and various                   
 international issues were reviewed in depth. Among the subjects                          
 discussed in the bilateral field were Indo-US trade relations and the                    
 prospects of continuing nuclear cooperation.                                             
                                                                                          
 India appointed Shri K. R. Narayanan, a distinguished diplo- mat and                     
 scholar as its Ambassador in Washington and he arrived at his post in                    
 October, 1980.                                                                           
                                                                                          
 The President and the Prime Minister sent congratulatory messages to                     
 Mr. Ronald Reagan on his election victory as Well as                                     
                                                                                          
 pg36                                                                                     
                                                                                          
 pg37                                                                                     
                                                                                          
 on his inauguration as the President of the United States, express-                      
 ing the hope that Indo-US relations would continue to grow dur- ing                      
 his Presidency.                                                                          
                                                                                          
 In the aftermath of developments in Afghanistan, several visits were                     
 exchanged between the two countries to apprise each other of their                       
 respective policies and perceptions concerning the situa- tion in                        
 Afghanistan. Shri Eric Gonsalves, Secretary in the Min- istry, visited                   
 the United States to explain India's view-point. In these meetings,                      
 India expressed the need for defusing the situation and its belief                       
 that a political and negotiated way had to be found to facilitate the                    
 Soviet withdrawal. India conveyed to the United States its deep                          
 concern over that country's decision to bolster Pakistan's military                      
 strength as such a step could only aggravate tensions in the region.                     
                                                                                          
 Another problem which continued to cause India concern was the                           
 question of the supply of nuclear fuel for Tarapur. Only after the                       
 Senate, in late September, had allowed President Carter's Executive                      
 Order, did India receive one of the two pending ship- ments of                           
 enriched uranium for Tarapur. While welcoming this development as a                      
 positive step for continued Indo-US cooperation in the nuclear field,                    
 India regretted the fact that the second and subsequent shipments of                     
 nuclear fuel had been made subject to the fulfilment of certain                          
 extraneous conditions. The United States was informed that India                         
 looked forward to receiving regular sup- plies, in keeping with the                      
 1963 Agreement and the Schedule for supplies mutually agreed upon in                     
 1976, and that it would not con- sider itself obliged to honour any                      
 conditions extraneous to the Agreement.                                                  
                                                                                          
 India could not agree with the rationale of the imposition of                            
 countervailing duties on Indian imports to the United States with- out                   
 the application of the Injury Test, following the latter's deci- sion                    
 not to apply the Subsidies Code between the two countries. The matter                    
 is currently under discussion in the forum of GATT.                                      
                                                                                          
 India noted with increasing concern that an area in which the two                        
 countries appeared to be following divergent policies was the                            
 continuing military build-up by the United States in the Indian Ocean                    
 area. The US Under Secretary of Defence, Mr. Robert Komer and Admiral                    
 R. L. Long, Commander-in-Chief of the Pacific American Armed Forces,                     
 visited India to explain the rationale behind the decision of the                        
 United States to deploy forces in the Indian Ocean, India made it                        
 clear that increased military presence on the part of big powers would                   
 only serve to exacerbate                                                                 
                                                                                          
 pg38                                                                                     
                                                                                          
 tensions in the region. It was stressed that the best way to main-                       
 tain peace and strengthen the security of the littoral States was for                    
 these external powers to terminate, at the earliest possible, all                        
 military, naval and air presence in this area.                                           
                                                                                          
 All four Sub-Commissions set up under the Indo-US Joint Commission                       
 held meetings during the course of the year. These included the first                    
 meeting of the newly constituted Sub-Commis- Sion on Agriculture. The                    
 Sub-Commission meetings continued to make a valuable contribution                        
 towards enlarging bilateral co- operation in various fields. The Joint                   
 Commission itself, how- ever, was unable to meet as a mutually                           
 convenient date for this purpose could not be found. This, however,                      
 did not detract from the great value such a Commission had in adding                     
 depth to Indo- US relations by providing an institutionalised forum                      
 for meaning- ful interchanges leading to the expansion of mutually                       
 agreed areas of cooperation.                                                             
                                                                                          
 India and Canada continued to develop close and friendly re- lations.                    
 The practice of holding annual bilateral official talks, initiated                       
 last year, was continued and a meeting was held in Ottawa in October.                    
 During this meeting officials of the two countries exchanged views                       
 covering a broad sweep of both bilateral relations and major                             
 international issues.                                                                    
                                                                                          
 South and Central Americas and the Caribbean                                             
                                                                                          
 India paid greater attention to developing relations with the                            
 countries of Latin America, and the Caribbean. The Minister of                           
 External Affairs visited Cuba, Mexico, and Venezuela during the year.                    
                                                                                          
 In order to focus attention on Latin America, a seminar on Simon                         
 Bolivar, General San Martin and the Liberation Move- ments in South                      
 America, was held by the Indian Council for Cultural Relations (ICCR)                    
 in collaboration with the Ministry. Participants included eminent                        
 scholars from Latin America as well as academicians and officials from                   
 India.                                                                                   
                                                                                          
 Cuba and India cooperated in different international fora in their                       
 common objective of reducing tension and achieving peace. At the                         
 invitation of the Government of Cuba, the Minister of Ex- ternal                         
 Affairs visited Havana in October. He held intensive dis- cussions                       
 with President Fidel Castro and other Cuban leaders, on the                              
 international situation, the non-aligned movement and Indo- Cuban                        
 bilateral relations. The Cuban Foreign Minister, Mr.                                     
                                                                                          
 pg39                                                                                     
                                                                                          
 Isidoro Malmierca Peoli, visited India in April to discuss the Afghan                    
 situation and subsequently in December to exchange views on finding a                    
 peaceful solution to the Iran-Iraq conflict.                                             
                                                                                          
 At the invitation of the Government of Mexico, the Minister of                           
 External Affairs visited Mexico City in October. He had dis- cussions                    
 with President H. E. Mr. Jose Lopez Portillo and other- Mexican                          
 leaders on the international situation, the North-South dialogue and                     
 bilateral relations. Earlier in April, the Mexican Minister for                          
 Patrimony and Industrial Development, Mr. Jose Andres Oteyza, had                        
 visited India. A number of other visits at official level identified                     
 possibilities of closer Indo-Mexican eco- nomic relations in the near                    
 future. Mexico also agreed to supply 1.5 million tonnes of oil per                       
 annum from January 1981. This was the first such agreement signed by                     
 India with a country of Latin America.                                                   
                                                                                          
 The President of Mexico, His Excellency Mr. Jose Lopez Portillo, paid                    
 a State visit to India from Jan 25, 1981 to 30 January 1981. He was                      
 the first distinguished statesman from Latin America to, be the chief                    
 guest at the Republic Day celebrations, a fact which symbolised the                      
 growing bilateral relations and cooperation bet- ween Mexico and                         
 India. Discussions between the Prime Minister and the President of                       
 Mexico, as reflected in the comprehensive Joint Communique issued at                     
 the conclusion of the visit, reflected wide similarity of views held                     
 by the two countries on the prob- lems evident today in the                              
 international arena. The visit is ex pected to provide an impetus to                     
 expansion and concretisation of cooperation between the two countries                    
 in various fields.                                                                       
                                                                                          
 In October-November 1980, a three-member delegation from Trinidad &                      
 Tobago led by Hon. Kamaluddin Mohammed, Min- ister for Health & Local                    
 Government and consisting of Hon. Cuthbert Joseph, Minister for                          
 Education & Culture and Hon. Selwyn Richardson, Attorney General and                     
 Minister for Legal Affairs, visited India as a part of a goodwill                        
 mission. This visit was the first of its kind from Trinidad & Tobago                     
 during the last decade. The Ministers not only had discussions with                      
 Indian leaders but also visited scientific and industrial                                
 establishments to have a first hand knowledge of India's scientific                      
 and technolo- gical progress. The goodwill mission also included a                       
 Steel Band Orchestra which performed in Bombay and Delhi, under the                      
 auspices of the Indian Council for Cultural Relations.                                   
                                                                                          
 For furthering economic relations, the Association of Indian                             
 Engineering industries (AIEI) visited Chile, Argentina, Brazil and                       
 Mexico in August 1980. On the occasion of this Mission's visit,                          
                                                                                          
 pg40                                                                                     
                                                                                          
 UNIDO, ECLA and AIEI sponsored and organised a three-day conference in                   
 Santiago, Chile, the Headquarters of the Economic Commission for Latin                   
 America (ECLA)--from 4 to 6 August 1980. The Conference was unique in                    
 that it was the first time UNIDO and the Economic Commission for Latin                   
 America were supporting a programme for closer cooperation between                       
 India and Latin American industries. The Conference was attended by                      
 delegations from 11 countries of Latin America and the Carib- bean.                      
 The Mission also visited Argentina, Brazil and Mexico to develop joint                   
 ventures arrangements, to discuss cooperation and trade and to collect                   
 and disseminate technical and statistical information. Similarly, an                     
 Indian Commercial delegation visit- ed Cuba in October 1980, on an                       
 invitation from the Chamber of Commerce of Cuba. During the visit, the                   
 delegation explored the possibility of export of Indian Railway                          
 equipment, sugar mill machinery and other equipment to Cuba and                          
 collaboration in third countries. Another delegation from the                            
 Kudremukh Iron Ore Company, visited Trinidad & Tobago to explore                         
 possibility of the export of iron ore concentrate.                                       
                                                                                          
 Indian experts, doctors and technicians continued to be held in high                     
 esteem in the countries of Latin America and the Carib- bean and there                   
 was increasing demand for these experts, particu- larly from the                         
 countries in the Caribbean. At present, there are a number of Indian                     
 experts in: Venezuela, Brazil, Guyana and Trinidad & Tobago. Jan 25,                     
 1981                                                                                     
                                                                    TOP                   
                                                                                          
 UNITED NATIONS AND INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCES                                             
 CHAPTER VIII                                                                             
                                                                                          
 UNITED NATIONS AND INTERNATIONAL                                                         
                                                                                          
 CONFERENCES                                                                              
                                                                                          
 India played host to the Second Regional Conference of the                               
 Commonwealth Heads of Government (CHOGRM II) held in New Delhi from                      
 Sep 04, 1980 to 8 September, 1980. It also played host to the                            
 Conference of Foreign Ministers of Non-aligned countries held in                         
 February 1981. The successful conclusion of this Con- ference was in                     
 no small part due to the crucial role played by India as its Chairman.                   
 As in the past, India participated actively in a number of important                     
 conferences during the year. These included the World Conference of                      
 the UN Decade for Women held in Copenhagen from 14 to 30 July 1980.                      
                                                                                          
 Important UN events during the period under review in- cluded the                        
 Seventh Emergency Special, Session on the Question of Palestine, held                    
 from 22 to 29 July 1980, and the Eleventh Special Session of the                         
 General Assembly on Global economic matters, held from 25 August to 15                   
 September 1980. All these sessions were held in New York.                                
                                                                                          
 The World Conference of the UN Decade for Women was held at                              
 Copenhagen, Denmark, from 14 to 30 July '80. The Indian delegation,                      
 led by Smt. Sheila Kaul, the present Minister of State for Education                     
 and Social Welfare, played a prominent and constructive role a! the                      
 Conference. A programme of action containing measures designed to                        
 improve the status of women in all spheres of activity was adopted at                    
 the conclusion of the Conference by 85 votes in favour, 4 against                        
 (Israel, USA, Canada and Australia) and 25 abstentions.                                  
                                                                                          
 India, along with 74 countries, signed the UN Convention on                              
 Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women.                                
                                                                                          
 The Second Regional Conference of the Commonwealth Heads of Government                   
 (CHOGRM-II) was held in New Delhi from 4 to 8 September 1980. The                        
 President of Bangladesh, Kiri- bati, Nauru, Sri Lanka and the Prime                      
 Ministers of Australia, Fiji, India, Malaysia, New Zealand, Papua, New                   
 Guinea, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Tonga, Tuvalu, Vanuatu and Western                   
 Samoa                                                                                    
                                                                                          
 pg41                                                                                     
                                                                                          
 pg42                                                                                     
                                                                                          
 attended the Conference. The Conference was inaugurated by the                           
 President of India, Shri Neelam Sanjiva Reddy, who described it as a                     
 opportunity to the leaders of the member-countries to reflect on                         
 international relations from the point of view of our regional                           
 perspective." Prime Minister Indira Gandhi presided over the                             
 Conference. Welcoming the participating Heads of State/ Government,                      
 she pointed to the uncertainty all around, with the collision of                         
 interests between powerful nations "imperilling stabi- lity and                          
 peaceful development of countries in our vicinity." She called upon                      
 the member-countries to build "a bridge of understand- ing between the                   
 great powers".                                                                           
                                                                                          
 The Conference adopted a 15-page communique covering various political                   
 and economic issues. The communique under- lined the need for finding                    
 peaceful political solutions to the prob- lems concerning Afghanistan                    
 and Kampuchea. On the Indian Ocean, the Conference appealed to the                       
 great Powers to remove the existing sources of tension in the area. On                   
 West Asia, the com- munique underlined the inalienable rights of the                     
 Palestinians and the need to solve the problem on the basis of UN                        
 resolutions.                                                                             
                                                                                          
 While restraint marked the Conference's approach to politi- cal                          
 issues, the desire to explore new avenues of cooperation among the                       
 member-states was underlined in its deliberations on the eco- nomic                      
 and trade issues. The Conference noted with concern that protectionism                   
 was on the increase particularly against the labour intensive or lower                   
 cost exports of countries of the region. Most developing countries,                      
 the communique said, had severe balance of payments problems and they                    
 needed greater export opportuni- ties in order to pay for their                          
 imports mainly from developed countries. The developed countries, in                     
 particular those exercis- ing major influence over world trade, it was                   
 stated, should not seek to avoid the realities of international                          
 competitiveness and should make a determined effort to liberalise                        
 trade through adop- tion of "positive adjustment policies".                              
                                                                                          
 The Conference also agreed to broaden the terms of reference of the                      
 consultative group, which was constituted at the 1978 re- gional                         
 conference in Sydney, to include economic development issues in order                    
 that the potential for development of member coun- tries may be                          
 explored in a more effective manner.                                                     
                                                                                          
 The Seventh Emergency Special Session of the UN General Assembly on                      
 the question of Palestine was held in New York from 22 to 29 July                        
 1980. The session was convened at the initiative of the Non-aligned                      
 countries. More than 100 States                                                          
                                                                                          
 pg43                                                                                     
                                                                                          
 participated in the debate. About 30 countries were represented at the                   
 session at the Ministerial level. In view of India's close friendship                    
 with the Arab States and principled support for the Palestinian cause,                   
 the Indian delegation to the Emergency Session was led by the Minister                   
 of External Affairs.                                                                     
                                                                                          
 At the end of the debate the Assembly adopted two resolutions on the                     
 question of Palestine. The first resolution reaffirmed the right of                      
 the Palestinian people to establish their own independent State and                      
 called for the unconditional withdrawal of Israel from all the                           
 Palestinian and other Arab territories occupied since June 1967,                         
 including Jerusalem". It urged that such withdrawal start before 15                      
 November 1980 and asked the Security Council to consider the adoption                    
 of sanctions in case of non-compliance by Israel. The resolution was                     
 adopted by 112 votes in favour, 7 against and 24 abstentions. Voting                     
 against were israel, USA, Canada, Norway, Australia, Guatemala and the                   
 Dominican Republic.                                                                      
                                                                                          
 A second resolution, approved by a vote of 112 in favour to 5 against                    
 with 26 abstentions, asked the UN Committee on inalienable rights of                     
 Palestinian people to study the reasons for Israel's refusal to comply                   
 with relevant United Nations resolu- tions. As a member of this                          
 Committee, India took an active part in drafting both the resolutions.                   
                                                                                          
 The Eleventh Special Session of the UN on Economic Development was                       
 held between 25 August and 15 September 1980. The Principal themes to                    
 which the session devoted its attention were : (i) the launching of a                    
 new round of Global Negotiations; (ii) adoption of the international                     
 Development Strategy for the 3rd UN Development Decade (1981-f990);                      
 and (iii) a review of the progress made towards the achievement of the                   
 New International Economic Order. Both during and prior to the                           
 session, India played an active role in its capacity as the Chairman                     
 of Group of 77 in negotiations with the deve- loped countries.                           
 However, the Committee of the Whole, which had been designated as the                    
 Preparatory Committee for the Global Round of Negotiations, failed to                    
 recommend any con- crete conclusions to the Special Session.                             
                                                                                          
 The Special Session which was to have finalised the agenda, time-frame                   
 and the procedures for the Global Round failed to do so and in turn                      
 remitted this task to the regular session of the UN General Assembly                     
 in the hope that the Global Round could be launched. The Special                         
 Session, however, was able to                                                            
                                                                                          
 pg44                                                                                     
                                                                                          
 achieve consensus on a text of the International Development Strategy                    
 about the Third Development Decade. This document, which attempted to                    
 chalk out a plan of action through internatio- nal community, could                      
 help the developing countries reach vari- ous objectives during the                      
 Decade. It contained four chapters on preamble, goals and objectives,                    
 policy measures and review and appraisal mechanism for the Decade. Its                   
 text was formally adopted at the 35th session of the UN General                          
 Assembly. However, detailed statements made by EEC, USA and certain                      
 other developed countries amounted almost to reservation on the vital                    
 portions of the Strategy. These reservations related basically to                        
 fulfilment of targets and commitments by the deve- loped countries in                    
 the field of ODA, industrial re-deployment, international trade and                      
 monetary issues. This indicated that for some of the developed                           
 countries, it was a political document to which there could not be                       
 binding commitments, particularly in as much as they might have direct                   
 or indirect impact upon their own economies.                                             
                                                                                          
 With regard to the review of progress towards achievement of New                         
 International Economic Order, the Group of 77 expressed their                            
 disappointment at the lack of meaningful results in this direction.                      
 Concern was expressed at the increasingly deteriora- ting economic                       
 situation in the case of the low-income developing countries. Interest                   
 was expressed in elaboration of the proposals made by the UN                             
 Secretary-General on 3 July 1980 at the Second Regular Session of                        
 ECOSOC in Geneva with regard to an early action programme in favour of                   
 these countries.                                                                         
                                                                                          
 At the 35 session of the UN General Assembly, resumed efforts were                       
 made to reach consensus on procedures and the agenda for the launching                   
 of Global Round of Negotiations. However, very little forward movement                   
 has so for taken place. The issues are expected to be taken up again                     
 at the resumed session of the UN General Assembly in March 1981.                         
                                                                                          
 In the Second Committee at the 35th session of the General Assembly,                     
 India-played an active role in the Group of 77 both in initiating and                    
 participating in the drafting of resolutions. This was particularly so                   
 with regard to (a) review of Operational Activities for Development;                     
 (b) UNIDO (United Nations Indus- trial Development Organisation); (c)                    
 ECDC (Economic Co- operation among Developing Countries), (d) UN                         
 Conference on New and Renewable Sources of Energy; (e) Report of the                     
                                                                                          
 pg45                                                                                     
                                                                                          
 Secretary-General on the Critical Economic Situation facing many                         
 developing countries; and (f) Food & Agriculture in Africa.                              
                                                                                          
 In addition, the Indian delegation also co-sponsored at least 15 other                   
 resolutions which were separately introduced in the Second Committee.                    
 India played a particularly active role in the resolutions on Habitat,                   
 Environment, cooperation between Habitat and UNEP (United Nations                        
 Environment Programme) and the report of the World Food Council.                         
                                                                                          
 Zimbabwe was admitted to the United Nations as the 153rd member at                       
 this Special Session.                                                                    
                                                                                          
 Lists of major international conference/meetings/seminars organised by                   
 government/non-government organisations in which India participated                      
 and of which India became a member are at Appendices I to IV.                            
                                                                                          
 The United Nations General Assembly Commenced its 35th regular session                   
 in New York on 16 September 1980. Baron Rudiger von Wechmar of the                       
 Federal Republic of Germany was elected President of the General                         
 Assembly for the session. The Assembly suspended its session on 16                       
 December 1980 after completing most of its business. It resumed its                      
 session in March 1981 to consider the remaining items on its agenda,                     
 which are the question of Namibia and the launching of the Global                        
 Round of Negotiations. The Assembly had before it an agenda of over                      
 120 items covering disarmament, political, economic, social, human                       
 rights, legal and other related issues. A new item on the agenda on                      
 granting of observer status for the Asian- African Legal Consultative                    
 Committee was inscribed at the initiative of India.                                      
                                                                                          
 The membership of the UN went up to 154 by the admission of Saint                        
 Vincent and Grenadines, a Caribbean country, as a new member.                            
                                                                                          
 India played an active and constructive role in the delibera- tions of                   
 the General Assembly and its Committees. The Assembly adopted a large                    
 number of resolutions, most of them by con- sensus. India took major                     
 initiatives in tabling or co-sponsoring a number of resolutions in the                   
 plenary as well as in various Committees.                                                
                                                                                          
 During the session, India was re-elected as a member of the Economic                     
 and Social Council (ECOSOC) for a further period                                         
                                                                                          
 pg46                                                                                     
                                                                                          
 of three years, starting from 1 January 1981. Earlier in the year, in                    
 elections held in ECOSOC, India had been elected to the Governing                        
 Council of United Nations Development Pro- gramme for a term of three                    
 years and re-elected to the Committee on Programme and Co-ordination                     
 (for three years), Committee on Natural Resources (for four years) and                   
 Commission on the Status of Women (for four years). Shri T.N. Kaul was                   
 elected to the Executive Board of UNESCO at its twentyfirst General                      
 Conference held in Belgrade, from 23 September to 28 October 1980.                       
                                                                                          
 The Indian delegation to the 35th session of the General Assembly was                    
 led by Minister of External Affairs. Speaking in the general debate on                   
 3 October, he referred to the current inter- national crisis, the                        
 responsibility for which rested with the most powerful nations. He                       
 affirmed that the weak and poor nations had no intention of                              
 acquiescing in the danger of Big Power brinkmanship. The conflicts in                    
 South-West and South-East Asia needed package solutions which took                       
 care of the concerns of all and eliminated all interference by outside                   
 powers. Pleading for the politics of co-operation, he concluded by                       
 saying, "sometimes, looking at great stretches of history, it is                         
 difficult to believe that the ideal of cooperation and working                           
 together for the common good has made much progress. And yet, if we                      
 are to avert a catastrophe, we should resolutely continue on the path                    
 of dia- logue and co-operation and turn away from sterile polemics and                   
 confrontation. All of us perhaps perceive the danger and recog- nise                     
 the challenge, but the will to act has so far been sadly lacking. Let                    
 us, therefore, so readjust our sights and conduct our affairs that                       
 future generations may not condemn our times as yet another barren                       
 stretch in the history of man."                                                          
                                                                                          
 The plenary of the General Assembly adopted as many as 18 resolutions                    
 on the question of Apartheid. India cosponsored all of them.                             
 Resolutions on (i) Comprehensive Sanctions against South Africa, (ii)                    
 Cultural, academic and other, boycotts. of South Africa, (iii) the                       
 Role of Transnational Corporations in South Africa, (iv) International                   
 Campaign against Apartheid and (v) Implementation of UN's Resolutions                    
 on Apartheid by Governments and Inter-governmental Organisations were                    
 intro- duced for the first time. India introduced the resolution on                      
 Campaign for the Release of Political Prisoners in South Africa. In                      
 these resolutions, the Assembly requested the Security Coun- cil                         
 urgently to adopt comprehensive and mandatory sanctions against the                      
 racist regime of South Africa, including oil embargo and                                 
                                                                                          
 pg47                                                                                     
                                                                                          
 called upon all governments which had not yet done so, to serve                          
 diplomatic, military, nuclear, economic, cultural, academic and sports                   
 as well as other relations with that regime. The Assem- bly also                         
 requested the Security Council to take mandatory measures to                             
 strengthen the arms embargo and secure the imme- diate cessation of                      
 any form of collaboration with the racist regime of South Africa in                      
 the military and nuclear fields.                                                         
                                                                                          
 The question of Kampuchea remained a controversial item in the                           
 deliberations of the UN General Assembly. As many as 30 speakers made                    
 statements on the credentials question, a majo- rity of them deploring                   
 the inhuman atrocities of the Pol Pot regime. The voting on the                          
 credentials question was, however, 74 in favour of the seating of the                    
 Pol Pot regime, i.e., Democratic Kampuchea, 35 against and 32                            
 abstentions. India voted against the seating of the Pol Pot regime.                      
                                                                                          
 The UN General Assembly adopted a resolution sponsored by the ASEAN                      
 countries on the situation in Kampuchea by 97 votes in favour, 23                        
 against and with 22 abstentions. The reso- lution inter alia called                      
 for the convening of an international conference on Kampuchea early in                   
 1981 which should involve the participation of all conflicting parties                   
 in Kampuchea and which should give priority to the total withdrawal of                   
 foreign troops from Kampuchea. India abstained because it felt that                      
 the deve- loping atmosphere of dialogue would be disturbed by                            
 proposals for convening an international conference based on                             
 resolutions rejected by the countries directly concerned.                                
                                                                                          
 The UN General Assembly adopted a resolution on the situ- ation in                       
 Afghanistan on 20 November 1980 by a vote of 111 in favour, 22 against                   
 and 12 abstentions. The resolution inter alia reiterated the call for                    
 the immediate withdrawal of foreign troops from Afghanistan and                          
 contained a provision for the ap- pointment of a Special                                 
 Representative of the UN Secretary- General with a view to Promoting a                   
 Political solution to the Afghan problem. All Western countries, the                     
 majority of non- aligned countries and Latin American States voted in                    
 favour of the resolution. The Soviet Union and the socialist countries                   
 along with Afghanistan, Angola, Cuba, Democratic Yemen, Ethi- opia,                      
 Laos, Madagascar, Mozambique, Syria and Vietnam voted against. India                     
 was one of the 12 countries which abstained. Others to do so were                        
 Algeria, Benin, Cape Verde, Chad, Congo, Cyprus, Finland,                                
 Guinea-Bissau, Mali, Nicaragua and Zimbabwe.                                             
                                                                                          
 pg48                                                                                     
                                                                                          
 Earlier in January 1980, a similar resolution had been adopted by the                    
 General Assembly in an Emergency Special Ses- sion by a vote of 104 in                   
 favour, 18 against and 18 abstentions.                                                   
                                                                                          
 Speaking in the UN General Assembly on 19 November 1980 the Permanent                    
 Representative of India to the United Nations stated that the                            
 important elements for achieving a political solu- tion to the crisis                    
 would be the complete cessation of all interfere- nce or intervention                    
 in the internal affairs of States; firm opposition to the presence of                    
 foreign troops in any country; the withdrawal of existing foreign                        
 forces; and the furnishing of complete and reliable guarantees against                   
 all forms of interference. India abstained on the resolution adopted                     
 by the UN General Assembly on 20 November 1980, because it did not                       
 contain all these ele- ments.                                                            
                                                                                          
 A Resolution on the Indian Ocean was adopted by consensus by General                     
 Assembly. The resolution had been drafted by the ad hoc Committee on                     
 the Indian Ocean, after prolonged nego- tiations. This was the first                     
 time that a resolution on the Indian Ocean had been adopted by                           
 consensus by the United Nations General Assembly. However, the USA,                      
 UK, France and other Western countries maintained their position that                    
 the provisions of the 1971 UN Declaration were not acceptable to them,                   
 espe- cially with regard to the elimination of Great Power military                      
 presence from the Indian Ocean.                                                          
                                                                                          
 The resolution contained a provision for the convening of the                            
 Conference on the Indian Ocean during 1981 at Colombo. However, the                      
 resolution also requested the ad hoc Committee "to make every effort,                    
 in consideration of the political and seen- rity climate in the Indian                   
 Ocean area, particularly recent deve- lopments, as well as progress                      
 made in the harmonization of views" to finalise all preparations for                     
 the Conference.                                                                          
                                                                                          
 India empressed its understanding of the consensus resolu- tion in the                   
 following terms. The resolution clearly and catego- rically related to                   
 "the implementation of the Declaration of the Indian Ocean as a Zone                     
 of Peace". Secondly, the decision taken by the UN General Assembly in                    
 1979 to convene a con- ference during 1981 in Colombo stood reaffirmed                   
 in the present resolution. Thirdly, the continued escalation of Great                    
 Power military presence in the Indian Ocean and the deteriorating                        
 poli- tical and security situation, far from serving as an exucuse to                    
 postpone the Conference only gives greater urgency to the need                           
                                                                                          
 pg49                                                                                     
                                                                                          
 for its convening. Fourthly, the question of harmonising diffe- rent                     
 approaches which had been referred to in the resolution, should relate                   
 to the modalities of the implementation of the Dec- laration of the                      
 Indian Ocean as a Zone of Peace. India rejected any preconditions,                       
 unrelated to the implementation of the Dec- laration for the convening                   
 of the Conference. The session of the ad hoc Committee on the Indian                     
 Ocean held in February 1981 ended without any agreement on the dates                     
 for the Indian Ocean Conference.                                                         
                                                                                          
 As in previous years, the General Assembly adopted a reso- lution,                       
 sponsored by Pakistan on the establishment of a Nuclear Weapon Free                      
 Zone in South Asia by 96 votes in favour, 3 (India, Bhutan and                           
 Mauritius) against and 44 abstentions.                                                   
                                                                                          
 India registered its opposition to the Pakistani resolution both on                      
 account of matters of principle and from practical consi- derations.                     
 The setting up of a nuclear weapon free zone, in its view, must be the                   
 result of a common initiative of all States of a particular region and                   
 participation in it must be voluntary. It was inadmissible for one                       
 state in a region to seek to impose such a zone on other States within                   
 the region. South Asia was an integral and contiguous part of the                        
 region of Asia and the Pacific and could, therefore, not be treated in                   
 isolation from the rest of the region to which it belonged. The                          
 Pakistani proposal did not take into account the geopolitical                            
 characteristics of the area con- cerned and ignored the fact that the                    
 security enviroment of the South Asia region was complicated by the                      
 deployment of the nuclear weapons in the Asia-Pacific theatre and the                    
 presence or foreign military bases in the Indian Ocean.                                  
                                                                                          
 The question relating to Information was considered in the Special                       
 Political Committe of the General Assembly. A resolu- tion on behalf                     
 of the Group of 77, introduced by Venezuela in its capacity as                           
 Chairman of the Group, was adopted by the General Asembly without a                      
 vote. India took an active and cons- tractive part in the drafting of                    
 the resolution. The Assembly also adopted the resolution without a                       
 vote.                                                                                    
                                                                                          
 The resolution consisted of 19 preambular paragraphs and 37 operative                    
 paragraphs in three separate sections. Note was taken in the                             
 resolution of the discussions at the Twenty-first session of the                         
 General Conference of the UNESCO, held in Bel- grade from 23 September                   
 to 28 October 1980. The resolution also took note with satisfaction of                   
 the establishment by UNESCO                                                              
                                                                                          
 pg50                                                                                     
                                                                                          
 of the International Programme for the Development of Com- munication                    
 which constituted an important step in the esablish- ment of a New                       
 World Information and Communication Order.                                               
                                                                                          
 The 31st session of the General Assembly by its Resolution 31/123,                       
 proclaimed 1981 as the International Year of Disabled Persons. The                       
 32nd session of the General Assembly constituted an Advisory Committee                   
 for the International Year of Disabled Persons consisting of 15 member                   
 States, which was later raised to 23 member States by a decision of                      
 the General Assembly at its 33rd session. India is a member of the                       
 Advisory Committee. Commensurate with India's adherence to                               
 humanitarian causes, a national Plan of Action and a Committee to                        
 oversee the same have been constituted. The Prime Minister launched                      
 the Inter- national Year of Disabled Persons at a function on 5                          
 January 1981. She announced that the Government was working to- wards                    
 a comprehensive legislation for the rehabilitation of the physically                     
 handicapped.                                                                             
                                                                                          
 An Indian delegation led by the Secretary, Ministry of Social Welfare                    
 participated in the 6th Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the                      
 Treatment of Offenders held at Caracas from 25 August to 5 September                     
 1980. In the Third Committee of the 35th session of the General                          
 Assembly, various matters on human rights, including the impor- tance                    
 of the universal realisation of the right of peoples to self-                            
 determination, alternative approaches and ways and means with- in the                    
 United Nations system for improving the effective enjoy- ment of human                   
 rights, elimination of all forms of racial discrimi- nation, came up                     
 for discussion. The Indian delegation played an active role in the                       
 deliberations of the Third Committee. India continued its active                         
 participation in multilateral deli- berations and negotiations on                        
 disarmament. India's role in the field of disarmament was determined                     
 by the consistent, basic, considerations that (i) lasting                                
 international peace and security can only be based on the achievement                    
 of the goal of general and complete disarmament under effective                          
 international control and the establishment of a just international                      
 economic order, and (ii) the focus of the international community's                      
 attention and efforts should remain priority objectives.                                 
                                                                                          
 India has, therefore, continued its determined efforts along with the                    
 other like-minded countries to press for a comprehen- sive ban on the                    
 testing of all nuclear weapons by all States and the                                     
                                                                                          
 pg51                                                                                     
                                                                                          
 complete prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons, pending the                          
 achievement of nuclear disarmament.                                                      
                                                                                          
 At the 35th regular session of the UN General Assembly, India tabled a                   
 resolution on non-use of nuclear weapons and prevention of nuclear                       
 war. The resolution reiterated that any use of nuclear weapons would                     
 be a violation of the UN Charter and a crime against humanity. It also                   
 called upon those States which had not so far done so to submit their                    
 proposals regarding the question of an international convention or                       
 some other agree- ment on the subject, so that further consideration                     
 could be given to the question. The resolution was adopted by 112                        
 votes in favour, 19 against and 14 abstentions.                                          
                                                                                          
 The United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea held its ninth                       
 session from 3 March to 4 April in New York and from 28 July to 29                       
 August in Geneva. It came to an agreement on most of the outstanding                     
 issues leading to the publication of a draft convention on the Law of                    
 the Sea (informal text) in August. It comprised 320 articles and 8                       
 annexes most of which reflected widespread agreement or near                             
 consensus. It embodied provisions relating to all aspects of the, Law                    
 of the Sea, viz. ter- ritorial waters, contiguous zone, exclusive                        
 economic zone, con- tinental shelf, straits, high seas, islands,                         
 archipelagos, landlocked and geographically disadvantaged States,                        
 maritime, scientific research, pollution, transfer of technology and                     
 the international seabed area and its resources.                                         
                                                                                          
 The Conference also settled difficult questions of the decision                          
 --making process in the Council of the proposed International seabed                     
 Authority. It was agreed that the decisions on crucially specified                       
 questions would require consensus whereas other ques- tions could be                     
 decided by a simple 2/3rd or 3/4th majority vote. This formula was                       
 originally proposed by India.                                                            
                                                                                          
 The next Session of the Conference is being held in New York from 9                      
 March to 17 April 1981. It will deal, inter alia, with the questions                     
 of the establishment of Preparatory Commis- sion and of interim                          
 authorisation of seabed exploration pending the entry into force of                      
 the Convention on the Law of the Sea. The Convention is expected to be                   
 finalised and opened for signa- ture later in 1981.                                      
                                                                                          
 India continued its participation in the deliberations of the Legal                      
 Sub-Committee of the UN Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space.                   
 The Sub-Committee held its nineteenth session                                            
                                                                                          
 pg52                                                                                     
                                                                                          
 in Geneva in March-April 1980 and discussed inter alia the principles                    
 governing the use by States of artificial earth satellites for direct                    
 television broadcasting, legal implications of remote sensing of the                     
 earth from space, definition and/or delimitation of outer space, outer                   
 space activities, and the use of nuclear power sources in the outer                      
 space.                                                                                   
                                                                                          
 Regarding direct broadcasting by satellites the Committee was not able                   
 to reach agreement on the outstanding principle of whether it was                        
 necessary to obtain agreement of a state on whose territory direct                       
 broadcasting by satellite is specifically directed.                                      
                                                                                          
 On remote sensing of the earth by satellites the Sub-Com- mittee was                     
 able to reach consensus on some principles. But no consensus could be                    
 reached on the question of prior consent of the sensed State for the                     
 dissemination of certain types of data, notification for conducting                      
 remote sensing activities and the applicability of the principle of                      
 full and permanent sovereignty over natural resources to remote                          
 sensing activities.                                                                      
                                                                                          
 Regarding definition and/or delimitation of outer space, a proposal                      
 was made by the USSR in the Legal Sub-Committee with regard to the                       
 establishment of a conventional boundary for air space and outer space                   
 not higher than 100 to 110 kms. above sea level. In this connection a                    
 number of delegations, while agreeing that there was a need for                          
 definition and delimitation of outer space, expressed the view that at                   
 the present stage of scientific development it was not possible to                       
 establish precise limits of outer space.                                                 
                                                                                          
 The item "use of nuclear power sources in outer space" was on the                        
 agenda for the first time. Except for the Soviet Union and the                           
 socialist countries, a majority of States were of the view that the                      
 use of nuclear power sources in outer space was a mat- ter of serious                    
 importance and concern to the whole of the inter- national community                     
 and as such specific regulations should be adopted for their use.                        
                                                                                          
 India participated in the Thirteenth Session of the United Nations                       
 Commission on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL) field at New York in                    
 July 1980 and played an active and con- structive role in the work of                    
 that organisation. The adoption of the UNCITRAL Conciliation Rules                       
 should, it is hoped, facilitate the settlement of international                          
 commercial disputes amicably between the parties. Further, India                         
 played a key role in the establishment of the Working Group on New                       
 International                                                                            
                                                                                          
 pg53                                                                                     
                                                                                          
 Economic Order and entrusting to it the subject of contracts in the                      
 field of industrial development.                                                         
                                                                                          
 The UNEP Working Group of Experts on Environmental Law held its Sixth                    
 and Seventh Sessions in Paris and Geneva from 30 June to 11 July 1980                    
 and 21 to 31 October 1980 res- pectively. The Working Group is engaged                   
 in formulating guidelines on "the legal aspects of off-shore mining                      
 and drilling carried out within the limits of national jurisdiction".                    
 India is a member of the Working Group.                                                  
                                                                                          
 The Working Group at its Sixth Session adopted certain guidelines on                     
 "contingency plans" to prevent and mitigate damages arising out of                       
 pollution caused by off-shore exploration and exploitation of                            
 hydrocarbons.                                                                            
                                                                                          
 The Working Group at its Seventh Session adopted certain guidelines on                   
 the question of "liability and compensation" arising out of pollution                    
 caused by off-shore exploration and exploitation of hydrocarbons.                        
                                                                                          
 The Anti-Apartheid (United Nations Convention) Bill, 1980, was                           
 introduced in Lok Sabha on 27 November 1980 to give effect to the                        
 provisions of the International Convention on the Suppression and                        
 Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid, 1973, to which India became a                      
 party on the 22 October 1977.                                                            
                                                                                          
 The Bill, however, could not be considered by the Lok Sabha at its                       
 Winter Session, due to heavy schedule of its work. It has been                           
 submitted to the current Budget Session of Parliament.                                   
                                                                                          
 The item of Drafting of a Convention against the Activities of                           
 Mercenaries was included in the agenda of the 34th Session (1979) of                     
 the General Assembly at the initiative of Nigeria and was considered                     
 directly in the Plenary. The General Assembly adopted by consensus                       
 resolution 34/140, which was also co- sponsored by India. At the 35th                    
 Session (1980), the item was allocated to the Sixth Committee and                        
 considered by it. On its recommendation, the General Assembly adopted                    
 by consensus resolution 35/48 whereunder a 35-member ad hoc Committee                    
 on the Drafting of a Convention against the Activities of Mer-                           
 cenaries will be established to elaborate an international conven-                       
 tion to prohibit the recruitment, use financing and training of                          
 mercenaries. India has been elected as a member of this ad hew                           
 Committee which met in New York from 20 January to 13 February, 1981.                    
 There was widespread support in the Sixth Committee from socialist and                   
 non-aligned countries for drafting such a convention.                                    
                                                                                          
 pg54                                                                                     
                                                                                          
 The Sixth Special Session of the General Assembly held in 1974 adopted                   
 two documents of supreme importance, namely, the Declaration and the                     
 Programme of Action on the Eestablish- ment of a New International                       
 Economic Order and the Charter of Eoconmic Rights and Duties of                          
 States. The General Assembly requested the Secretary-General in                          
 collaboration with the United Nations Institute, for Training and                        
 Research and in co- ordination with the United Nations Commission on                     
 International Trade Law, to study the question of the consolidation                      
 and pro- gressive development of the principles and norms of                             
 international economic law relating in particular to the legal aspects                   
 of the New International Economic Order, with a view to embodying them                   
 in one or more instruments, as appropriate (vide resolution 34/150 of                    
 17 December 1979).                                                                       
                                                                                          
 At its 35th session (1980), the General Assembly allocated the item to                   
 the Sixth Committee, which considered it on the basis of the Report of                   
 the Secretary-General (A/35/466). The deve- loping Countries which                       
 participated in the debate on this item stressed the great importance                    
 attached by them to the progressive development of the principles and                    
 norms of international econo- mic law relating to the New                                
 International Economic Order (NIEO). The western countries expressed                     
 the view that the Sixth Committee could not constructively embark upon                   
 this task as the principles and norms of international economic law                      
 were still in the process of evolution and development. The socialist                    
 countries agreed that there was considerable amount of disagree- ment                    
 among Members on the basic question of whether to under- take any                        
 consolidation and progressive development of inter- national economic                    
 law. Accordingly, the Sixth Committee re- commended to the General                       
 Assembly to request the United Nations Institute for Training and                        
 Research to prepare a list of the existing and evolving principles and                   
 norms of international law relating to NIEO concerning the economic                      
 relations among States, international organisations, other entities of                   
 public inter- national law, and the activities of trans-national                         
 corporations, inter alia, in the existing declarations, principles and                   
 resolutions on the subject as well as the Charter of Eoconomic Rights                    
 and Duties of States and on the basis of this list, prepare an analy-                    
 tical study, which the Secretary-General should submit to the General                    
 Assembly at its 36th session in 1981.                                                    
                                                                                          
 At the meeting of the Assembly of the International Tele-                                
 communication Satellite Organisation (INTELSAT) WA at Venice in                          
 October 1980, the nominee of India, Dr. R. K. Dixit,                                     
                                                                                          
 pg55                                                                                     
                                                                                          
 was elected a member of the Panel of Experts of INTELSAT. Later on in                    
 Novmber 1980, at the meeting of the Panel at Rome, he was unanimously                    
 elected its Chairman. It is for the first time that a member of the                      
 Asian African countries has been elected as Chairman of the Panel of                     
 Legal Experts of INTELSAT.                                                               
                                                                                          
 The 21st Annual Session of the Asian-African Legal Consul- tative                        
 Committee was held in Jakarta from 24 April to 1 May 1980. These dates                   
 coincided with the Commemoration of the Silver Jubilee Anniversary of                    
 the historic Bandung Conference. The Prime Minister of India sent a                      
 message of greetings in con- nection with the Commemoration Ceremony.                    
                                                                                          
 At the AALCC Session in Jakarta general statements were made on the                      
 theme "Asian-African Identity in World Affairs- Its Impact and                           
 Prospects for Future" as a part of the Com- memoration Ceremony. The                     
 Leader of the Indian Delegation, Shri Shiv Shanker, Minister of Law,                     
 Justice and Company Affairs, made a statement recalling the crucial                      
 and historic role played by the leaders at the Bandung Conference in                     
 1955. The Bandung Declaration and other Resolutions had provided the                     
 framework for cooperation among Asian and African States in all                          
 fields-economic, cultural and political. He recalled the tremendous                      
 progress made by the two continents since the Ban- dung Conference,                      
 particularly the liberation of Africa and the joint stand taken by                       
 Asian and African States for promoting eco- nomic growth and                             
 development of developing countries in different UN and other forums.                    
 He also recalled the role played by AALCC in providing solidarity                        
 among the Asian and African States in the legal field.                                   
                                                                                          
 The main subjects considered at the Session were: (1) Deve- lopments                     
 in the Law of the Sea; (2) Exploitation of the Exclu- sive Economic                      
 Zone; (3) Regional Economic Co-operation in the Industrial field as                      
 part of New International Economic Order; and (4) International Trade                    
 Law.                                                                                     
                                                                                          
 Two Working Groups on the Law of the Sea set up by the AALCC met in                      
 February 1981 at New Delhi and considered issues likely to come up at                    
 the 10th session of the UN Con- ference on the Law of the Sea being                      
 held in March-April 1981.                                                                
                                                                                          
 During 1980, India concluded 67 treaties and agreements. A final list                    
 of such treaties and agreements is at Appendix V.                                        
                                                                    TOP                   
                                                                                          
 FOREIGN ECONOMIC RELATIONS                                                               
 Jan 01, 1980                                                                             
                                                                                          
 CHAPTER IX                                                                               
                                                                                          
 FOREIGN ECONOMIC RELATIONS                                                               
                                                                                          
 The Ministry intensified its efforts towards further develop- ment of                    
 India's foreign economic relations. On the bilateral side, this was                      
 achieved, through an exchange of visits of high- level delegations, by                   
 strengthening economic and technical co- operation with developing                       
 countries and developed market eco- nomy and Socialist countries.                        
                                                                                          
 On-going economic cooperation with neighbouring countries in South                       
 Asia progressed satisfactorily on the whole. Out of 21 pilot projects                    
 that India had undertaken to set up in Burma under ITEC, 15 projects                     
 have already been completed and six are expected to be completed by                      
 June 1981.                                                                               
                                                                                          
 Machinery and equipment was supplied to Sri Lanka for set- ting up of                    
 three rural technical centres.                                                           
                                                                                          
 The export of skills and services to West Asian and North African                        
 countries continued its momentum. Several delegations from these areas                   
 visited India to recruit on direct contract terms personnel with                         
 expertise in different fields such as medicine, engineering,                             
 accountancy, finance, hydrology, etc. A standard recruitment protocol                    
 regarding doctors was finalised with Libya. The recruitment of                           
 teaching staff for universities and engineering institutions in                          
 Algeria progressed satisfactorily. In this connec- tion courses in                       
 functional French were organised in the Jawahar- lal Nehru University                    
 and Institute of Languages, Hyderabad, for professors prior to their                     
 departure for Algeria. Eruption of the conflict between Iran and Iraq                    
 created some bottlenecks in regard to India's economic programmes with                   
 these countries but progress was maintained by making efforts to                         
 remove these bottlenecks.                                                                
                                                                                          
 With African countries, the accent was on cooperation in the fields of                   
 small scale and medium scale industries, establishment of joint                          
 ventures, cooperation in agriculture and rural develop- ment and in                      
 the development of infrastructure and transport. Special mention may                     
 be made of four protocols signed with Zambia, at the time of the visit                   
 of President Kaunda, in the fields of industry, trade, joint ventures                    
 and agriculture and rural deve-                                                          
                                                                                          
 pg56                                                                                     
                                                                                          
 pg57                                                                                     
                                                                                          
 lopment. The visit of the Mozambique's Minister for Ports and Surface                    
 Transport is likely to result in greater cooperation bet- ween India                     
 and Mozambique in the field of railway development and management.                       
 India also participated as observer in the Second Southern African                       
 Development Coordination Conference held in Maputo for cooperation in                    
 development of infrastructure and transport in the Southern African                      
 region. India also extend- ed its cooperation to African countries in                    
 the grant of commer- cial credits and government-to-government                           
 credits. Cooperation with Seychelles was strengthened through                            
 undertaking of addi- tional programmes under ITEC.                                       
                                                                                          
 Cooperation with Laos and Vietnam in setting up of Buffalo Breeding                      
 centres made considerable progress. On the occasion of the visit of                      
 the Prime Minister of Vietnam, agreements were signed for supply of                      
 50,000 tonnes of rice on loan to Vietnam and for                                         
 government-to-government credit. During the visit of the President of                    
 Indonesia, it was agreed that officials of the two countries would                       
 meet soon to identify specific areas of coopera- tion.                                   
                                                                                          
 At the meeting of Heads of Mission in Latin American countries,                          
 presided over by the Minister of External Affairs, it was agreed that                    
 efforts should be made to solve the problem of shipping to this region                   
 and areas of cooperation in the field of consultancy and technical                       
 cooperation should be identified.                                                        
                                                                                          
 A sum of Rs. 8.32 crores was earmarked for implementation of various                     
 ITEC programmes during the financial year 1980-81. This was in                           
 addition to individual technical and economic co- operation programmes                   
 with Nepal, Bhutan and Bangladesh. The main beneficiaries under ITEC                     
 programme were Afghanis- tan, Sri Lanka, Burma, Mauritius, Tanzania,                     
 Vietnam, Laos, People's Democratic Republic of Yemen, Fiji, Thailand                     
 and Malawi. Under this programme, about 100 experts were deput- ed and                   
 about 1200 trainees from various countries underwent specialised                         
 courses in India. A sum of approximately Rs. 9 lakhs was made                            
 available as India's initial contribution to the Industrial                              
 Development Unit of the Commonwealth for pro- grammes connected with                     
 industrialisation of developing Com- monwealth countries such as                         
 pre-investment studies, identification of projects, preparation of                       
 feasibility reports, provision of train- ing facilities and                              
 implementation of priority projects. A sum of Rs. 50 lakhs was given                     
 to the Economic Commission for Africa under basic grants agreement for                   
 projects to be undertaken under economic and technical cooperation                       
 programmes among deve- loping countries. Other activities under ITEC                     
 programmes undertaken we-re supply of wheat seeds to the People's                        
 Demo- cratic Republic of Yemen equipment for a technical centre in                       
                                                                                          
 pg58                                                                                     
                                                                                          
 Fiji, Ayurvedic and Homeopathic medicines to Burma, school equipment                     
 to Laos, books to Somalia, scientific and laboratory equipment to                        
 Liberia and preparation of certain feasibility studies for setting up                    
 of industrial estates and manufacture of centrifugal pumps.                              
                                                                                          
 Other highlights of India's economic and technical coopera- tion with                    
 developing countries were the establishment of 39 joint ventures                         
 during the year in developing countries by private sector, deputation                    
 of experts numbering more than 1500 through gov- eminent agencies..                      
 grant of commercial credits and discussions and negotiations in regard                   
 to possible long-term arrangements/ agreements for meeting                               
 requirements of essential commodities such as crude oil, fertilizers,                    
 non-ferrous metals, etc.                                                                 
                                                                                          
 India and the Socialist countries of Eastern Europe continued to                         
 develop their trade and commercial exchanges and strengthen industrial                   
 and economic cooperation on the basis of effective follow-up of past                     
 decisions and new initiatives undertaken in the framework of joint                       
 commissions. Long term trade plans for 1981-85 were finalised with the                   
 Soviet Union and Romania. An economic cooperation agreement was                          
 entered into between India and the Soviet Union, during the visit of                     
 President Brezhnev, according to which the Soviet Union would grant a                    
 Rouble cre- dit of 520 million for projects in India to be set up with                   
 Soviet assistance.                                                                       
                                                                                          
 Several developed countries, particularly from Europe, showed interest                   
 in establishing and strengthening their technical and economic                           
 collaboration with India. Considerable progress was achieved in regard                   
 to the completion of negotiations with the European Economic Community                   
 towards the conclusion of a new commercial and economic cooperation                      
 agreement.                                                                               
                                                                                          
 The first session of the Indo-US Sub-Commission on Agri- culture was                     
 devoted in the setting of directions and priorities for cooperation in                   
 diverse areas such as forestries, wild life manage- ment, irrigation,                    
 soil conservation, water shed management, ani- mal husbandry and                         
 fisheries.                                                                               
                                                                                          
 The negative trends in the world economy and particularly the trebling                   
 of oil prices continued to be a source of great con- cern. India faced                   
 some real difficulties due to trade barriers, protectionism and other                    
 action taken by developed countries affecting its exports. The regular                   
 session of the UN General Assembly failed to adopt any positive                          
 recommendation in regard to measures for overcoming the critical                         
 economic situation of                                                                    
                                                                                          
 pg59                                                                                     
                                                                                          
 many developing countries. The Aid India Consortium meeting resulted                     
 in a pledge of bilateral assistance amounting to $ 3.4 billion. India                    
 also availed of SDR 1815 million (Rs. 815 crores approximately) of IMF                   
 facilities in order to stabilise the foreign exchange position. In                       
 addition, in view of constraints on its foreign exchange, position,                      
 India also resorted to commer- cial borrowings on very selective                         
 basis.                                                                                   
                                                                                          
 Spiralling costs of crude oil imports as well as security of supply,                     
 particularly in the wake of the flghting between Iran and Iraq, the                      
 two principal traditional suppliers of crude oil to India, were the                      
 major issues facing India in 1980. The long-term Strategy Committee of                   
 OPEC had put forward specific proposals in regard to compensation                        
 measures for alleviating the burden on oil importing developing                          
 countries and had proposed criteria based on per capita incomes as                       
 well as total oil imports for categorisation of developing countries                     
 that would be entitled to compensation measures. India made diplomatic                   
 demarche vis-a- vis members of OPEC for explaining the impact of oil                     
 rises on its balance-of-payments position and stressed that per capita                   
 oil imports and consumption rather than total imports were more                          
 relevant as a criteria. As a result there was greater understand- ing                    
 of India's sui generis case in this respect. Unfortunately, further                      
 pi-ogress in regard to finalisation of the recommendation by the,                        
 Long-term OPEC Stratey Committee and its ad- option by the OPEC Summit                   
 was blocked mainly due to Iran-Iraq conflict. This led India to look                     
 for crude oil supply from other OPEC countries in West Asia as well as                   
 non-tradi- tional sources, such as Venezuela, Mexico etc. While this                     
 helped in ensuring the requisite import requirements in 1980 this                        
 aspect would need a continual watch in 1981.                                             
                                                                                          
 A somewhat promising development was the elaboration of                                  
 action-oriented recommendations in regard to economic co- operating                      
 among developing countries in the sectors of trade, raw materials,                       
 energy, food, industrialisation, technology and finance, It was hoped                    
 that a package of inter-related measures which would now emerge, would                   
 contribute to the strengthening of collective self-reliance of the                       
 developing countries. A signi- ficant decision taken by India, within                    
 the framework of its invest- ment policy, related to permitting of                       
 portfolio investment in new companies by oil exporting developing                        
 countries. India will participate in a high level meeting on Economic                    
 Cooperation among Developing Countries which is expected to be held in                   
 May 1981.                                                                                
                                                                                          
 pg60                                                                                     
                                                                                          
 India is determined to continue its efforts for bringing about greater                   
 understanding and deeper appreciation of inter-depen- dence among                        
 nations--its relevance and importance-and for generating political                       
 will at highest level so that all nations which have their proper                        
 resources to contribute could take part in a cooperative efforts in                      
 optimising the results of international co- operation that would                         
 promote the development of the develop- ing countries. It was in this                    
 context that India responded posi- tively to the initiative taken by                     
 Austria and Mexico, in the wake of the near failure of the 11th                          
 Special Session for chartering out a course of appropriate action for                    
 the promotion of the develop- ment of developing countries and                           
 international economic co- operation, for convening a Restricted                         
 Summit meeting to consi- der the problems of cooperation and                             
 development. India parti- cipated in the meeting of Foreign Ministers                    
 from 11 countries held in Vienna, in November, for consultations in                      
 regard to the preparations for such a meeting. 1980                                      
                                                                    TOP                   
                                                                                          
 EXTERNAL PUBLICITY                                                                       
 CHAPTER X                                                                                
                                                                                          
 EXTERNAL PUBLICITY                                                                       
                                                                                          
 The External Publicity Division of the Ministry is responsible for the                   
 overall tasks of publicity affecting India's foreign relations. It                       
 also coordinates and supervises the press, public relations, publicity                   
 and cultural work done by Indian Missions abroad. The Division briefs                    
 and assists the Missions to interpret all aspects of India's foreign                     
 policy to the public and the media in countries of their respective                      
 accreditation. They are also kept informed of the political, economic                    
 social and cultural develop- ments in India in a manner so as to make                    
 foreign countries and people interested in developing and expanding                      
 relations with India.                                                                    
                                                                                          
 In the context of developments since 1979, the Division during this                      
 year had to deal with politically criticial situations; both in terms                    
 of domestic developments in India and India's external relations. The                    
 political uncertainties which characterised Indian political                             
 developments in 1979, put a special responsibility on the Division                       
 during 1980 to project Indian developments in their correct                              
 perspective abroad.                                                                      
                                                                                          
 The deteriorating international situation as reflected through                           
 developments in Indo-China, Afghanistan, Iran-Iraq conflict, the arms                    
 build up and the increasing Great Power rivalry marked the reversal of                   
 the process of detente. The Division gave a correct interpretation and                   
 projection of these developments.                                                        
                                                                                          
 A continuous critical evaluation of the functioning of XP Division                       
 made by the Parliament, public and the Ministers helped the Division                     
 in discharging its functions and tasks with purposiveness and                            
 flexibility inspite of limitation in terms of resources and manpower.                    
                                                                                          
 The Division made special publicity efforts to project India's firm                      
 commitment to democracy and non-alignment, to the estab- lishment of a                   
 new international economic order, to moral and material support for                      
 majority rule in Namibia and Zimbabwe and to the objectives of the                       
 United Nations in upholding peace and security in the world. As a                        
 result of initiatives taken by the External Publicity Division, the                      
 Indian news agencies agreed to appoint/have appointed additional                         
 representatives abroad.                                                                  
                                                                                          
 pg61                                                                                     
                                                                                          
 pg62                                                                                     
                                                                                          
 The Press Trust of India appointed Correspondents in Beijing, Kuala                      
 Lampur and Nairobi, the United News of India in Abu Dhabi; Hindustan                     
 Samachar and Samachar Bharati in Kathmandu and Dacca respectively.                       
                                                                                          
 Press Relations                                                                          
                                                                                          
 The Division handled visits of foreign journalists to India and those                    
 of Indians to other countries. 705 foreign journalists received                          
 temporary accreditation to cover elections, UNIDO, CHOGRM and-State                      
 official visits. Out of these 49 journalists visited the country on a                    
 professional basis. Journalists who received full hospitality as                         
 guests of the government numbered 23, those who were given local                         
 hospitality numbered 95 and 14 more journa- lists are expected as                        
 guests. Facilities were provided for 76 Indian journalists to visit                      
 different countries upto 31 December.                                                    
                                                                                          
 As regards television teams, permission was granted to 93 such teams                     
 and 16 requests of interviews with the Prime Minister were                               
 successfully arranged. By and large, the reporting by foreign media                      
 including items based on despatches by foreign correspondents                            
 stationed in India were factual. Whenever any deliberate or                              
 mischievous slant was detected, it was taken up with the correspondent                   
 in New Delhi by the Division as well as brought to the notice of the                     
 concerned publication through India's diplomatic Missions and the                        
 correct factual position explained to them. As regards unfavourable                      
 interpretation of events, which in foreign media, of course, is a                        
 matter of public opinion, the Mission under guidance from XP Division                    
 tried to give the correct perspective by meeting the editorial                           
 management of the publication.                                                           
                                                                                          
 Audio Visual Publicity                                                                   
                                                                                          
 Publicity through documentary and feature films has always been an                       
 effective medium of projection of India's image. About 210 prints of                     
 documentary films were supplied to Indian Missions abroad.                               
                                                                                          
 The Division began processing and commissioning of docu- mentary films                   
 on themes which would be relevant for international audiences. The                       
 films were : Indo-Bhutan Co-operation; Econo- mic Development in India                   
 and Celebration of the 1400th Anniversary of the Hijra Era. It was at                    
 the instance of the Division that the Films Division produced the film                   
 `Non-aligned Movement' primarily meant to be used during the                             
 Non-aligned                                                                              
                                                                                          
 pg63                                                                                     
                                                                                          
 Foreign Ministers' Meeting held in Delhi in February 1981. Besides,                      
 five documentary films were dubbed in Arabic for circu- lation among                     
 the Arab countries. On request of the Common- wealth Collection school                   
 of Peace Studies, university of Bradford, West Lancashire, U.K., the                     
 Division donated a 14 part docu- mentary film entitled `Mahatma' to                      
 the Institution.                                                                         
                                                                                          
 To spread the knowledge of Hindi, a film entitled `Learn Devnagri' was                   
 supplied to the Indian Mission in the Philippines.                                       
                                                                                          
 The following quality feature films were acquired:-                                      
                                                                                          
 27 Down; Tyagpatra; Trisandhya; Kodiyettam and Sonar Kella. These have                   
 been sent for subtitling in English, Spanish, Arabic and French. After                   
 sub-titling, these will be circulated among the Missions.                                
                                                                                          
 Many of the Missions participated in local film festivals. On request,                   
 special films were supplied to these Missions. Their own stocks also                     
 proved very useful.                                                                      
                                                                                          
 The Division sanctioned and authorised about twenty-five Missions to                     
 replace or acquire radio sets, cassette recorders, film projectors and                   
 slide projectors. Also video cassette equipment was authorised to one                    
 important Mission.                                                                       
                                                                                          
 Transmissions                                                                            
                                                                                          
 The Division kept Missions abroad informed of matters of current                         
 interest in India's relations with other countries as well as on                         
 important political, scientific, technological and economic                              
 developments in India through the External Publicity Transmis- sions                     
 (XPT) net work. These transmissions contained important pronouncement                    
 on Indian foreign policy made by the Govern- ment of India and the                       
 visiting dignitaries from various countries as well as by the official                   
 spokesman of the Ministry of External Affairs.                                           
                                                                                          
 Forty Missions received XPT, on an average consisting of 2000 to 2500                    
 words, through the OCS and eight through satellite channel. Missions                     
 not having facilities to receive XPT by either mode were fed through                     
 bi-weekly telexes or Press Cables. Twenty-nine Missions received                         
 bi-weekly telexes and six Missions bi-weekly press cables.                               
                                                                                          
 In order to improve the reception of transmissions abroad, it was                        
 decided to switch to the latest mode of communications via satellite.                    
 The existing service via satellite to Indian Missions in                                 
                                                                                          
 pg64                                                                                     
                                                                                          
 North and South America worked satisfactorily, and proposals are being                   
 considered to cover all the Missions in Europe and Africa through                        
 satellite service. The aim is to eventually put all the Missions on                      
 the satellite network.                                                                   
                                                                                          
 Printed Publicity                                                                        
                                                                                          
 The External Publicity Division continued to bring out its following                     
 regular publications : Foreign Affairs Record (monthly) the Indian and                   
 Foreign Review (fortnightly), Courrier de L'Inde (fortnightly, in                        
 French) for free distribution through Indian Missions and Posts                          
 abroad.                                                                                  
                                                                                          
 The Indian and Foreign Review was sent to all members of Parliament.                     
 It was continuously improved both in content and in lay out and its                      
 circulation went up from 13,500 in 1978-79 to nearly 25,000.                             
                                                                                          
 Apart from its regular publications, the Division brought out special                    
 booklets and pamphlets during important state and official visits. The                   
 following booklets and pamphlets were printed by the Division :                          
 India's views on the Afghan Situation; Indira Gandhi-Choice of the                       
 people; Indo-Yugoslav symposium on Non-Alignment-Text of Speech by                       
 Shri P. V. Narasimha Rao, Minister or External Affairs, at JNU on May                    
 14, 1980; Statement in Parliament by Shri P. V. Narasimha Rao,                           
 Minister of External Affairs on his visit to the USSR-17 June 1980:                      
 Darul-Uloom- Deoband-A Saga of Dedicated Work; Lok Sabha-Reply by Shri                   
 P. V. Narasimha Rao, Minister of External Affairs on debate on Budget                    
 demands of the MEA on 9 July 1980; Address by Shri P. V. Narasimha                       
 Rao, at the 25th Session of UN General Assembly in New York on 3                         
 October 1980; the visit of the Amir of Kuwait to India on 9-11                           
 September 1980; reprints of articles entitled "India : in a land of                      
 fables, the Industrial Reality" by Shri Sunder Rajan and Dr. Homi                        
 Sethna's (Chair- man of the Atomic Energy Commission) interview which                    
 originally appeared in the Statesman of 13 September 1980.                               
                                                                                          
 In addition, the Division also disseminated material produced by other                   
 Ministries and various departments of the Government of India.                           
                                                                                          
 During the calendar year 1980, 69 supplements were pub- lished; 51                       
 supplements on the occasion of Indian Republic Day 1980; 10                              
 supplements in foreign newspapers on the occasion of Indian                              
 Independence Day and 8 supplements covering economic and other topics.                   
 By and large, these supplements projected a                                              
                                                                                          
 pg65                                                                                     
                                                                                          
 favourable image of India. The assistance of the Indian Mis- sions,                      
 the Trade Fair Authority and other Ministries was secured in bringing                    
 out these supplements.                                                                   
                                                                                          
 The World Press Review containing comment, summary and analysis of                       
 foreign press on or of interest to India in foreign newspapers and                       
 periodicals continued to be brought out in cyclostyled form. During                      
 the year under review, 175 issues were issued. The Review was revamped                   
 and made more comprehen- sive to include country-wise press round up                     
 of foreign media.                                                                        
                                                                                          
 About 40 titles an Indian history, philosophy, religion, art and                         
 culture were supplied both to the libraries of indian Missions and for                   
 presentation purposes, A list of standard reference material                             
 consisting of about 260 books was prepared. These books are being                        
 procured and sent to Indian Missions. This work is expected to be                        
 completed by the end of next financial year.                                             
                                                                                          
 Visual Material                                                                          
                                                                                          
 The Division supplied posters, books, paintings, pictures etc., to the                   
 Missions abroad. Musical instruments and other material relevant to                      
 portray various aspects of Indian Culture abroad- were supplied to                       
 Missions abroad. This material is basically used for participating in                    
 local exhibitions.                                                                       
                                                                                          
 The Division sent about 12,000 black and white photographs for                           
 suitable display to the Missions during the year.                                        
                                                                    TOP                   
                                                                                          
 CULTURAL RELATIONS                                                                       
 CHAPTER XI                                                                               
                                                                                          
 CULTURAL RELATIONS                                                                       
                                                                                          
 The Indian Council for Cultural Relations continued to work as the                       
 main agency for promoting cultural relations bet- ween India and other                   
 countries. There was further expansion in its activities during the                      
 year because of the increase in the field of external exchange                           
 programmes and other steps taken to disseminate Indian culture abroad.                   
                                                                                          
 The Council received 101 distinguished visitors whose field of                           
 specialisation varied from fine arts to literature, education,                           
 science, medicine and technology. They came from Argentina,                              
 Bangladesh, Bhutan, Ethiopia, Federal Republic of Germany, German                        
 Democratic Republic, Ghana, Greece, Indonesia, Ireland, Japan,                           
 Mauritius, Mozambique, Norway, Peru, Sri Lanka, Sweden, UK, USA and                      
 USSR.                                                                                    
                                                                                          
 The ICCR sponsored the visit of a Qari and a Qariah to Indonesia for                     
 recitation of the Koran.                                                                 
                                                                                          
 Under the programmes of inviting delegations of performing arts, 36                      
 groups were invited, from Australia, Cuba, the Federal Republic of                       
 Germany, German Democratic Republic, Greece, Italy, Japan, Korea,                        
 Portugal, Trinidad, UK, USA, USSR, Venezuela, Vietnam and Yugoslavia.                    
 These delegations put up performances in various centres in India.                       
                                                                                          
 During the year, 81 visitors and 44 performing delegations were sent                     
 out to different parts of the world. Many well-known Indian artistes,                    
 including dancers and musicians, gave perfor- mances in various cities                   
 including prestigious International festi- vals. Indian Professors and                   
 academicians gave a number of lectures in the centres visited by them.                   
                                                                                          
 The 1979 Jawaharlal Nehru Award for International Understanding was                      
 conferred on Dr. Nelson R. Mandela at a dignified function held on                       
 Jawaharlal Nehru's birth anniversary on Nov 14, 1980. The award was                      
 received by Dr. Oliver Tambo on behalf of Dr. Mandela. The Nehru Award                   
 Secretariat also announced the nomination of Ms. Barbara Ward, the                       
 inter- nationally renowned economist, for the Jawaharlal Nehru Award                     
 for the year 1980.                                                                       
                                                                                          
 pg66                                                                                     
                                                                                          
 pg67                                                                                     
                                                                                          
 The ICCR received 5 exhibitions from Canada, GDR, Sri Lanka, Thailand                    
 and another entitled "Vistas Commonwealth Asia Pacific". Exhibitions                     
 were also sent to France, USA, Cuba, Peru and Venezuela.                                 
                                                                                          
 The following publications were brought out during the year : -                          
                                                                                          
 (i) Readings from India by GNS Raghavan.                                                 
                                                                                          
 (ii) Indian Music by B. C. Dave.                                                         
                                                                                          
 Regular publications of journals namely Indian Horizons, Cultural News                   
 from India, Papeles de la Indie, Rencontre Avec l 'Inde as well as the                   
 Africa Quarterly and the Hindi Quarterly were brought out on schedule.                   
 A special number of Gagananchal, the Hindi Quarterly, dedicated to                       
 Munshi Premchand, was also released.                                                     
                                                                                          
 Under the Indo-US sub-Commission on Culture, meetings were held of                       
 Joint Museums Committee and of the Indo- American Joint Advisory                         
 Committee on films and broadcasting.                                                     
                                                                                          
 The Council organised a number of seminars during the year. An                           
 Indo-Austrian seminar on non-alignment and neutrality was hold in                        
 November 1980. Two seminars, one on the life and works of Simon                          
 Bolivar and another on General San Martin and other Latin American                       
 liberators, were held in December 1980.                                                  
                                                                                          
 Under the programme of presentation of books/musical instruments and                     
 art objects, the respective requirements were sent to Indian Missions                    
 in almost all countries of the world.                                                    
                                                                                          
 Orientation courses on aspects of Indian life and culture, policies                      
 and programmes, economy and external relations were given to Indians                     
 going abroad, a group of American teachers and in addition to a                          
 visiting American group.                                                                 
                                                                                          
 The Council continued its work relating to the observation of the UN                     
 Day, OAU Day, the PLO Day, and other special events.                                     
                                                                                          
 The Indian Cultural Centres in Fiji, Guyana and Suriname arranged film                   
 shows and performances of dance and music as well as                                     
 lecture-cum-demonstrations, Hindi classes, plays and exhibitions.                        
                                                                                          
 The Council maintained Indian Professors teaching subjects like                          
 Indology, Social Sciences, Economic Planning and Deve-                                   
                                                                                          
 pg68                                                                                     
                                                                                          
 lopment, Business Management, etc. in the University of West Indies                      
 (Trinidad) El Collegio de Mexico, University of Guyana, Indonesia,                       
 University of Sophia (Bulgaria), University of Bucharest (Romania),                      
 American University of Beirut (Lebannon) and Humboldt University,                        
 Berlin (GDR).                                                                            
                                                                                          
 The Council continued to oversee the activities of the Foreign                           
 Cultural Centres in India by administering the British Libraries at                      
 Bangalore, Bhopal, Lucknow, Patna, Pune, Ranchi, Trivand- rum,                           
 Hyderabad and Ahmedabad. The House of Soviet Culture in Trivandrum                       
 organised a number of film shows, Russian language classes,                              
 exhibitions, talks, etc. aimed at projecting Soviet life and culture.                    
 Liaison was maintained with the Max Muller Bhavans in India and the                      
 Alliances Francaises.                                                                    
                                                                                          
 As usual, the Council received a large number of foreign students                        
 under various scholarships schemes of the Government, of India. Six                      
 Summer Camps for 450 students were organised in the summer months and                    
 12 study tours were organised for 500 other students.                                    
                                                                                          
 A substantial number of titles were added to the Library of the                          
 Council which has nearly 50,000 books.                                                   
                                                                                          
 The scheme for providing educational facilities in the fields of                         
 medicine and engineering to self-financing foreign students, from                        
 developing countries was continued during the year. Appli- cations                       
 increased by more than 60% for engineering degree courses and by more                    
 than 35% for the medical degree course as compared to last year.                         
                                                                                          
 Applications were received from nearly 50 countries. From the 1477                       
 applications for admission to the medical degree course, 54 students                     
 were selected and nominated to various medical colleges in India.                        
 Similarly, from the 1276 applica- tions for admission to engineering                     
 degree courses, 155 students were selected and nominated to various                      
 engineering colleges including IITS. Lately, requests from foreign                       
 students for admission to engineering diploma courses at various                         
 polytech- nic institutes also started increasing. During the year                        
 1980, 43 foreign students were selected and nominated to such courses.                   
                                                                                          
 In addition, 12 out of 197 applicants from Nepal and 3 out of 5                          
 applicants from Bhutan were nominated to the M.B.B.S. course. For                        
 engineering courses, 30 out of 102 applicants from Nepal and 2                           
 applicants from Bhutan were nominated.                                                   
                                                                    TOP                   
                                                                                          
 PROTOCOL                                                                                 
 Jan 01, 1980                                                                             
                                                                                          
 CHAPTER XII                                                                              
                                                                                          
 PROTOCOL                                                                                 
                                                                                          
 During the year the Heads of Mission of the following countries left                     
 India on completion of their assignment :-                                               
                                                                                          
 Ambassadors of Denmark, Iraq, Ireland, Mongolia, Thai- land,                             
 Philippines, Libya, Republic of Korea, Senegal, Syria, U.A.E., USA,                      
 Spain and Bhutan and High Commissioners of Australia, Tanzania and                       
 Uganda.                                                                                  
                                                                                          
 The Heads of Mission of the following countries presented their                          
 credentials to the President :-                                                          
                                                                                          
 Ambassadors of Ireland, Iraq, Mexico, Niger, Afghanistan, Thailand,                      
 Mongolia, Republic of Korea, Bhutan, Panama (Non-resident), Tunisia                      
 (New Mission), Kampuchea (New Mission), U.A.E. and Uganda and High                       
 Commissioner of Tanzania.                                                                
                                                                                          
 The status of the Representative of the P.L.O. has been raised to that                   
 of an Ambassador.                                                                        
                                                                                          
 pg69                                                                                     
                                                                    TOP                   
                                                                                          
 PASSPORT, EMIGRATION AND CONSULAR SERVICES                                               
 CHAPTER XIII                                                                             
                                                                                          
 PASSPORT, EMIGRATION AND CONSULAR SERVICES                                               
                                                                                          
 The administrative machinery which had been geared up during the                         
 previous years to provide maximum facilities for the issue of                            
 passports to Indian citizens wishing to travel abroad for business,                      
 employment or other purposes was further toned up during the year.                       
 This was done by making adjustments in the strength of officers and                      
 staff working in various passport offices throughout the country and                     
 substantive changes in the rules and procedures pertaining to the                        
 issue of passports. Proce- dures regarding emigration clearance to                       
 Indian workers going abroad for employment purposes were also                            
 streamlined with a view to provide speedy and trouble-free service.                      
                                                                                          
 The number of applications for the issue of passports and other                          
 services received during 1980 remained about the same as in the year                     
 1979, i.e. about 10 lakhs applications for pass- port and about 5                        
 lakhs applications for miscellaneous services. A detailed statement                      
 showing the number of applications for issue of passports and                            
 miscellaneous services received and the number of passports issued and                   
 the miscellaneous services rendered during the year is given at                          
 Appendix VI.                                                                             
                                                                                          
 The standard of efficiency in issue of passports and render- ing                         
 miscellaneous services achieved during 1979 improved fur- ther during                    
 this year by introducing a continuing process of reorganising the                        
 working of passport offices and deployment of special task force for                     
 clearing arrears wherever necessary. Rendering of miscellaneous                          
 services was made speedier as compared to the past year.                                 
                                                                                          
 Keeping in view the existence of a large number of state- less persons                   
 like Tibetan refugees and persons of Indian origin from Uganda,                          
 Malaysia and Vietnam, the procedure for issue of Identity Certificates                   
 and their renewal was streamlined with a view to provide expeditious                     
 and smooth service.                                                                      
                                                                                          
 The passport Rules 1967 made under the provisions of the Passports                       
 Act, 1967 were reviewed in the light of the experience gained during                     
 the last 13 years. All ambiguities which could lead to delays in                         
 rendering passport services were removed and                                             
                                                                                          
 pg70                                                                                     
                                                                                          
 pg71                                                                                     
                                                                                          
 the prescribed forms revised so as to elicit only absolutely necessary                   
 information required for rendering a service. These are now more clear                   
 and devoid of chances of their being inter- preted differently by                        
 different persons. The revised rules are already with the press and                      
 are likely to be published soon.                                                         
                                                                                          
 A number of proposals which would further improve the quality of                         
 services rendered by the Central Passport & Emigra- tion Organisation                    
 to the members of the public were actively pursued. These included :-                    
                                                                                          
 (a) introduction of a new passport booklet which will be smaller in                      
 size with more pages and a flexible cover, as soon as the existing                       
 stock of passport booklets is exhausted; and                                             
                                                                                          
 (b) gradual introduction of computerised method in respect of                            
 storage/retrieval of factual informa- tion relating to the passports                     
 issued.                                                                                  
                                                                                          
 During the first eleven months of the year 1980, the total revenue                       
 earned by the passport, offices was Rs. 552.44 lakhs as compared to                      
 the revenue of Rs. 528.50 lakhs during 1979. The expenditure in 1980                     
 was Rs. 135.97 lakhs as compared to the expenditure of Rs. 143.19                        
 lakhs in 1979.                                                                           
                                                                                          
 The exodus of Indian workers to the West Asian and North African                         
 regions for employment continued to show an upward trend during 1980.                    
 To facilitate emigration of workers without undue hindrance and to                       
 protect them from exploitation in India and abroad at the hands of                       
 unscrupulous agents and foreign employers, government procedures were                    
 further stream- lined and new measures introduced.                                       
                                                                                          
 Emigration procedures continued to be based on the guide- lines                          
 provided by the Supreme Court order of Mar 20, 1979. Within the                          
 guidelines set by this order the process of emigra- tion was                             
 simplified. The emigration checks which had been instituted at the                       
 airports and which were causing inconvenience to the bona-fide                           
 passengers were discontinued with effect from 1 November 1980. This                      
 system of check was replaced by a new system under which the point of                    
 check was shifted to the Passport Office. At the time of issue of                        
 passport itself, an indication would be made on the passport booklets                    
 whether the person needed an emigration clearance or not. This would                     
 also ensure that persons who required emigration clearance did                           
                                                                                          
 pg72                                                                                     
                                                                                          
 not proceed abroad without fulfilling the required emigration                            
 formalities.                                                                             
                                                                                          
 With the simplification of emigration procedures and publi city of the                   
 benefits to the workers, if they went abroad after fulfilment of due                     
 observance of emigration formalities, the number of workers whose                        
 employment agreements were regis- tered with the Protectors of                           
 Emigrants showed a marked increased over the earlier years. From a                       
 moderate figure of 4186 in 1976, the registrations increased to 22,854                   
 in 1977 and to 69,006 in 1978. During 1979, 2,05,000 employment                          
 agreements were registered. Upto October 1980 this figure had reached                    
 2,34,361 for the current year.                                                           
                                                                                          
 Reports of unscrupulous elements duping the unwary job seekers,                          
 however, continued to be received from time to time. On receipt of                       
 such reports these were referred to appropriate authorities for                          
 investigation and action.                                                                
                                                                                          
 A proposal to introduce a new legislation on emigration has reached                      
 its final stages. The Bill is likely to be introduced in the                             
 Parliament shortly. Another proposal to set up a man- power                              
 corporation in the public sector at the Central level to assist Indian                   
 job seekers in obtaining jobs abroad is also under active                                
 consideration of the Government. Those proposals aim at bringing the                     
 activities or unscrupulous recruiting elements under effective                           
 regulatory controls.                                                                     
                                                                                          
 Indian Missions abroad extended financial assistance to 73 Indian                        
 nationals who got atranded as against 56 in 1979. The number of                          
 destitute Indians repatriated from abroad, in- cluding a batch of 106                    
 from Israel, was 473 as compared to 444 during 1979. Deaths of 463                       
 Indians who died abroad were reported to the Ministry during 1980. In                    
 1979 deaths of 354 were reported. The Government took up with the                        
 rele- vant foreign authorities, the question of settlement of their                      
 claims and/or compensation.                                                              
                                                                                          
 There was a sharp increase in the number of various docu- ments                          
 requiring attestation by the Ministry before submission to the foreign                   
 Governments/Embassies. As against 71,001 in 1979, the number of                          
 documents attested in 1980 jumped to 1,03,892 registering an increase                    
 of over 46%.                                                                             
                                                                    TOP                   
                                                                                          
 ORGANISATION AND ADMINISTRATION                                                          
 CHAPTER XIV                                                                              
                                                                                          
 ORGANISATION AND ADMINISTRATION                                                          
                                                                                          
 Shri P. V. Narasimha Rao continued as Minister of Exter- nal Affairs.                    
 There were no changes at the level of Foreign Secretary and other                        
 Secretaries during the year. At the level of Additional Secretary,                       
 Shri J. R. Hiremath took over charge of the Policy Planning and Review                   
 Division.                                                                                
                                                                                          
 The total strength at the headquarters, comprising 21 Divi- sions (of                    
 which 9 are specialised Divisions), was about 2500, out of which about                   
 560 were officers. The detailed staff strength is given at Appendix                      
 XI.                                                                                      
                                                                                          
 A detailed review of the working and staff requirements of the Policy                    
 Planning and Review Division was carried out during the year. As a                       
 result, a substantial augmentation of its strength took place to make                    
 it an effective tool in the work of the Ministry of External Affairs.                    
 The Division is supervised by the Foreign Secretary and an Additional                    
 Secretary, with a full time staff of a Joint Secretary, a Director,                      
 two Deputy Secretaries, two Deputy Directors and other staff.                            
                                                                                          
 In Missions and Posts abroad, there were about 700 diplo- matic                          
 officers and about 3,000 non-diplomatic officials, includ- ing                           
 locally-recruited employees.                                                             
                                                                                          
 A list of the number of officers who have qualified in various                           
 languages is given at Appendix XII.                                                      
                                                                                          
 During the year, two new Indian Missions were opened, in Seychelles                      
 and in Cyprus. A Mission was opened in Kampu- chea in January 1981.                      
                                                                                          
 Global inflationary pressures continued unabated during the year.                        
 Several administrative and financial reforms, therefore, were                            
 considered and implemented in order to reduce their im- pact. These                      
 reforms, which led to the elimination of routine work, also rendered                     
 staff surplus in a number of Missions. Staff was accordingly reduced                     
 in larger Missions, such as London, Washington, Kathmandu, Rangoon,                      
 etc. Some of the staff rendered surplus were diverted to Missions in                     
 West Asia and North Africa where workload had increased tremendously                     
                                                                                          
 pg73                                                                                     
                                                                                          
 pg74                                                                                     
                                                                                          
 in recent years, in particular due to the increasing numbers of Indian                   
 nationals visiting and working in those areas. The total expenditure                     
 on all Missions abroad was thus kept to the reasonable amount of Rs.                     
 41 crores. (The expenditure at the headquarters was about Rs. 7                          
 crores). Details are given at Appendix IX and X.                                         
                                                                                          
 A substantial portion of the budget of Missions abroad was on rental                     
 of office and residential accommodation. Vigorous efforts were,                          
 therefore, made to acquire and construct own properties. A Five-Year                     
 Plan document was prepared and approved by the Government. A total sum                   
 of Rs. 70 crores is proposed to be invested between 1980 and 1985 on                     
 acquisition and construction of property abroad.                                         
                                                                                          
 In pursuance of the recommendations of the Estimates Com- mittee of                      
 Parliament, a number of Missions were inspected to assess their                          
 functional effectiveness and to bring about optimum efficiency in                        
 their working. The Missions visited were in the developing countries.                    
                                                                                          
 Special teams were despatched to Kuwait and Amman, at the time of the                    
 outbreak of the Iran-Iraq conflict, to provide immediate assistance to                   
 Indian nationals seeking to leave the zone of conflict.                                  
                                                                                          
 The Welfare Unit of the Ministry continued to look after the general                     
 welfare of all officials serving at headquarters and Missions abroad.                    
 Employment opportunities were provided to deserving dependants of the                    
 deceased officials. Financial assistance was provided to some                            
 deserving officials from the Staff Benefit Fund.                                         
                                                                                          
 A Special Cell continued to function to watch and monitor the progress                   
 of the implementation of the reservation order in respect of the                         
 Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. The details are given at                          
 Appendix VII and Appendix VIII.                                                          
                                                                    TOP                   
                                                                                          
 USE OF HINDI IN OFFICIAL WORK                                                            
 CHAPTER XV                                                                               
                                                                                          
 USE OF HINDI IN OFFICIAL WORK                                                            
                                                                                          
 The Ministry continued to make every effort to ensure the use of Hindi                   
 in the official work of the Ministry, including all Indian Missions                      
 abroad and the Regional Passport Offices in India. In order to keep a                    
 watch on the progress of implementa- tion of Govrenment instructions                     
 in this regard, the Official Language Implementation Committee of the                    
 Ministry headed by Additional Secretary (Admn.) met periodically. In                     
 some of the bigger Missions where such Implementation Committees have                    
 been constituted, the progress made in this field was reviewed. The                      
 Implementation Committee of the Ministry in its meetings reviewed the                    
 reports received from the Missions and Regional Passport Offices and                     
 necessary instructions to ensure further pro- gress in the use of                        
 Hindi as the Union Official Language were issued. In order to ensure                     
 fuller implementation of the Official Language Rules, 1976, in the                       
 Ministry, instructions were issued by the Foriegn Secretary and the                      
 Additional Secretary (Admn.).                                                            
                                                                                          
 Apart from the above, Hindi continued to be used extensively, in the                     
 protocol matters relating to international treaties and agree- ments.                    
 Various documents like Letters of Credence, Letters of Recall,                           
 Commissions of Appointment and other protocol docu- ments were                           
 prepared in Hindi.                                                                       
                                                                                          
 A large number of notifications and office orders were issued in Hindi                   
 and quite a large number of letters received from mem- bers of the                       
 public and the State Governments were replied to in Hindi. Many                          
 letters were also issued in, Hindi to the Missions abroad and to the                     
 Regional Passport Offices and some of the Missions also sent replies                     
 in Hindi. This year, the number of such letters had increased. Some of                   
 them were even handwritten. This reflected the sincere efforts on the                    
 part of the Missions abroad to implement the instructions on the use                     
 of Hindi in their official work.                                                         
                                                                                          
 The process of equipping Indian Missions with Hindi type- writers,                       
 stenographers/typists trained in Hindi, books in Hindi for libraries                     
 as well as for children, progressively continued. Seventy-two Hindi                      
 typewriters had already been supplied to the                                             
                                                                                          
 pg75                                                                                     
                                                                                          
 pg76                                                                                     
                                                                                          
 Indian Missions and efforts were continued to send at least one Hindi                    
 typewriter to each of the remaining Missions. Efforts were made to                       
 post Hindi-knowing stenographers/typists to Indian Missions abroad and                   
 to impart training in Hindi typewriting/ stenography to our staff.                       
 Steps are also being taken to create more posts of Hindi Officers for                    
 our Missions abroad, RPOs and also for the Headquarters. This will be                    
 in addition to the three posts already available for the Missions in                     
 Fiji Mauritius and Trinidad.                                                             
                                                                                          
 English-Hindi and Hindi-English Dictionaries and also a set of help                      
 literature had already been supplied to all Indian Missions abroad. A                    
 booklet consisting of Hindi terms used in inter- national treaties and                   
 agreements was prepared and supplied to all Indian Missions abroad and                   
 Ministries/Departments of the Gov- ernment of India enabling them to                     
 prepare the Hindi version of such agreements and treaties.                               
                                                                                          
 During the year under review, three groups of Members of Parliament                      
 belonging to the Committee of Parliament on Official Language visited                    
 25 Indian Missions abroad to see the progress of Hindi in their                          
 official work and these groups were assisted by three officers of the                    
 Ministry. These groups made certain sugges- tions at their meetings                      
 held in the Missions and these suggestions were examined in greater                      
 detail at the Headquarters and, in keeping with their views, all                         
 efforts are being made to accelerate the pace with regard to the use                     
 of Hindi in the Missions and for this purpose the question of creation                   
 of posts of Hindi Officers etc. in the Missions abroad is under active                   
 consideration.                                                                           
                                                                                          
 The Minister of External Affairs addressed the 35th Session of the                       
 United Nations General Assembly partly in Hindi. It is hoped that in                     
 the comity of nations Hindi will have its rightful place.                                
                                                                                          
 Efforts to popularise Hindi in foreign countries, particularly with a                    
 large number of people of Indian origin, continued during the year. A                    
 get-together to meet an eminent Burmese Hindi writer was organised in                    
 Delhi in which quite a few local Hindi writers, poets and journalists                    
 and also some Members of Parlia- ment participated.                                      
                                                                                          
 A set of 110 standard Hindi books was supplied to all Indian Missions                    
 abroad to be kept permanently in their libraries for reference                           
 purposes. This was in addition to the books supplied to some of the                      
 Missions under the Scheme for the propagation of Hindi abroad.                           
                                                                                          
 pg77                                                                                     
                                                                                          
 Just like `Manas Chatushati' and `Sur Panchshati', Prem Chand                            
 Centenary Celebrations were organised by some of the Missions in                         
 cooperation with the local voluntary organisations and the Missions in                   
 Mauritius, Fiji, Trinidad, USSR and UK did some commendable work on                      
 this occasion. Eminent local writers partcipated in such functions and                   
 some of the Missions published articles on Prem Chand in their news                      
 bulletins. A set of books on Prem Chand, including his writings, was                     
 sent to 25 Indian Missions and this set of literature was well                           
 received by all those who are interested in the study of this great                      
 writer. Some children's Hindi books were also sent to some of the                        
 Missions so that the efforts being made by local voluntary Hindi                         
 organisa- tions in those countries could thus be encouraged and                          
 supple- mented. Linguaphone records and charts, etc. in Devnagari                        
 script were sent to Missions where foreigners had evinced interest in                    
 learning Hindi. The Missions were also asked to encourage the members                    
 of staff and foreigners to learn Hindi through Cor- respondence                          
 Course.                                                                                  
                                                                                          
 Children's Hindi Classes continued to make a steady progress in more                     
 than 20 of the Indian Missions abroad. Newspaper Exchange Programme                      
 also had its impact in places where news- papers and magazines are                       
 published in Hindi, in countries like Mauritius, Fiji and UK, etc.                       
                                                                                          
 In spite of the financial constraints, all efforts were made to ensure                   
 the use of Hindi in the working of the Ministry of External Affairs,                     
 Regional Passport Offices and Indian Missions abroad, and steps were                     
 taken to popularise Hindi in foreign countries within the cultural                       
 framework of India's foreign policy.                                                     
                                                                                          
 APPENDIX I Major International Conferences/Meetings/Seminars                             
 Appendices                                                                               
                                                                                          
 pg79-80                                                                                  
                                                                                          
 APPENDIX I                                                                               
                                                                                          
 Major International Conferences/Meetings/Seminars etc., organised by                     
 Inter- Governmental Organisations (such as UN and its specialised                        
 Agencies like WHO, ILO, ICAO, FAO, UNDP, UNIDO, IMCO etc.) at which                      
 the GOVERN-MENT OF INDIA was represented in 1980-81.                                     
 ----------------------------------------------                                           
 Sl.       Title of Conference etc.   Foreign Ex-                                         
 No.       (with venue and date)     change  com-                                         
                                      ponent  of                                          
                                   expenditure in                                         
                                     rupees                                               
 --------------------------------------------------------                                 
 1                       2              3                                                 
 --------------------------------------------------------                                 
 1.  Biological Weapons Review Conference in Geneva, 3  Nil                               
     to Mar 21, 1980.                                                                     
                                                                                          
 2.  4th Meeting of UNIDO Panel on Leather and Leather  Nil                               
     Products Industry held in Beijing (Peking) from 11 to                                
     15 March 1980.                                                                       
                                                                                          
 3.  Training Course on Organisational and Management   Nil                               
     of Food Industries at Central Food Techincal Re-                                     
     search Institute, Mysore from 10 March to 28 April                                   
     1980.                                                                                
                                                                                          
 4.  Workshop on Environmental Resources Manage-     Nil                                  
     ment and Development held at Moscow from 31 March                                    
     to 2 May 1980.                                                                       
                                                                                          
 5.  Seminar on Migration Urbanisation and Settlement  Nil                                
     held at Manila from 19 to 27 April 1980.                                             
                                                                                          
 6.  FAO/Preparatory Meeting for the 6th session of World                                 
     Food Council, Rome, 28 to 30 April 1980.     3,615.00                                
                                                                                          
 7.  FAO/DSC Rural Market Development Programmes/                                         
     Asian Regional Evaluation Workshop at Bangalore                                      
     from 28 April to 2 May 1980.                                                         
                                                                                          
 8.  Seminar on Policy Guidelines and Curriculam, Manila Nil                              
     (Philippines), Development for more effective migration                              
     and resettlement policies organised by "Social Welfare                               
     Development Centre for Asia and the Pacific".                                        
                                                                                          
 9.  109th session of Executive Board of UNESCO held                                      
     in Paris from 30 April to June 1980.          12,500.00                              
                                                                                          
 10. 13th Session of the Permanent Committee and 14th                                     
     session of the Industrial Development Board (IDB) 18,079.41                          
     of UNIDO held in Vienna (Austria) from 5 to 19 May                                   
     1980.                                                                                
 --------------------------------------------------------                                 
                                                                                          
                                                                                          
 -------------------------------------------------------                                  
 1                                  2                3                                    
 -------------------------------------------------------                                  
                                                                                          
 11.  Second Substaliture session of United Nations Disarma-                              
      ment Commission, New York, 12 May to 6 June 1980.                                   
                                          23,693.20                                       
                                                                                          
 12.  Preparatory Meeting of 16th COAG (6th session),  Nil                                
      Rome, 20 to 22 May 1980.                                                            
                                                                                          
 13.  Eleventh seminar in Population organised by East- Nil                               
      West Population Institute, Honolulu, 31 May to 4 July                               
      1980.                                                                               
                                                                                          
 14.  International Law Commission held in Vienna from  Nil                               
      18 May to 25 July 1980.                                                             
                                                                                          
 15.  21st Annual session of the Asian African Legal Con-                                 
      sultative Committee held in Djakarta from 24 April to                               
      1 May 1980.  14,192.00                                                              
                                                                                          
 16.  6th session of World Food Council, Arusha (Tanzania),                               
      2 to 6 June 1980.                       38,550.00                                   
                                                                                          
 17.  UNIDO 2nd Consultative Meeting on Leather and                                       
      Leather Products Industry held in Cologne (FRG),                                    
      from 23 to 27 June 1980.                   8,930.85                                 
                                                                                          
 18.  6th session of FAO Commission on Fertilizers, Rome,                                 
      30 June to 3 July 1980.                  11,335.00                                  
                                                                                          
 19.  XIIITH session of the UNCITRAL held in New York,                                    
      from 14 to 25 July 1980.               33,335.00                                    
                                                                                          
 20.  FAO seminar in World Life Resources for Rural De- Nil                               
      velopment, Hyderabad, July 1980.                                                    
                                                                                          
 21.  Vital Organisation Working Group  organised by   Nil                                
      East-West Population Institute, Honolulu from 28                                    
      July to 5 September 1980.                                                           
                                                                                          
 22.  Meeting of coordinating Group on Food and Agri-                                     
      culture of Non-aligned Countries, Belgrade, 7 to 9                                  
      July 1980.  13,125.00                                                               
                                                                                          
 23.  Eighth Commonwealth Education Conference held                                       
      in Colombo, Sri Lanka from 5 to 13 August 1980.                                     
  15,186.00                                                                               
 24.  5th World Congress on Rural Sociology held at Mexico                                
      from 7 to 12 August 1980.  Nil                                                      
                                                                                          
 25.  High Level Seminar on Institutional Capability for                                  
      Regional Development in Asia held at Najoya (Japan)                                 
      from 16 to 20 August 1980.  Nil                                                     
                                                                                          
 26.  National Conference on Population & Urban Feature                                   
      held in Rome (Italy) from 1 to 4 September 1980.                                    
   Nil                                                                                    
 27.  FAO/UK/India/TCDC Regional Managerial Training                                      
      Courses by Fertiliser Association of India, Bangalore                               
      from 1 to 13 September 1980.  Nil                                                   
                                                                                          
 28. India/FAO/Norway Seminar on maximising fertilisers N.A.                              
      use efficiency, New Delhi, 15 to 19 September 1980.                                 
 ----------------------------------------------------------                               
                                                                                          
 ----------------------------------------------------------                               
 1                   2                                   3                                
 ------------------------------------------------------------                             
 29.  APPRACA/NAIA Seminar on Crop Insurance at   9,675.00                                
      Tokyo, 16 to 20 September  1980.                                                    
                                                                                          
 30.  Organisation of 2nd FAO/IBPGR/ICAR Regional N.A.                                    
      Training Course on Plant genetic resources exploration                              
      and collecting techniques for South Asia at NBPGR,                                  
      New Delhi, 17 September to 16 October 1980.                                         
                                                                                          
 31.  M.Sc. Course in Demograpby Training at the London Nil                               
      School of Economics under "Colombo Plan", London                                    
      from 29 September 1980 to 28 September 1981.                                        
                                                                                          
 32.  UNIDO Fifth Meeting of Heads of Technology Trans- Nil                               
      fer Registries and similar Institutions held in Buenos                              
      Aires (Agrentina) from 15 to 19 September 1980.                                     
                                                                                          
 33.  UNIDO Third Consultation Meeting on Pharmaceuticals Nil                             
      Industry held in Sao Paulo (Brazil) from 29 September                               
      to 4 October 1980.                                                                  
                                                                                          
 34.  24th General Conference of the IAEA Vienna, 22 to 29                                
        September 1980.  40,885.00                                                        
                                                                                          
                                                                                          
 35.  FAO/5th session of the Regional Animal Production                                   
     and Health Commission for Asia, The Far East and                                     
      South-west Pacific, Bangkok, 6 to 11 October 1980.                                  
  2,030.00                                                                                
                                                                                          
 36.  14th session of the Permanent Committee and Second                                  
       Special session of the Industrial Development Board                                
      (IDB) of UNIDO held in Vienna (Austria) from 13 to                                  
      17 October 1980. 6,647.06                                                           
                                                                                          
                                                                                          
 37.  FAO Training Course in Compost Technology at IARI,                                  
      New Delhi from 1 October to 5 November 1980. N.A.                                   
                                                                                          
 38.  UNIDO Meeting on exchange of Experience & Coopera-                                  
      tion among developing countries in the development of                               
      Agricultural Machinery Industry including demonstra-                                
      tion visits in Beijing (Peking), China, 22 to 27 October                            
      1980.   Nil                                                                         
                                                                                          
                                                                                          
 39.  Commonwealth Expert Group Consultation on Veteri-                                   
      nary Services to Small farmers in developing common-                                
      wealth countries from 27 October to 1 November 1980                                 
      at Anand (Gujarat).  N.A.                                                           
                                                                                          
 40.  FAO/DANIDA Workshop on handling Small Fish in                                       
      Arabian Sea, Mangalore, 3 to 15 November 1980.                                      
  NA.                                                                                     
 41.  FAO Workshop on Women's participation in Agri-                                      
     culture and Rural development, Hyderabad, 17 to 22                                   
      November 1980.  NA                                                                  
                                                                                          
                                                                                          
 42.  25th session of the International Lead & Zinc Study                                 
      Group held in Geneva from 16 to 23 October 1980                                     
  N.A.                                                                                    
 43.  FAO/GCP/RAS/92-Integrated Pest Control in Rice                                      
      in Asia & The Pacific Meeting of National Programme                                 
      Leaders, Bangkok, 22 to 24 October 1980.  Nil                                       
 ---------------------------------------------------------                                
                                                                                          
 ---------------------------------------------------------                                
 1                        2                            3                                  
 ---------------------------------------------------------                                
 44.  The Seventh session of the UNEP Working Group                                       
      Meeting held in Geneva from 21 to 31 October 1980                                   
     Nil                                                                                  
 45.  21st session of UNESCO held in Belgrade from 23                                     
      September to 28 October 1980.   Nil                                                 
                                                                                          
 46.  12th session of FAO's Plant Protection Committee for                                
      the South East Asia and Pacific Region, Chiangmai,                                  
      27 October to 3 November 1980.  Nil                                                 
                                                                                          
 47.  FAO/SIDA 6th Advisory Committee Meeting of the                                      
      Bay of Bengal Programme (GCP/RAS/O40/SWE)                                           
      in Penang, 4 to 7 November 1980.  Nil                                               
                                                                                          
 48.  Official Discussions with UNIDRIOT in Rome on the                                   
      26 & 27 November 1980.   2,000.00                                                   
                                                                                          
 49.  FAO/APHCA Regional Training Course/Workshop on                                      
      date base on limestack resources at Indian Agricultural                             
      Research Statistics Institute, New Delhi from 1 to 6                                
      December 1980. N.A.                                                                 
                                                                                          
 50.  UNEP Meeting on Deserlification Control, Nairobi                                    
      17 to 29 November 1980. Nil                                                         
                                                                                          
 51.  UNIDO sponsored solidarity meeting of Minister of                                   
     industries from developing countries to assist the Indus-                            
      trial development of Bangladesh at Dacca from 2 to 5                                
      December 1980.    Nil                                                               
                                                                                          
                                                                                          
 52.  FAO Seminar on role of women in social Forestry at                                  
      Forest Research Institute & Colleges, Dehradun, 4 to                                
      9 December, 1980.  Nil                                                              
                                                                                          
                                                                                          
 53.  Inter-sessional Meeting on some aspects of Regional                                 
      Cooperation in the context of the International Econo-                              
      mic Order held in Kuala Lumpur from 8 to 12 Decem-                                  
      ber, 1980.  4,597.00                                                                
                                                                                          
 54.  IUCN Conference on the Conservation of Wetlands                                     
      of International importance especially as Water Food                                
      Habitat, Sandrina, 24 to 29 November, 1980. 4,190.00                                
                                                                                          
 55.  78th session of FAO Council, Rome, 24 November to                                   
      5 December 1980.  8,176.00                                                          
  ESCAP:-                                                                                 
                                                                                          
 56.  3rd session of the ESCAP Committee on Shipping and                                  
 Transport, 21 January to 1 February 1980. 12,913.00                                      
                                                                                          
                                                                                          
 57.  Resumed session of the UN Conference of the Law of                                  
      the Sea held in Geneva (sponsored by M.E.A.).                                       
   Nil                                                                                    
 58.  UN Conference on contracts for the International Sale                               
     of Goods held in Vienna (sponsored by M.E.A.).  Nil                                  
                                                                                          
 ---------------------------------------------------------                                
                                                                                          
 ---------------------------------------------------------                                
 1                        2                           3                                   
 ---------------------------------------------------------                                
 59.  13th session of the UN Commission on International                                  
      Trade Law (UNCITRAL) held in New York (sponsored                                    
      by M.E.A.).  Nil                                                                    
                                                                                          
                                                                                          
 60.  8th session of the Governing Council held in Nairobi                                
     (sponsored by DST).     Nil                                                          
                                                                                          
                                                                                          
 61.  35th session of the UN General Assembly held in New                                 
      York (sponsored by M.E.A.).  Nil                                                    
                                                                                          
 62.  ESCAP:-First Preparatory Meeting held by ESCAP                                      
      Secretariat being set up to advise on the organisation                              
      of the Third Asian & Pacific Population Conference,                                 
      29 October to 4 November 1980.   Nil                                                
                                                                                          
 63.  ESCAP:-Fourth session of ESCAP Committee on                                         
     Industry, Technology, Human Settlements and Envi-                                    
      ronment held in Bangkok from 23 to 29 September                                     
      1980.  1,423.58                                                                     
                                                                                          
                                                                                          
 64.  ESCAP:-ESCAP Inter-Governmental Meeting on                                          
      Agro and Allied Industries held at Tokyo from 21 to                                 
      27 October 1980.  N.A.                                                              
 -------------------------------------------------------                                  
 Mar 21, 1980                                                                             
                                                                                          
 APPENDIX II Major International Conferences/Meetings/Seminars                            
 APPENDIX II                                                                              
                                                                                          
 Major International Conferences/Meetings/Seminars organised by Non-                      
 Governmental Organisations (such as Asian Productivity Organisation,                     
 Inter- national Cooperative Alliances, International Organisation for                    
 Standardisation,                                                                         
                                                                                          
 etc.) in which Indian experts participated in their personal capacity                    
 with Governmental assistance in 1980-81 (April, 1980 to March 1981)                      
 -----------------------------------------------------                                    
 --                                                                                       
 Sl.  Title of the Conference, etc.,  Foreign  Ex-                                        
 No.  with venue and date             change com-                                         
                                      ponent of Ex-                                       
                                      penditure in Rs.                                    
 -----------------------------------------------------                                    
 --                                                                                       
 1                        2                         3                                     
 -----------------------------------------------------                                    
 --                                                                                       
 1.  Special Symposium to commemorate 20th Anni-   N.A.                                   
     versary of the establishment of IRRI, Manila                                         
     Apr 21, 1980  to 25 April 1980.                                                      
                                                                                          
 2.  IUFRO/MAB/UNESCO Research Conference in   Nil                                        
     Multiple use of Forest Resources, Arizona (USA,                                      
     18 to 26 May 1980).                                                                  
                                                                                          
 3.  Seminar on Transportation held at Colombo from                                       
     14 to 22 May, 1980 organised by Economic Deve-                                       
     lopment Institute.                                                                   
     Cost borne by  Eonomic De velopment Institute.                                       
 4.  Joint Roving sponsored by ESCAP in Burma, Bang-                                      
     kok and Thailand (21 days from 8 May 1980).                                          
     36,435/-00                                                                           
                                                                                          
 5.  3rd Techno-Economic Panel of Pepper Community                                        
     Sub-panel on Production, Indonesia, 2 to 6 June                                      
         1980. Expenditure  met by Pepper Community of ESCAP                              
                                                                                          
                                                                                          
 6.  Study Meeting on Farmer Education and Extension                                      
     APO met all of Services, Tokyo (Japan), 26 June                                      
     to 5 July, 1980.  the  expenses.                                                     
                                                                                          
 7.  Working Group of Experts sponsored by ESCAP for                                      
     drafting our Constitution for the Preparatory work                                   
     for the proposed meeting of the Ministers of Trans-                                  
     port including Railways. 7,922.90                                                    
                                                                                          
                                                                                          
 8.  Overseas Development Administration Conference                                       
     on Water Resources in Rural Development, Cambridge                                   
      (UK), 5 to 12 July 1980.                                                            
       Expenditure met by ODA                                                             
                                                                                          
 9.  Inter-Governmental Railway Group Bangkok, 21                                         
     to 23 August 1980 and 25 August 1980 to 1 Septem-                                    
     ber 1980                                                                             
 ------------------------------------------------------                                   
 -                                                                                        
                                                                                          
                                                                                          
 ------------------------------------------------------                                   
 -                                                                                        
 1                               2               3                                        
 ------------------------------------------------------                                   
 -                                                                                        
 10.  High level seminar on Institutional capability for                                  
      Regional Development in Asia being conducted  by                                    
      UN Centre for Regional Development, Japan, 16 to                                    
      20 August 1980.                                                                     
      Expenditure  met by UNCRD                                                           
 11.  IUCN Commission on Education Meeting, Sweden,                                       
      23 to 25 August 1980. Rs.  5,135.00                                                 
                                                                                          
 12.  64th session of International Dairy Federation,                                     
      Bristol (UK), 7 to 12 September 1980.                                               
       Expendtiure met by NDDB                                                            
                                                                                          
 13.  ESCAP seminar on Agricultural Development Plan-                                     
      ning, Tashkent (USSR), 10 to 21 September 1980.                                     
      Expenditure met by ESCAP                                                            
 14.  IDF'S seminar on Recombination of Milk & Milk                                       
      products, Singapore 7 to 10 October, 1980.                                          
      Expenditure  met by NDDB                                                            
                                                                                          
 15.  Meeting of the Management Committee of the ICRA                                     
      in Brussels (10 October 1980)                                                       
                                                                                          
 16.  ESCAP Inter-Governmental Meeting on Agro-Indus-                                     
      tries in Tokyo, 21 to 27 October 1980                                               
      3,700.00                                                                            
                                                                                          
 17.  39th Plenary meeting of International Cotton Ad-                                    
      visory Committee and the Annual Meeting of ICIC,                                    
      Manila, 22 to 29 November 1980. 3,974.00                                            
                                                                                          
 18.  UN study of the Institutional arrangement relating                                  
      to the Process of disarmament:                                                      
  Expenses were borne by UN.                                                              
      (i) 7 to 10 April 1980                                                              
      (ii) 30 June to 11 July 1980                                                        
 -------------------------------------------------------                                  
 Apr 21, 1980                                                                             
                                                                                          
 APPENDIX III Miscellaneous Major International Conference                                
 Jan 01, 1980                                                                             
                                                                                          
                     APPENDIX III                                                         
                                                                                          
 Miscellaneous Major International Conference, etc.,                                      
 in 1980-81 (April 1980 to March 1981) at which the                                       
 Government of India was representd in which Indian                                       
 experts participated with Government of India's                                          
 assistance in their personal capacity                                                    
 --------------------------------------------------                                       
                                 Foreign Exchange                                         
 Sl.   Title of Conference etc.   component  of                                           
 No.     with venue and date       expenditure                                            
                                    (Rs.)                                                 
 -------------------------------------------------                                        
                                                                                          
 1                             2               3                                          
 -------------------------------------------------                                        
                                                                                          
 1.  Final Plenary Conference and 9th TCC Meeting                                         
     of INFCE-Vienna, Feb 22, 1080 to 29 February 1980                                    
       37,70 5-00                                                                         
                                                                                          
 2.  Workshop on Integrated Livestock Changmai (Thai-                                     
     land), 9 to 14 April 1980  Expenditure                                               
                                met by BAIF.                                              
                                                                                          
 3.  Symposium of IRRI, Manila, 21 to 25 April 1980                                       
 All the expenses met by IRRI                                                             
                                                                                          
                                                                                          
 4.  Second meeting of the Commonwealth Working Group                                     
     of the Asia and Pacific Regions on Illicit Drugs                                     
     held at Kuala Lumpur on 5 & 6 May 1980   Not known                                   
                                                                                          
 5.  1st International Symposium on the Protection of                                     
     Financial Establishments against Robbery and Burg-                                   
     lary held at Interpol Headquarters, Saint Claude,                                    
      Paris                                                                               
     from 6 to 8 May 1980           Not known                                             
                                                                                          
 6.  Expert Consultation on Farm Water Management at                                      
     Bilesvilley, USA, 13 to 15 May 1980 Expenditure                                      
                                          met by FAO                                      
 7.  Seminar for Senior Officials in the Transport Sector                                 
     held at Colombo (Sri Lanka) from 14 to 22 May                                        
     1980                                 Nil                                             
                                                                                          
 8.  Workshop on Post-Harvest Grain Technology  with                                      
     emphasis on Rice Pest and  Quality Control, China,                                   
     18 May to 27 June 1980            Expr. met by                                       
                                          FAO                                             
 9.  Bamboo Workshop, Singapore, 28 to 30 May 1980                                        
           Expr. met by  TDRC                                                             
                                                                                          
 10. Briefing Session of Coordinators for assignment of                                   
     Fuelwood resources and needs on a regional basis for                                 
     the developing countries of the Third World, Rome,                                   
     21 to 23 May 1980       All the expense                                              
 s                                                                                        
                                   met by FAO                                             
 11. Meeting of the group of experts on special study of                                  
     Energy held at Bangkok from 6 to 7 June 1980  Nil                                    
                                                                                          
                                                                                          
 -----------------------------------------------------                                    
 ---                                                                                      
                                                                                          
 -----------------------------------------------------                                    
 ---                                                                                      
 1                             2                   3                                      
 ------------------------------------------------------                                   
 ---                                                                                      
 12.  FAO/Technical Consultation on Annual Genetic                                        
      Resourses & Management, Rome, 2 to 6 June 1980                                      
      Expr. met by FAO                                                                    
 13.  Golden Jubilee Conference of the Bureaux held at Lon-                               
      don in July 1980           Nil                                                      
 14.  Conference to discuss the Third World Collective reli-                              
      ance in the field of Energy & Development held at Vienna                            
      from 7 to 9 July 1980             Nil                                               
 15.  Round Table Meeting entitled "beyond the Brandt                                     
      Commission" held at Sussex University from 10 to 12                                 
      July 1980                   Nil                                                     
 16.  Norwegian International Fisheries Fair Norway, 12                                   
      to 15 August 1980      Expr. met  b                                                 
 y                                                                                        
                                 NORAD.                                                   
 17.  Meeting of Latin American and Indian  Engineering                                   
      Industry Representatives sponsored by the UNIDO                                     
      with collaboration of AIET and Economic Commis-                                     
      sion on Latin America (CEPAL) at Santiago  from 4                                   
      to 6 August 1980             Not  availab                                           
 le                                                                                       
 18.  ESCAP Seminar on Modern Methods of Mineral Pros-                                    
      pecting in USSR, 20 August to 9 September 1980.                                     
     Expenses met by host country                                                         
                                                                                          
 19.  Participation in the Conference as Case Writer on                                   
      Forestry Site Case Studies, Honolulu, 1 to 18 Septem-                               
      ber 1980     Expenses met by East-West Centre.                                      
                                                                                          
 20.  Second Oxford Energy Seminar held  at Oxford (UK)                                   
      on 8 September 1980                        Nil                                      
 21.  Seminar on Population in Development Planning held                                  
      from 13 to 26 September  1980 in Chapel Hill. North                                 
      Carolina (USA)                               Nil                                    
                                                                                          
 22.  FAO/International Consultation on Cotton Production                                 
      Research with focus on the Asian Region, Manila, 17                                 
      to 21 November 1980                    Expr. met  b                                 
 y                                                                                        
                                                FAO                                       
 23.  6th Asian Regional Conference of ICPO-Interpol held                                 
      at Manila (Philippines on 10 & 11 November 1980 Not known                           
 24.  Symposium on Grain Leguries Production, Chingmai.                                   
      Expenses met by FAO                                                                 
                                                                                          
 25.  Briefing session of FAO/UNEP Tropical Forest assess-                                
      ment Project involving information for reappraisal of                               
      Forest resources in five Asian countries, Rome, 9 to 30                             
      November 1980                                                                       
      Expense met by FAO                                                                  
                                                                                          
 26.  49th General Assembly session of the ICPO-Interpol                                  
      held at Manila (Philippines, 13 to 21 November 1980                                 
      Not known                                                                           
                                                                                          
 27.  Conference on Policy implications for Nitrogen Fixa-                                
      tion Research held in Canberra from 3 to 9 December                                 
      1980                               Nil                                              
 --------------------------------------------------------                                 
 Feb 22, 1080                                                                             
                                                                                          
 APPENDIX IV International Organisation                                                   
 Jan 01, 1980                                                                             
                                                                                          
                     APPENDIX IV                                                          
 -------------------------------------------------                                        
                                                                                          
 International Organisation of which India becomes                                        
 a member during the year 1980-81 (from April 1980                                        
  to March 1981)                                                                          
                                                                                          
 Name of the International Organisa- Name of the                                          
 International                                                                            
                                                                                          
 Sl.tion of which India became a member Organisation                                      
 of which during the year 1980-81 India ceased to be                                      
 a member during the year  1980-81                                                        
 ---------------------------------------------------                                      
 1.  Re-elected Member of the Industrial Board  Nil                                       
      (IDB) of UNIDO.                                                                     
                                                                                          
 2.  International Union for Scientific Study    -                                        
      of Population, Belgium.                                                             
                                                                                          
 3.  International Association for Regional and  -                                        
      Urban Statistics (IARUS), Netherlands.                                              
                                                                                          
 4.                 -      Ceased to be a member of                                       
                           Executive  Board of IFAD                                       
                                                                                          
 5.  International Telecommunications Satel-   -                                          
     lite  Organisation (INTELSAT)-Dr.                                                    
     R. K. Dixit was elected its Member.                                                  
 ---------------------------------------------------                                      
                                                                                          
 1980                                                                                     
                                                                                          
 APPENDIX V Treaties/Conventions/Agreements concluded or renewed by                       
 India                                                                                    
  APPENDIX V                                                                              
                                                                                          
 Treaties/Conventions/Agreements concluded or renewed                                     
 by India  with other countries in 1980*                                                  
 ---------------------------------------------------                                      
 Sl.Title of Convention/Treaty/ Date of Date of Date on Re                                
 NO.         Agreement        signa- ratifica- which marks                                
                              ture      tion/     entered                                 
                                           acces-    into                                 
                                           sion/     force                                
                                           accept-                                        
                                           ance                                           
 ---------------------------------------------------------                                
 1              2          3      4       5        6                                      
 ---------------------------------------------------------                                
                                                                                          
 MULTILATERAL                                                                             
  European Economic Community                                                             
    (E.E.C.)                                                                              
                                                                                          
 1.  Financing Agreement between India                                                    
     and European Economic Community                                                      
     (E.E.C:) regarding Cyclone and flood                                                 
     Protection Project, Orissa                                                           
    Feb 12, 1980    -   12-2-80     -                                                     
                                                                                          
 2.  Financing Agreement between India                                                    
     and European Economic Community                                                      
     (E.E.C.) regarding Flood Protection                                                  
     Project, West Bengal                                                                 
     12-2-80      -  12-2-80     -                                                        
                                                                                          
     Food and Agriculture Organisation                                                    
      (F.A.O.)                                                                            
                                                                                          
 3.  Agreement between India and Food                                                     
     and Agriculture Organisation (F.A.                                                   
     O.) regarding Improvement of Cocoa                                                   
     Production and Primary Processing                                                    
     12-3-80      -  1-4-80      -                                                        
                                                                                          
 4.  Agreement between India and Food                                                     
     and Agriculture Organisation (F.A.                                                   
     O.) regarding Preliminary Assessment                                                 
     of Utilization of Andaman Hardwood                                                   
     for Paper Pulp                                                                       
     12-3-80       -  1-4-80      -                                                       
                                                                                          
 5.  Agreement between India and Food                                                     
     and Agriculture Organisation (F.A.                                                   
     O.) regarding Propeller Nozzles for                                                  
     Trawlers                                                                             
     12-3-80       -  1-4-80      -                                                       
 -------------------------------------------------                                        
   *This list is not exhaustive.                                                          
                                                                                          
                                                                                          
                                                                                          
 ------------------------------------------------                                         
 1         2        3          4       5       6                                          
 ---------------------------------------------------                                      
 6. Agreement between India and Food                                                      
    and Agriculture Organisation (F.A.                                                    
    O.) regarding Integrated Watershed                                                    
    Management, Planning and Monitor-                                                     
    ing                                                                                   
     12-3-80      -     1-4-80    -                                                       
                                                                                          
    General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade                                                
    (G.A.T.T.)                                                                            
                                                                                          
 7.  Agreement between India and Gen-                                                     
     ral Agreement on Tariffs  and                                                        
     Trade (G.A.T.T.) regarding Import                                                    
     Licensing Procedures                                                                 
    12-4-79   11-7-80  10-8-80    -                                                       
                                                                                          
 8.  Agreement between India and Gene-                                                    
     ral Agreement on Tariffs and Trade                                                   
     (G.A.T.T.) regarding Interpretation                                                  
     and Application of Articles VI, XVI                                                  
     and XXIII of the General Agreement                                                   
     on Tariffs and Trade (G.A.T.T.)                                                      
    12-4-79   11-7-80   10-8-80   -                                                       
                                                                                          
 9.  Agreement between India and Gene-                                                    
     ral Agreement on Tariffs and Trade                                                   
     (G.A.T.T.) regarding Implementation                                                  
     of Article VI of the General Agree-                                                  
     ment on Tariffs and Trade (G.A.T.T.)                                                 
     12-4-79    11-7-80   10-8-80   -                                                     
                                                                                          
 10. Agreement between india and Gene-                                                    
     ral Agreement on Tariffs and Trade                                                   
     (G.A.T.T.)  regarding Implementa-                                                    
     tion of Article VII of the General                                                   
     Agreement on Tariffs and Trade                                                       
     (G.A.T.T.)                                                                           
     12-4-79    11-7-80   10-8-80   -                                                     
                                                                                          
 11. Agreement between India and Gene-                                                    
     ral Agreement on Tariffs and Trade                                                   
     (G.A.T.T.) regarding Protocol to the                                                 
     greement on implementation of                                                        
     Article VII of the General Agreement                                                 
     on Tariffs and Trade (G.A.T.T)                                                       
     1-11-79    11-7-80   10-8-80   -                                                     
                                                                                          
     United Nations Development Programme                                                 
      (U.N.D.P.)                                                                          
                                                                                          
 12. Agreement between India and United                                                   
     Nations Development Programme                                                        
     (U.N.D.P.) regarding Transfer of                                                     
     know-how through Expatriate Speci-                                                   
     alists of Indian Origin                                                              
     17-1-80      -       31-1-80   -                                                     
 --------------------------------------------------                                       
                                                                                          
 --------------------------------------------------                                       
 1         2           3     4       5        6                                           
 --------------------------------------------------                                       
 13.  Agreement between India and United                                                  
      Nations Development Programme                                                       
      (U.N.D.P.) regarding Vacuum Stan-                                                   
      dard                                                                                
        26-12-79    -      18-2-80   -                                                    
                                                                                          
 14.  Agreement between India and United                                                  
      Nations Development Programme                                                       
      (U.N.D.P.) regarding Establishment                                                  
      of Primary and Transfer Pressure                                                    
      Standards                                                                           
      26-12-79    -      18-2-80   -                                                      
                                                                                          
 15.  Agreement between India and United                                                  
      Nations Development Programme                                                       
      (U.N.D.P.) regarding Operational                                                    
      Improvements for Indian Railways                                                    
      17-4-80     -      18-4-80   -                                                      
                                                                                          
 16.  Agreement between India and United                                                  
      Nations Development Programme                                                       
      (U.N.D.P.) regarding Post-Graduate                                                  
      Hydrological Education and Re-                                                      
      search (Univertsity of Roorkee)                                                     
      3-4-80     -      26-4-80   -                                                       
                                                                                          
 17.  Agreement between India and United                                                  
      Nations Development Programme                                                       
      (U.N.D.P) regarding Modernisation/                                                  
      Augmentation of the Existing Facili-                                                
      ties for Radio Frequency Spectrum                                                   
      Monitoring, Radio Direction Finding                                                 
      and Inservice Training                                                              
      26-4-80    -      16-5-80   -                                                       
                                                                                          
 18.  Agreement between India and United                                                  
      Nations Development Programme                                                       
      (U.N.D.P.) regarding UNDP support                                                   
      to the T.C.D.C Programme between                                                    
      India and other Developing Count-                                                   
      ries                                                                                
       24-5-80   -       24-5-80    -                                                     
                                                                                          
 19.  Agreement between India and United                                                  
      Nations Development Programme                                                       
      (U.N.D.P.)  regarding Modern                                                        
      Hydrographic Survey Training                                                        
       3-4-80   -        12-6-80    -                                                     
                                                                                          
 20.  Agreement between India and United                                                  
      Nations Development Programme                                                       
      (U.N.D.P.) regarding system Engi-                                                   
      neering for Integrated Development                                                  
      of Water Resource in India                                                          
       10-3-80   -        1-7-80      -                                                   
                                                                                          
 21.  Agreement between India and United                                                  
      Nations Development Programme                                                       
      (U.N.D.P.) regarding Technical Man-                                                 
      power Development for Indian Oil                                                    
      Corporation Limited                                                                 
     28-12-79  -       17-7-80      -                                                     
 ----------------------------------------------                                           
                                                                                          
 -----------------------------------------------                                          
 1           2     3       4         5        6                                           
 -----------------------------------------------                                          
 22.  Agreement between India and United                                                  
      Nations Development Programme                                                       
      (U.N.D.P) regarding Hydrological                                                    
      and Artificial Recharge Studies,                                                    
      Madras                                                                              
        3-9-80    -      9-9 80    -                                                      
                                                                                          
 23.  Agreement between India and United                                                  
      Nations Development Programme                                                       
      (U.N.D.P.) regarding Welding Re-                                                    
      search Institute, Tiruchirapalli-                                                   
      Phase II.                                                                           
       6-9-80   -      19-9-80    -                                                       
                                                                                          
 24.  Agreement between India and United                                                  
      Nations Development Programme                                                       
      (U.N.D.P.) regarding Consultancy                                                    
      Services for Indian Petroleum Refin-                                                
      ing Industry                                                                        
        21-7-80  -      3-10-80    -                                                      
                                                                                          
 25.  Agreement between India and United                                                  
      Nations Development Programme                                                       
      (U.N.D.P.) regarding Training and                                                   
      Development in Advanced Road and                                                    
      Bridge Technology                                                                   
      1-5-80   -     13-10-80     -                                                       
                                                                                          
 26.  Agreement between India and United                                                  
      Nations Development Programme                                                       
      (U.N.D.P.) regarding Isotope Appli-                                                 
      cation in Hydrology                                                                 
      9-9-80   -     17-10-80    -                                                        
                                                                                          
 27.  Agreement between India and United                                                  
      Nations Development Programme                                                       
      (U.N.D.P.) regarding the project No.                                                
      IND/79/034/A/01/01-Establishment                                                    
      of Soil Dynamics Laboratory at                                                      
      CSMES, New Delhi                                                                    
      4-11-80  -     18-11-80    -                                                        
                                                                                          
 28.  Agreement between India and United                                                  
      Nations Development Programme                                                       
      (U.N.D.P.) regarding the project No.                                                
      IND/79/037/A/01/01-Establishment                                                    
      of Research and Testing Facilities for                                              
      Rockfill                                                                            
      4-11-80  -    18-11-80      -                                                       
                                                                                          
   BILATERAL                                                                              
                                                                                          
      ALGERIA                                                                             
                                                                                          
 29.  Agreement between the Government                                                    
      of the Republic of India and the Go-                                                
      vernment of the Democratic and                                                      
      Popular Republic of Algeria for Co-                                                 
      operation in the Utilisation of Ato-                                                
      mic Energy for Peaceful Purposes                                                    
      28-2-80  -    28-2-80       -                                                       
 -----------------------------------------------                                          
                                                                                          
 ----------------------------------------------                                           
 1       2        3        4         5       6                                            
 ----------------------------------------------                                           
      AUSTRIA                                                                             
                                                                                          
 30.  Agreement between India and Austria                                                 
      on financial Assistance to India for                                                
      Austrian Schillings 27.651 million                                                  
     18-7-80    -      18-7-80    -                                                       
                                                                                          
      BANGLADESH                                                                          
                                                                                          
 31.  Trade Agreement between India and                                                   
      Bangladesh                                                                          
        4-10-80    -      4-10-80    -                                                    
                                                                                          
      CANADA                                                                              
                                                                                          
 32.  Agreement between India and Canada                                                  
      for a development loan for an agri-                                                 
      cultural development project                                                        
      15-3-80   -       15-3-80    -                                                      
                                                                                          
 33.  Loan Agreement between India and                                                    
      Canada of C $ 15 million for oil and                                                
      gas exploration                                                                     
       24-6-80   -       24-6-80    -                                                     
                                                                                          
      FRANCE                                                                              
                                                                                          
 34.  Protocol between India and France                                                   
      regarding the development of Indo-                                                  
      French Industrial and Commercial                                                    
      Cooperation                                                                         
       28-1-80   -       28-1-80     -                                                    
                                                                                          
 35.  Protocol between India and France                                                   
      on Co-operation in Audio-Visual                                                     
     25-2-80   -       25-2-80     -                                                      
                                                                                          
 36.  Memorandum of Understanding                                                         
      between India and France for the use                                                
      and development of new techniques                                                   
      for Post and Telecommunications                                                     
      28-2-80    -      28-2-80     -                                                     
                                                                                          
 37.  Financial Protocol between India and                                                
      France relating to French Credits                                                   
      meant to finance the Development                                                    
      Plan of India                                                                       
      5-6-80     -      5-6-80      -                                                     
                                                                                          
 38.  Credit Agreement between India                                                      
      and Banque Pe Paris and Banque                                                      
      Francaise Du Commerce Exterieur,                                                    
      Paris, for six hundred million French                                               
      Francs                                                                              
     6-6-80    -       6-6-80      -                                                      
                                                                                          
 39.  Convention between India and                                                        
      Credit National Ltd., Paris, regarding                                              
      implementation of the Financial Pro-                                                
      tocol dated 5-6-80.                                                                 
        18-6-80   -      18-6-80      -                                                   
                                                                                          
      FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY                                                         
                                                                                          
 40.  Loan Agreement between India and                                                    
      KREDITANSTALT FUR WIEDER-                                                           
      AUFBAU for DM 35 million                                                            
      16-1-80   -      16-1-80      -                                                     
 ----------------------------------------------                                           
                                                                                          
 ---------------------------------------------                                            
 1            2       3       4     5        6                                            
 ------------------------------------------------                                         
 41.  Exchange of Letters  between India                                                  
      and Federal Republic of Germany                                                     
      regarding promotion of Conifers Re-                                                 
      search Centre, Simla                                                                
      6-2-80    -     6-2-80   -                                                          
                                                                                          
 2.   Exchange of Letters between India                                                   
      and Federal Republic or Gemany                                                      
      regarding Erosion Prevention on the                                                 
      Dhauladhar Range, Himachal Pra-                                                     
      desh                                                                                
      13-5-80   -     13-5-80   -                                                         
                                                                                          
 43.  Loan Agreement between India  and                                                   
      KREDITANSTALT FUR WIT-                                                              
      DRAUFBAU for DM 5 million.                                                          
      10-6-80   -    10-6-80    -                                                         
                                                                                          
 44.  Guarantee Agreement between India                                                   
      and KREDITANSTALT FUR                                                               
      WIEDERAUFBAU to the Loan                                                            
      Agreement dated 10-6-80                                                             
       10-6-80   -    10-6-80    -                                                        
                                                                                          
 45.  Agreement between India and Fe-                                                     
      deral Republic of Germany concern-                                                  
      ning financial Co-operation in                                                      
      1980                                                                                
      23-6-80    -   23-6-80    -                                                         
                                                                                          
 46.  Loan Agreement between India and                                                    
      KREDITANSTALT FUR WIE-                                                              
      DERAUFBAU for DM 44 million                                                         
     24-6-80    -   24-6-80    -                                                          
                                                                                          
 47.  Loan Agreement between India and                                                    
      KREDITANSTALT FUR WIE-                                                              
      DERAUFBAU for DM 40 million                                                         
      24-6-80    -   24-6-80     -                                                        
                                                                                          
 48.  Second Supplemental Loan Agree-                                                     
      ment pertaining to the Loan Agree-                                                  
      ment dated 27 December, 1977 in the                                                 
      version of the Supplemental Loan                                                    
      Agreement dated 5 October, 1979                                                     
      between India and KREDITAN-                                                         
      STALT FUR WIEDERAUFBAU                                                              
      for DM 100,000,000 (Gujarat Ferti-                                                  
      lizer Plant)                                                                        
      6-8-80    -   6-8-80        -                                                       
                                                                                          
 49.  Loan Agreement between the Indus-                                                   
      trial Finance Corporation of India                                                  
      and KREDITANSTALT FUR WIE-                                                          
      DERAUFBAU for DM 10,000,000                                                         
      (IFCI XVIII)                                                                        
      6-8-80    -   6-8-80        -                                                       
                                                                                          
      JAPAN                                                                               
                                                                                          
 50.  Exchange of Notes between India                                                     
      and Japan for the Grant Aid of Yen                                                  
      50 million for the purchase of Science                                              
      Laboratory equipment from Japan                                                     
      by the Archaeological Survey of                                                     
      India                                                                               
      14-1-80   -   14-1-80       -                                                       
 -------------------------------------------                                              
                                                                                          
                                                                                          
                                                                                          
 -------------------------------------------                                              
 1         2     3        4        5      6                                               
 ---------------------------------------------                                            
 51.  Loan Agreement between India and                                                    
      Japan for Bombay Off-Shore Oil                                                      
      Field Development Project of Yen                                                    
      6.2 billion                                                                         
       4-3-80    -    19-3-80     -                                                       
                                                                                          
 52.  Loan Agreement between India and                                                    
      Japan for the implementation of                                                     
      Telecommunication Project (II)                                                      
    8-5-80    -    20-8-80     -                                                          
                                                                                          
 53.  Loan Agreement between India and                                                    
      Japan of Yen 8.6 billion for the                                                    
      implementation of the Bombay Off-                                                   
      Shore Oil Field Development Pro-                                                    
      ject (II)                                                                           
      25-7-80   -     21-8-80     -                                                       
                                                                                          
      NEPAL                                                                               
                                                                                          
 54.  Agreement between India and Nepal                                                   
      regarding Money Order Service                                                       
      4-3-80    -    13-4-80     -                                                        
                                                                                          
 55.  Exchange of Letters between India                                                   
      and Nepal regarding Coaxial Cable                                                   
      Link between Birganj in Nepal and                                                   
      Raxaul in India                                                                     
     21-7-80    -    21-7-80     -                                                        
                                                                                          
      NETHERLANDS                                                                         
                                                                                          
 56.  Agreement between India and Ne-                                                     
      therlands Bank for Loan to be used                                                  
      to finance requirements for goods                                                   
      and/or services in connection with                                                  
      the development of India                                                            
       14-11-79   -    14-4-80      -                                                     
                                                                                          
      NORWAY                                                                              
                                                                                          
 57.  Plan of operation between India and                                                 
      Norway for supply of Urea                                                           
        17-9-80    -    17-9-80        -                                                  
                                                                                          
      PORTUGAL                                                                            
                                                                                          
 58.  Agreement between India and Portu-                                                  
      gal regarding Cultural Co-operation                                                 
      7-4-80  29-8-80 29-8-80      -                                                      
                                                                                          
      SRI LANKA                                                                           
                                                                                          
 59.  Agreement between India and Sri                                                     
      Lanka regarding  Cultural  Co-                                                      
      operation                                                                           
       29-11-77   -    27-5-80      -                                                     
                                                                                          
      SYRIAN ARAB REPUBLIC                                                                
                                                                                          
 60.  Agreement between the Govern-                                                       
      ment of the Republic of India and                                                   
      the Government of the Syrian Arab                                                   
      Republic for Cooperation for the                                                    
      Utilisation of Atomic Energy for                                                    
      Peaceful Purpose                                                                    
       1-5-80     -    1-5-80       -                                                     
 --------------------------------------------                                             
                                                                                          
                                                                                          
                                                                                          
 --------------------------------------------                                             
 1            2    3       4     5       6                                                
 --------------------------------------------                                             
      UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST                                                           
      REPUBLICS                                                                           
                                                                                          
 61.  Agreement between India and the                                                     
      Union of Soviet Socialist Republics                                                 
      (USSR) regarding working pro-                                                       
      gramme of cooperation in the field                                                  
      of irrigation                                                                       
       3-4-80    -     3-4-80    -                                                        
                                                                                          
      UNITED KINGDOM                                                                      
                                                                                          
 62.  Exchange of N tes between India                                                     
      and United Kingdom regarding                                                        
      Mixed Project Grant for L 70                                                        
      million                                                                             
      19-3-80   -      19-3-80   -                                                        
                                                                                          
 63.  Exchange of Notes between India                                                     
      and United Kingdom regarding local                                                  
      costs Aid Arrangement for L 33,184,                                                 
      758.14 pense                                                                        
      19-3-80    -     19-3-80    -                                                       
                                                                                          
 64.  Exchange of Notes between India                                                     
      and United Kingdom regarding Coal                                                   
      Sector Grant 1980 for L 11 million                                                  
      19-3-80    -     19-3-80    -                                                       
                                                                                          
      UNITED STATES OF AMERICA                                                            
                                                                                          
 65.  Agreement between India and United                                                  
      States of America regarding Inte-                                                   
      grated Rural Health and Population                                                  
      Project for US $ 23.7 million                                                       
      29-8-80     -    29-8-80     -                                                      
                                                                                          
 66.  Agreement between India and United                                                  
      States of America regarding Rajas-                                                  
      than Medium irrigation Project for                                                  
      US $ 35 million                                                                     
      21-8-80     -    21-8-80     -                                                      
                                                                                          
      THE SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF                                                           
      VIETNAM                                                                             
                                                                                          
 67.  Rice Loan Agreement between India                                                   
      and the Socialist Republic of Viet-                                                 
      nam                                                                                 
       15-9-80     -    15-9-80      -                                                    
 -------------------------------------------                                              
 Feb 12, 1980                                                                             
                                                                                          
 APPENDIX VI Statement showing number of Passports/miscellaneous                          
 services applications                                                                    
 Jan 01, 1980                                                                             
                                                                                          
                          APPENDIX VI                                                     
                                                                                          
 Statement showing number of Passports/miscellaneous                                      
  services applications received and number of                                            
  passports issued/miscellaneous services granted                                         
  during the period January 1980 to December 1980                                         
 --------------------------------------------------                                       
                                                                                          
 Sl.Station  Number of Number of Number of Number of                                      
                                                                                          
 No.   passport Passports   applications    miscella-                                     
                                                                                          
   applications   issued in     for misc.      neous                                      
  received        1980        services      services                                      
  in 1980                    received       granted                                       
     in 1980        in 1980                                                               
 --------------------------------------------------                                       
 1.  Ahmedabad  60030   56469      26708      25373                                       
 2.  Bangalore  32788   33969       8178       8373                                       
 3.  Bhopal     13536  15339        3660       3809                                       
 4.  Bhubaneswar 2726   2848         426        477                                       
 5.  Bombay    212403 198489      200711     202092                                       
 6.  Calcutta   24837  26967       15232      15574                                       
 7.  Chandigarh 52849  50432       14482      14189                                       
 8.  Cochin     74139  72104       65096      64929                                       
 9.  Delhi      67641  65571       29894      29923                                       
 10. Gauhati     1989   1773         406        393                                       
 11. Hyderabad  55934  56898       14065      14259                                       
 12. Jaipur     45809  44538        7746       7690                                       
 13. Jullundur  73315  71926       25277      24754                                       
 14. Kozhikode  49185  49681       37127      37451                                       
 15. Lucknow    73502  90882       15147      11685                                       
 16. Madras     95265  95085       22382      22053                                       
 17. Patna       8894   7725        1797       1635                                       
 18. Srinagar    5463   5670         965        967                                       
                                                                                          
 TOTAL         952128 946366      489299     485626                                       
 ----------------------------------------------------                                     
 Details of Official, Diplomatic Passports issued/                                        
 serviced by Passport Visa Division of Ministry                                           
 during 1980 :                                                                            
                                                                                          
   (a) Number of official passports issued   4190                                         
                                                                                          
   (b) Number of official passports serviced 1114                                         
                                                                                          
    (c) Number of Diplomatic passports issued 1062                                        
                                                                                          
    (d) Number of Diplomatic Passports serviced 1062                                      
                                                                                          
                                                                                          
                                                                                          
 1980                                                                                     
                                                                                          
 APPENDIX VII Statement showing the total number of employees                             
   APPENDIX VII                                                                           
                                                                                          
 Statement showing the total number of employees,                                         
  (both permanent and tem- porary) in the Ministry                                        
  of External Affairs under various Groups and                                            
  repre- sentation of Scheduled Castes and                                                
 Scheduled Tribes therein (position as                                                    
                            on Dec 31, 1980)                                              
 ------------------------------------------------                                         
 Class Total Sche-  Percen-   sche-    Percen-                                            
 number    duled    tage of     duled    tage of                                          
  of emplo- Castes    total      Tribes    total                                          
  yees               emplo-               emplo-                                          
         yees                 yees                                                        
 ------------------------------------------------                                         
 Class I     687   49   6.1%     29       4.2%                                            
                                                                                          
 Class II   1515  102   6.7%      8       0.5%                                            
                                                                                          
 Class III  1069  102   9.5%     24       2.2%                                            
                                                                                          
 Class IV (excluding                                                                      
 sweepers)  519   95    18.3%     9       1.7%                                            
                                                                                          
 Class IV (Sweepers) 45  45   100%  -   -                                                 
 ----------------------------------------------                                           
                                                                                          
                                                                                          
                                                                                          
 Dec 31, 1980                                                                             
                                                                                          
 APPENDIX VIII Statement showing the number of appointments                               
 Jan 01, 1980                                                                             
                                                                                          
                        APPENDIX VIII                                                     
                                                                                          
 Statement showing the number of appointments                                             
 (both by direct recruitment and by promotion)                                            
  made to various Groups of Posts and reserved                                            
  vacancies filled by Scheduled Castes and                                                
 Scheduled Tribes durintg the year 1980                                                   
 -----------------------------------------------                                          
 Number of vacan                                                                          
 cies                                                                                     
             Total                   dereserved due                                       
 to non-number of Number of vacancies Number of reserved                                  
  availability of  reserved Class  vacancies  reserved                                    
 candidates appointed     candidates   filled                                             
 Scheduled  Scheduled Scheduled  Scheduled Scheduled Sc                                   
 heduled Castes      Tribe     Castes     Tribes  Castes                                  
 T ribes                                                                                  
 -------------------------------------------------------                                  
 Group A       20        3   2    3      2           -                                    
 -                                                                                        
                                                                                          
 Group B     244     63    32  16  2    49       2                                        
 9                                                                                        
                                                                                          
 Group C    299     50    29   31   8  25        2                                        
 0                                                                                        
                                                                                          
 Group D                                                                                  
 (excluding                                                                               
 Sweepers)     66   8    4  7     -           1                                           
 4                                                                                        
                                                                                          
 Group D       -      -   -       -     -     -                                           
 -                                                                                        
 (Sweepers)                                                                               
                                                                                          
 NOTE : The above figures are exclusive of                                                
 employees working in the Central Passport                                                
  and Emigration  Organisation.                                                           
 ---------------------------------------------                                            
 1980                                                                                     
                                                                                          
 APPENDIX IX Revenue Expenditure of the Ministry                                          
 Jan 01, 1980                                                                             
                                                                                          
                               APPENDIX IX                                                
 Revenue Expenditure of the Ministry during the                                           
  Financial year 1980-81                                                                  
 ---------------------------------------------                                            
                                  Revised Esti-                                           
                                  mates 1980-81                                           
                                (Rupees in lakhs)                                         
 ------------------------------------------------                                         
   Headquarters                     6,92.11                                               
                                                                                          
   Missions/Posts abroad             39,00.57                                             
                                                                                          
   Supply wings at London and Washington 2,02.43                                          
                                                                                          
 Other Items :                                                                            
                                                                                          
   Contribution to U.N., Commonwealth Secretariat                                         
  and other  International Institutions   3,21.51                                         
  Central Passport and Emigration Organisation 2,96.91                                    
                                                                                          
   Other Miscellaneous items        27,01.19                                              
                                                                                          
 Aid :                                                                                    
                                                                                          
   Aid to Bhutan                33,52.76                                                  
                                                                                          
   Aid to Nepal                  14,21.60                                                 
                                                                                          
   Aid to other developing countries in Asia and                                          
  Africa under    ITEC Programme    8,32.11                                               
                                                                                          
   Aid to Bangladesh                 1,21.50                                              
                                                                                          
   Social Security and Welfare        34.21                                               
                                  ---------------                                         
                       TOTAL        1,38,76.90                                            
 ------------------------------------------------                                         
                                                                                          
 1980                                                                                     
                                                                                          
 APPENDIX X Expenditure on Headquarters and Missions/posts abroad                         
 Jan 01, 1980 APPENDIX X Expenditure on Headquarters and Missions/posts                   
 abroad during 1980-81 The expenditure during 1980-81 on Headquarters                     
 of this Ministry is ex- Peeled to be of the order of Rs. 692.11 lakhs;                   
 a sum of Rs. 185.84 lakhs is towards establishment charges, a sum of                     
 Rs. 114.32 lakhs for Allowances other than Travelling Allowance, a sum                   
 of Rs. 261.13 lakhs for Publicity, communication, diplomatic bag                         
 service etc., a sum of Rs. 129.04 laksh for travelling expenses and a                    
 sum of Rs. 1.78 lakhs for Departmental Canteens. The expenditure on                      
 Missions/Posts abroad including the Supply Wings at London &                             
 Washington is Rs. 4103 -00 lakhs, out of which a sum of Rs. 1629.00                      
 lakhs is spent on Establishment Charges including Foreign and other                      
 Compensatory Allowances, a sum of Rs. 521 -51 lakhs on passages for                      
 transfers and local tours, Rs. 307.82 lakhs for publicity                                
 contingencies and Rs. 1644.67 lakhs for official and residential                         
 accommodation, P & T Chrarges and other Office Contingencies. The                        
 average annual expenditure per Mission comes to Rs. 31.56 lakhs. The                     
 expenditure mentioned above (viz. 4795.11 lakhs=Rs. 692.11 lakhs+                        
 4103.00 lakhs) as per details above, on Headquarters and                                 
 Missions/Posts abroad included expenditure on External Publicity                         
 Programme activities; the break-up of this expenditure is as under :-                    
       (Rupees in lakhs)                                                                  
 (a) Headquarters                                                                         
                                                                                          
  (i) Salaries (Officers 22, Staff 71)    12.04                                           
  (ii) Travelling Expenses                 5.06                                           
 (iii) Publicity Contingencies Charges   100.89                                           
                                        --------                                          
                                         117.99                                           
                                        --------                                          
 (b) Missions/Posts abroad                                                                
                                                                                          
      (i) Salaries (Officers 88, Staff 550)   91.04                                       
     (ii) Foreign Allowance, Compensatory Allowance                                       
                                              54.96                                       
    (iii) Passages & Travelling Expenses      11.07                                       
     (iv) Publicity Contingencies            127.83                                       
      (v) Other Charges including renting of Residential                                  
          Accommodation & Other Office Contingencies                                      
                                              22.92                                       
                                            --------                                      
                                   TOTAL    307.82                                        
                                            --------                                      
            Total External Publicity        425.81                                        
 ---------------------------------------------------                                      
                                                                                          
                                                                                          
                                                                                          
    The expenditure on External Publicity as                                              
 detailed above cones to 8.9% of the expenditure                                          
  on Headquarters and Mission/Posts abroad.                                               
                                                                                          
                          (In lakhs of Rupees)                                            
 -------------------------------------------------                                        
   Establish-   Travelling      Office       Total                                        
                                                                                          
              ment      Expenses       Expenses,                                          
            Charges                   Official &                                          
                                      Residential                                         
                                      accommo-                                            
                                     dation                                               
 -------------------------------------------------                                        
    Secretariat                                                                           
                                                                                          
    Headquarters  289.90   123.98   160.24    574.12                                      
                                                                                          
    External Publicity                                                                    
    Division     12.04       5.06  100.89    117.99                                       
                                                                                          
      -------------------------------------------------                                   
 -                                                                                        
       301.94       129.04         261.13    692.11                                       
                                                                                          
      -------------------------------------------------                                   
 -                                                                                        
     Overseas Establishment                                                               
                                                                                          
    (a) Missions/Posts                                                                    
     abroad (excluding                                                                    
     Publicity Wings)    1483.00  510.44 1801.74  3795.                                   
 18                                                                                       
                                                                                          
    (b) Publicity Wings  146.00  011.07   150.75   307.                                   
 82                                                                                       
  -------------------------------------------------                                       
 -                                                                                        
   TOTAL1629.00       521.51         1952.49    4103.                                     
 00                                                                                       
  -------------------------------------------------                                       
 -                                                                                        
 GRAND TOTAL    1930.94     650.55   2213.62 4795.11                                      
                                                                                          
 ---------------------------------------------------                                      
 1980                                                                                     
                                                                                          
 APPENDIX XI Strength of IFS & IFS(B) Cadres                                              
 Jan 01, 1980                                                                             
                                                                                          
                    APPENDIX XI                                                           
                                                                                          
  Strength of IFS & IFS(B) Cadres, Combined                                               
 Research Cadre   and Interpreters  Cadre                                                 
 (a)  IFS Cadre Strength                                                                  
                                                                                          
 IFS Gr. I Posts   =   18  (excluding 1 post                                              
  temporarily up- graded from Gr. III of IFS)                                             
                                                                                          
 IFS Gr. II Posts =   21  (excluding 1 Post                                               
  temporarily up- graded from Gr. III of IFS)                                             
                                                                                          
 IFS Gr. III Posts    =   78  (excluding 2                                                
  Posts of Gr. IV tem- porarily upgraded,                                                 
  1 post of FA(EA) and 3 ex-cadre posts)                                                  
                                                                                          
 IFS Gr. IV Posts = 80 (excluding 1                                                       
  Post upgraded from  Senior Scale of IFS)                                                
                                                                                          
      Sr. Scale Posts               =  243                                                
      Jr. Scale Posts               =   99                                                
      Training Reserve (Jr. Scale)  =   50                                                
      Leave Reserve                 =   19                                                
      Training Reserve              =   19                                                
      Deputation Reserve            =   20                                                
                                                                                          
 (b)  IFS (B) Cadre Strength                                                              
      Gr. I Posts                   =  119                                                
      Gr. II/III Posts              =  324                                                
      Gr. IV                        =  920                                                
      Gr. V                         =  131                                                
      Gr. VI                        =  594                                                
                                                                                          
 (c)  Cipher Sub-Cadre Strength                                                           
      Grade II                      =  181                                                
                                                                                          
 (d)  Stenographer Sub- Cadre                                                             
      Sel. Grade                    =   50                                                
      Grade I                       =   75                                                
      Grade II                      =  532                                                
      Grade III                                                                           
                                    =  116                                                
                                                                                          
 (e)  Combined Research Cadre       =   45                                                
      (including isolated                                                                 
       research posts)                                                                    
 (f)  Interpreters Cadre            =   33                                                
 --------------------------------------------                                             
                               pg105>                                                     
 1980                                                                                     
                                                                                          
 APPENDIX XII Foreign Language Chart                                                      
 Jan 01, 1980                                                                             
                                                                                          
                          APPENDIX XII                                                    
                                                                                          
                     Foreign Language Chart                                               
                                                                                          
                          (INDEX)                                                         
 -----------------------------------------------                                          
 Sl.           Language       Total No. of                                                
 No.                         Officers passed/                                             
                              knows  the                                                  
                               language                                                   
 -------------------------------------------------                                        
 1.   Arabic                        45                                                    
 2.   Burmese                      Nil                                                    
 3.   Chinese                       27                                                    
 4.   Czech                        Nil                                                    
 5.   Dutch                          1                                                    
 6.   French                        70                                                    
 7.   German                        29                                                    
 8.   Gorkhali                       6                                                    
 9.   Hungarian                      1                                                    
 10.  Bahasa-Indonesia              12                                                    
 11.  Italian                        3                                                    
 12.  Japanese                      13                                                    
 13.  Kiswahili                     11                                                    
 14.  Malay-Bahasa                   1                                                    
 15.  Persian                       10                                                    
 16.  Polish                         1                                                    
 17.  Portuguese                    11                                                    
 18.  Pushtu                       Nil                                                    
 19.  Romanian                       1                                                    
 20.  Russian                       42                                                    
 21.  Serbo-Croation                 2                                                    
 22.  Spanish                       41                                                    
 23.  Swedish                        1                                                    
 24.  Thai                           1                                                    
 25.  Tibetan                        2                                                    
 26.  Turkish                        1                                                    
 27.  Vietnamese                     3                                                    
                                                                                          
 --------------------------------------------                                             
                               pg106>                                                     
 1980                                                                                     
                                                                                          
External website that External website External website External website External website 
opens in a new window that opens in a  that opens in a  that opens in a  that opens in a  
                      new window       new window       new window       new window       

    Address : Patiala House, Annexe - BNew Delhi                              
   -110001                                           Page last updated on: 09 
    Telephone: 23389073, 23382694, 23073685;                  December, 2013  
   Fax: 23386340, 23387700;Feedback :            Site designed and maintained 
   dirlibmea.gov.in                                  by: National Informatics 
    Officer In-charge:-                                         Centre (NIC), 
    (c)Content Owned by MEA Library Ministry of   DeitY, MoCIT, Government of 
   External Affairs, Government of India                               India. 
   Terms & Conditions | Privacy Policy |         Visitors:                    
   Copyright Policy | Hyperlinking Policy |      
   Accessibility Statement | Help                

   java script is required for this page
   MEAs App twitter Facebook Google plus YouTube flickr
   loading
