1954-55

Contents
Jan 01, 1954
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS
REPORT
1954-55
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PART I
PAGES
Administration

1-5
PART II

A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.

State in special treaty relation with India.
Foreign possession in India
India's neighbours
South-EastAsia
East Asia
South pacific region
West Asia
Africa
Europe
The Americas
External publicity
Miscellaneous

6
7-8
8-15
16-18
18-19
20
20-22
22-25
25-27
27-28
28-30
30-36

PART III
United nations and International Conferences

37-39

APPENDICES
I.

Extract from the speeches and statments of policy
in Parliament of the Minister for external affairs

40-50

II.

Joint statments

51-59

III.

Indian missions abroad

60-63

IV.

Foreign mission in India

V.

Treaties, convention and Agreements concluded
by India during 1954-1955
International organisations of which India is a
member
Organisation chart of the Ministary of External
Affairs

VI.
VII.

INDIA
USA
Jan 01, 1954

Administration
PART I
ADMINISTRATION
Organization of the Ministry
(i) HEADQUARTERS
A chart showing the organization of the Ministry is at Appendix
VII. The Ministry has 60 Sections of which 19 are Administrative
and 41 Territorial and Technical. These sections are grouped in the
following Divisions:(i) American Division-countries of North and South America;
(ii) Western Division-the United Nations and Europe (excluding the United Kingdom);
(iii) Eastern Division-China, Japan, Korea, Nepal, Sikkim,
Bhutan and the North East Frontier Agency;
(iv) Southern Division-West Asia (See Note below) and
South-East Asia;
(v) African Division-Africa, U.K. and Colonies and Emigration;
(vi) Pakistan Division;
(vii) Protocol Division-Protocol, Consular Work, Passports and
Visas and Abducted Persons;

64-68
69
70-72
73

(viii) Administration Division-Administration at Headquarters
and in Indian Missions abroad;
(ix) External Publicity Division;
(x) Historical Division.
The staff of the Ministry consists of about 653 junior officials, including 53 Section Officers; one Officer-in-Charge of the Central Cypher
Bureau; 24 Under-Secretaries; 4 Officers on Special Duty; one Chief
Passport Officer of Deputy Secretary's rank; 10 Deputy Secretaries;
8 Joint Secretaries; two Secretaries and one Secretary-General.
Four Territorial Divisions and the Administration Division are in
the charge of Joint Secretaries who are designated as Directors. The
Protocol Division is also in the charge of a Joint Secretary. Two
Territorial Divisions are in the charge of Deputy Secretaries who are
also designated as Directors. The External Publicity Section is in
the charge of a Deputy Secretary and the Historical Division in the
NOTE.-Through out this report, the terms West Asia and East Asia are used for t
he
Middle East and Far East respectively.
<pg1>
<pg2>
charge of a Director who is a Specialist Officer. This Officer is in
concurrent charge of the Research and Intelligence Section and the
Library.
Two Joint Secretaries have been appointed as Foreign Service
Inspectors. Further particulars of the Directorate are given below:The Foreign Secretary deals with work from the American,
Western and Eastern Divisions and the West Asian countries of the
Southern Division. He is also in charge of administration and representational work arising from the Protocol Division.
The Commonwealth Secretary deals with work from the Pakistan Division and Commonwealth countries, excluding Canada; the
African Division; and the South-East Asian countries of the Southern
Division. Both the Secretaries deal jointly with work from the
External Publicity and Historical Divisions.
The Secretary-General is responsible for supervision and coordination of the work of the Ministry as a whole.
(ii) MEASURES FOR STRENGTHENING THE ADMINISTRATION
During the year under report some special measures were taken
for this purpose. An Organization and Methods Section was set up
in November 1954. This section is closely associated with the Orga-

nization and Methods Division of the Government of India. Its functions are to examine the methods of work in the various Sections,
to study organizational problems and to suggest improvements in
procedure with a view to achieving greater efficiency.
(iii) THE INDIAN FOREIGN SERVICE
At present the permanent strength of the service is 184. 148 posts
are filled by IFS officers and the rest by non-IFS officers and nonofficials. Nine candidates are to be recruited to the IFS on the results
of the competitive examination held by the UPSC in 1954.
It was decided during the year that, in addition to training given
abroad, IFS probationers should undergo six months' training in
selected districts in India. The training in India is intended to give
the probationers first-hand knowledge of the problems of the Indian
administration and to bring them into close touch with developments
at home. One batch of probationers has already returned after training in the districts; another is undergoing this training at present
and a third will shortly be sent out.
The formation of the IFS (B) cadre is now nearing completion.
Details regarding cadre strength, leave reserve and, deputation reserve
<pg3>
have been worked out. It has, however, been, found that it is necessary to modify the original scheme slightly in order to give members
of the new service prospects analogous to those of the Central Secretariat Service. The new service is now expected to come into existence during the year 1955-56.
(iv) MISSIONS ABROAD
The following new Missions were opened during the year:(i) Embassy of India in Yugoslavia-The Ambassador is concurrently accredited to Rumania and Bulgaria.
(ii) Embassy of India office in Mexico. The Ambassador to the
USA continues to be concurrently accredited to Mexico.
(iii) Liaison Office in the Sudan, Khartoum.
(iv) Consulate of India, Muscat.
(v) Special Mission in Cambodia.
(vi) Consulate-General in Laos.
(vii) Consulate-General in Vietnam.
The Consulate-General in Saudi Arabia (Jeddah) has been raised
to the status of a Legation.

Indian Missions abroad are still experiencing shortage of accommodation and efforts to improve the position continued. At Nairobi,
the construction of a house for the First Secretary has been completed. At Peking, a building has been purchased and is now being
altered and repaired.
A Senior Architect of the CPWD was deputed to Accra, Ankara
and Cairo to study proposals for construction of buildings for our
Missions there. Plans for the construction of buildings at Karachi
and Kathmandu are under review.
An Executive Engineer was deputed to Nairobi to inspect the
newly constructed buildings. Another was sent to Peking to report
on the repairs and alterations necessary to the newly acquired building. Their reports have been received. It has been decided to construct a residential flat with a Memorial Hall on the site donated
by the Ghaddar Party at San Francisco. At Canberra, a building
site has been leased. Various proposals for the acquisition or construction of buildings in other places are under examination.
An Advisory Committee under the Chairmanship of Rajkumari
Amrit Kaur, Minister of Health, has been set up to advise on the
standardisation and supply of furniture, furnishings, objects of art,
etc., for Indian Missions abroad.
<pg4>
(v) INSPECTORATE
In order to achieve greater efficiency and economy in the operations of the missions abroad, a Foreign Service Inspectorate has been
established to carry out periodical inspections. The two Joint Secretaries who have been appointed as Inspectors, visited a number of
missions during the year. The Finance Ministry Was also represented in these inspections by an officer of Joint Secretary's rank.
The Inspectors have made certain recommendations for the refixation.
of foreign allowances and other matters. These recommendations.
are now under the consideration of Government.
(vi) EXPENDITURE
The expenditure of the Ministry falls under 5 Demands, viz. (i)
External Affairs, (ii) Tribal Areas, (iii) Chandernagore, (iv) Pondicherry, and (v) Miscellaneous. According to the revised estimates,
expenditure in 1954-55 is expected to be Rs. 1,204.83 lakhs. Some
items are either fixed, or do not relate to External. Affairs:
(1) Tribal Areas, including the Assam Rifles, and provision
for economic development (Rs. 56.44 lakhs and Community
Projects (Rs. 8.5o lakhs) in the North-East Frontier
Agency
Rs. 436.95 lakhs.

(2) Payments to neighbouring States and expenditure on
Chandernagore and Pondicherry Administrations .
Rs. 137.82 "
(3) Contributions to the United Nations ; expenditure on delegations to the United Nations and on delegations to the
three International Commissions for Supervision & Control
in Indo-China.
Rs. 120.30 "
(4) Expenditure on demarcation of boundaries between India
and Pakistan, Recovery of abducted women and children,
and implementation of the Prime Ministers' Agreement
Rs. 19.07 "
(5) Passport and Emigration Establishments
Rs. 20.23 "
(6) Miscellaneous expenditure, e.g., that on pilgrims and evacuees, repatriation of Indians, loss by exchange, etc. . Rs. 3.34 "
Expenditure on External Relations proper amounted during the
year to Rs. 467.12 lakhs. This includes Rs. 53.79 lakhs on the High
Commissioner's Office in London, and Rs. 86.21 lakhs on pay and
allowances of officers and staff and other expenses at headquarters..
Expenditure on Missions and posts abroad was Rs. 327.12 lakhs-an
average of Rs. 4.36 lakhs per Mission. Of this an average of Rs. 1.24
lakhs per Mission was spent on pay and allowances of officers.
Average expenditure on rent for office and residential accommodation
was Rs. 40.77 lakhs.
<pg5>
The search for economy has continued. Although work has
steadily increased, an attempt has been made to restrict an increase
in the size of the staff. The closing down of the High Commission
at Johannesburg and the Consulate-General at Pondicherry, vacancies
in the establishments and various Departments of the North-East
Frontier Agency and in the Central Passport Organization, reduction
in contribution to the UN and merger of Chandernagore with West
Bengal, are expected to bring about a saving of Rs. 63.76 lakhs.
Rs. 52.76 lakhs will be required as additional expenditure on diplomatic and consular officials, air dropping of supplies in the NEFA,
and revision of pay and allowances of local recruits in our Missions
abroad.
(vii) TRIBAL AREAS-NORTH EAST FRONTIER AGENCY.
The Governor of Assam continued to administer the Agency as
the Agent to the President, under the Ministry of External Affairs.
Administration was extended to the interior of all the six Divisions
and new administrative centres were opened. A Financial Adviser
was appointed to exercise greater financial supervision on the spot
and to expedite sanction of the various schemes without unnecessary
references to the Centre. The administrative machinery has been
integrated into a "single line administration" with the Political
Officer as the main executive agency and the local heads of various
departments as his advisers. The question of forming a separate

cadre for managing posts in N.E.F.A. and the neighbouring border
States is under active consideration. Development schemes in the
fields of education, communications, public health and agriculture
are making good progress. A full-time post of Development Commissioner has been sanctioned. Basic education is being encouraged
in the Agency with the tribal language as the medium of instruction
in the lower classes and Hindi in the upper classes. Eight cottage
industry centres have been opened where various trades are being
taught. Communications are still backward and about 6,000 tons of
essential supplies had to be air-dropped in inaccessible areas. Two
high-power Committees have been set up in Shillong and Delhi to
review the progress of communications from time to time. The Head
Lama of Tawang and a party of tribal representatives were invited
to Delhi for the Republic Day celebrations.
(viii) CHANDERNAGORE
A Commission of inquiry appointed by the Government of India
recommended the merger of Chandernagore with West Bengal. Later
the Chandernagore Merger Act was passed and the territory merged
with West Bengal on the Oct 02, 1954.
147 MofEA
CHINA
JAPAN KOREA NEPAL BHUTAN UNITED KINGDOM PAKISTAN INDIA USA CANADA
YUGOSLAVIA BULGARIA MEXICO SUDAN OMAN CAMBODIA LAOS VIETNAM SAUDI ARABIA
KENYA GHANA TURKEY EGYPT AUSTRALIA CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC SOUTH AFRICA
Oct 02, 1954

A. State In Special Treaty Relations With India
PART II
A. STATES IN SPECIAL TREATY RELATIONS WITH INDIA
(i) BHUTAN
Close co-operation with the Government of Bhutan continued in
many spheres of mutual interest.
Discussions for a survey of the Manas river in Bhutan are being
initiated with a view to relieving the distress from floods in both
Bhutan and Assam.

Training was arranged for Bhutanese personnel in various institutions in India.
His Highness the Maharaja of Bhutan donated a sum of Rs. 20,000
for the Prime Minister's Relief Fund.
The Government of India sent Rs. 50,000 to the Maharaja of
Bhutan for the relief of sufferers from floods in southern Bhutan
during the summer of 1954.
(ii) SIKKIM
Sikkim made considerable progress both politically and economically. The State Council is functioning well and the experiment of
having two Councillors is proving successful.
The Sikkim Durbar have already started to implement a SevenYear Development Plan, costing over Rs. 2 crores and phased to
synchronize with India's Five-Year Plans. The Government of India
will provide the necessary financial and technical assistance in full
for the implementation of this Plan. The Geological Survey of India
will further explore the copper and coal deposits in the State. The
Plan also envisages the extension of posts and telegraph services, increased educational, veterinary, medical and public health facilities,
and the development of cottage industries.
At the invitation of the Government of India the Maharaj Kumar
and Maharaj Kumarani, accompanied by other members of their
family and the Dewan of Sikkim, participated in the Indian Republic
Day (1955) celebrations in Delhi. They also paid a visit to Bhakra
Nangal and other places of interest.
<pg6>
<pg7>
B. FOREIGN POSSESSIONS IN INDIA
The question of the French possessions in India was settled satisfactorily. The Portuguese possessions however continued to present
difficulties.
The movement for freedom in the French Settlements reached its
climax in March 1954, when the Mayors and elected councillors of
Pondicherry and Karaikal passed a resolution calling for the immediate merger of the settlements with India. In a statement in
Parliament on the 6th April, the Prime Minister invited the French
Government to enter into negotiations for a friendly settlement on
the basis of immediate de facto transfer of the administration. Negotiations were held in Paris but they failed as the French Government
were at that time reluctant to transfer control of key departments
such as police, judiciary and the treasury.

Meanwhile, approximately two-fifths of the settlements of Pondicherry and the whole of Yanam declared themselves independent,
and the French withdrew from the settlement of Mahe. But the
Government of India declined to assume unilaterally control of these
areas.
With the assumption of office by M. Mendes-France, the new
French Premier, there was a shift in French policy. Fresh negotiations, this time in Delhi, led to an agreement which was placed
before the elected representatives of the settlements. The representatives met at Kihzoor on the 18th October and by an overwhelming majority voted for merger with India. An Indo-French
Agreement for de facto transfer of the administration was signed on
the 21st October. The transfer took place on the 1st November. The
new state is called `Pondicherry State' and the former Indian ConsulGeneral in Pondicherry has been appointed as the first Chief Commissioner.
In contrast with the attitude of the French Government, the
Portuguese Government adopted an uncompromising attitude and,
in spite of repeated efforts on the part of the Government of India,
refused to enter into negotiations on the future of the Portuguese
Possessions in India. The Goans, despairing of a negotiated settlement between the two Governments, launched a struggle for their
freedom whereupon the Portuguese authorities adopted a policy of
severe repression. Troops were reinforced and large numbers of
Goans-both Hindus and Christians-were imprisoned and were
harassed and ill-treated. Peaceful Indian settlers in Goa were
threatened and summarily expelled, without being given sufficient
time or opportunity to wind up their business or to remove their
property.
<pg8>
Despite these repressive measures, the Goans succeeded in
liberating the enclaves of Dadra and Nager Haveli unaided and on
their own initiative. The controlled Portuguese press and radio
tried, hard to prove that these developments represented not a
popular demand for freedom but an organised aggression by armed
bands with the active aid and connivance of the Government of
India. The Government of India strongly protested against these
unfounded allegations, while making it clear that they fully Supported the aspirations of the Goans and that they could not be a party to
the suppression of a genuine nationalist movement. While they
adhered to the policy of friendly negotiations for settling disputes,
they could not remain indifferent to the sufferings of the people in
these territories.
Measures were also taken during the year under review to make
the customs cordon on the India-Goa border more effective in order
to prevent the smuggling which had been going on on a large scale.
The smuggling trade on the India-Goa border has in the past been
the cause of the artificial economic prosperity of Goa.

C. INDIA'S NEIGHBOURS
(i) AFGHANISTAN
With a view to promoting the fruit trade between India and
Afghanistan, a centre for the fumigations of grapes was opened in
Amritsar in 1954. The Government of India have also provided facilities for the training of two Afghan nationals in fumigation work. A
fumigation plant will be presented by the Government of India to
the Government of Afghanistan to enable them to set up their own
fumigation. centre at Kandahar.
At the invitation of the Government of India, a cultural delegation led by H. E. Dr. Ali Ahmad Khan Popal, Deputy Minister of
Education, toured India for about six weeks. The Government of
India participated in the national `Jashan' celebrations of Afghanistan by sending hockey and football teams; and the Government of
Afghanistan invited a students' delegation to take part in these celebrations. In February 1955 an Afghan volley-ball team visited India
to participate in the All-India Physical Education Conference at
Calcutta. On their way back the team visited the University centres
at Lucknow, Aligarh, Agra and Delhi and played matches with the
local teams.
At the request of the Government of Afghanistan the Government
of India provided facilities for the training of Afghan nationals in
<pg9>
cottage industries. Six Afghan nationals have already arrived here
for receiving such training.
An industrial and textile delegation led by Mr. Mohamed Akbar
Pamir visited India to study the organization of handloom and other
cottage industries.
The Government of India have provided training facilities to a
large number of Afghan Air Force personnel. Some of them have
already completed their training and have returned to Afghanistan.
The services of a meteorological expert are being lent to Afghanistan
shortly. An Indian officer was sent to train Afghan personnel in salt
extraction. Three Afghan nationals are undergoing training in milk
production and distribution at the Aarey milk colony in Bombay.
The Afghan Red Crescent Society contributed 20,000 metres of
cloth for flood victims in India.
(ii) BURMA
An exhibition of Buddhist Art and Antiquities was arranged by
the Government of India at Rangoon during the meeting of the sixth
Buddhist Council. The exhibition was opened by the Prime Minister

of Burma in January and proved very popular.
In the United Nations, India continued to give strong support to,
Burma's complaint against the activities of Kuomintang troops in
Burmese territory.
At the invitation of the Government of India the Hon'ble Khin
Mating Lat, Health Minister of Burma, visited India in November,
1954. Several Burmese missions of experts and two Ministers of the.
Shan States toured India during the year to study construction and
development schemes and visited community projects, shipyards,
defence installations, research institutions and laboratories and some
important educational, cultural and health institutions. Burma sent
two scientists as observers to the conference on the use of atomic
energy for peaceful purposes held in Delhi in November, 1954.
A large number of cases of claims of Indian ex-employees of the
Burma Government for pension, gratuity, arrears of pay, leave salary,
etc., were taken up with the Government of Burma through the
Indian Embassy in Rangoon. Some of these cases have been settled
(iii) CEYLON
Soon after the ratification of the January 1954 Agreement with
Ceylon, difficulty was experienced in its implementation. While the
<pg10>
two Governments co-operated in controlling illicit immigration into
Ceylon, registration of Indians as Ceylon citizens was slow. Separate
electorates were provided for 12 years instead of 10 years as specified
in the Agreement. No interim elections were held to elect representatives of Ceylon Indians in Parliament. It was alleged by
Ceylon Indians that some of the measures adopted by the, Ceylon
Government to induce persons of Indian origin to apply, for Indian
citizenship were not in accord with the spirit of clause 7 of the Agreement. They also alleged that the Ceylon immigration laws were
being used to serve quit notices on Indian nationals who had been
in Ceylon for as long as 20 to 30 years.
As the agreement was not working satisfactorily another conference between the Prime Ministers of Ceylon and India was held in
October 1954 in New Delhi. It was decided that persons whose applications for Ceylon citizenship were rejected could apply for Indian
citizenship. The Ceylon Government undertook not to reject applications for Ceylon citizenship on purely technical grounds. They
also agreed to resume the practice of issuing identity certificates to
all persons of Indian origin whose applications for Ceylon citizenship
were pending. The Government of India agreed to grant similar
facilities to persons whose applications for Indian citizenship were
pending with the Indian High Commissioner in Ceylon. The Ceylon
Government agreed to permit persons, newly registered as Indian
citizens, to remain in employment in Ceylon till the age of 55. The
two Governments promised to exchange information on registration

of citizens.
In June 1954 a visa system was introduced for travel between India
and Ceylon. In view of the decrease in the volume of traffic between
the two countries, the Government of Ceylon were asked to close
down the offices of their Labour Commissioner and their quarantine
camps in India.
On receipt of a request from the Mahabodhi Society of Ceylon
the Mahabodhi Society of India decided with the concurrence of
the Government of India to present to Ceylon relics of Sariputta and
Moggallana. The transfer will take place at a State function to be
arranged by the Government of Bhopal.
(iv) NEPAL
Relations with Nepal continued to be close and friendly.
The Government of India continued their assistance to Nepal for
the construction of Gaucher airfield, roads and minor irrigation works.
A few technical officers were sent at the request of Nepal Government
<pg11>
to assist in the various development schemes and in the reorganization of the administrative machinery. Facilities for training were
provided for about 200 Nepalese nationals in various technical institutions in India. A senior officer of the Nepal Government was also
attached to the Ministry of External Affairs for six months for
training.
The unprecedented floods during July-August caused severe
damage to life and property in Nepal. The Government of India
contributed a sum of Rs. 60,000 in cash for relief to the flood victims
and also sent two fully-equipped medical teams, a veterinary team
and five welfare parties for relief work. Every possible assistance
was given including repairs to the Amlekhganj-Dhursing and Bhainse
Dhoban-Thankot roads damaged by the floods.
An agreement was signed with the Nepal Government in connection with the Kosi Project which will benefit both countries.
The Government and people of Nepal suffered irreparable loss in
the sad and untimely demise of His Majesty King Tribhuvan Bir
Bikram Shah Deva on Sunday, Mar 13, 1955, in Switzerland. His
late Majesty was a great friend of India. He was an honorary General
in the Indian Army and Colonel in all the Gorkha Regiments. King
Tribhuvan was a great patriot and helped the democratic movement
in his own country and the cause of Indo-Nepalese friendship and
collaboration.
The new King His Majesty Mahindra Bir Bikram Shah has
ascended the Throne, Through his keen sense of patriotism and

devotion to the welfare of his people he has already won their
affection and esteem.
(v) PAKISTAN
Renewed efforts were made during the year for direct negotiations
at all levels between the two Governments for the settlement of
their outstanding disputes after a setback suffered in the early part
of the year as a result of the U.S.-Pakistan Military Agreement and
of the desire of the Government of Pakistan to refer the Kashmir
dispute once again to the Security Council.
In a friendly birthday message to the Prime Minister of India, the
Governor-General of Pakistan said that he sincerely felt that "you
and I must unravel the tangles between our two countries". In his
reply, the Prime Minister stated that he agreed with the GovernorGeneral, that "it is, essential that our two countries should live in
<pg12>
friendly co-operation and that we should solve such problems as
face us". Some correspondence then ensued between the Prime
Ministers of India and Pakistan reviving the method of direct negotiations for the settlement of Indo-Pakistan disputes.
VISIT OF THE GOVERNOR-GENERAL OF PAKISTAN TO NEW DELHI DURING
THE REPUBLIC DAY CELEBRATIONS.
The Governor-General of Pakistan was I invited to visit New Delhi
during the Republic Day Celebrations in January 1955. This was a
unique event as it was the first time that the Head of a foreign State
was invited by the President to participate in the Indian Republic
Day celebrations. The Governor-General of Pakistan. visited India
despite ill-health, accompanied by Dr. Khan Sahib, Major-General
Iskander Mirza and Chaudhuri Mohammed Ali, and was accorded a
rousing reception.
KASHMIR
Reference was made in the Report of the preceding year to the
correspondence which was taking place between the Prime Ministers
of India and Pakistan on Kashmir and other issues and to the new
situation which had arisen as a result of the negotiations between
Pakistan and the U.S.A. for military aid. The Prime Minister of
India had pointed out to the Prime Minister of Pakistan the military
and political consequences of the acceptance of American military aid
by Pakistan in the context of Indo-Pakistan problems, including,
Kashmir, and of the cold war antagonism in international relations.
In September 1954 the Prime Minister of Pakistan wrote to the
Prime Minister of India that he was bound to conclude that there
was no scope left for further direct negotiations between them for
the settlement of the Kashmir dispute, which must therefore revert
to the Security Council. He also suggested that their correspondence

on Kashmir should be published for general information. In his
reply, the Prime Minister of India again urged Mr. Mohammed Ali
"to consider this matter dispassionately and come to the conclusion,
as I came long ago, that we can only settle our disputes between ourselves and by peaceful methods of negotiations, however long that
might take".
The correspondence between the two Prime Ministers was published in India and Pakistan on the 5th October, 1954.
Following the recent constitutional changes in Pakistan the Prime
Minister of Pakistan suggested at the end of 1954 that they should
again hold direct discussions with a view to resolving their differences.
<pg13>
The Prime Minister of India invited the Prime Minister of Pakistan,
to New Delhi in order to discuss Indo-Pakistan problems. The meeting was fixed for the last week of March but had to be postponed.
It is likely to take place in May next,
STEERING COMMITTEES.
In May 1953, the Governments of India and Pakistan had issued
directives to the Ministries concerned to take up immediately the
outstanding issues between the two countries with a view to reaching
an early and lasting solution of these issues. In order that the two
Prime Ministers may be kept fully informed of the progress made
at these discussions, the two Governments had also decided to set up
Steering Committees to meet from time to time to review the progress
in the settlement of pending disputes and to devise means by which
issues remaining unsolved or pending for a long time might be
resolved. A meeting of the Steering Committees was accordingly
held in July 1953. Since then the Steering Committees had not met.
As the Prime Ministers of India and Pakistan are meeting shortly
and the method of direct negotiation at all levels to settle the outstanding disputes between the two countries is again being adopted,
it has been decided that the Steering Committees should be revived.
This has been done. Meetings of the Steering Committees were held
in Karachi on the 26th-28th February 1955 and in New Delhi on
the 11th and 12th March 1955.
EVACUEE PROPERTY.
Reference was made in last year's Report to an Agreement reached
between the Advisers of the Ministries of Rehabilitation of the two
countries during the discussions which were held in July-August
1953 on some problems relating to evacuee property. This Agreement has been ratified by the two Governments and some progress has
been made in implementing it. It is proposed that further meetings
should be held to review the progress as well as to reach agreement
on issues still outstanding between the two countries. A meeting
of the representatives of the Ministries of Rehabilitation and Finance

of the two countries was held in Karachi in the beginning of March
1955.
The Government of India has also taken steps to acquire the rights
and titles of the evacuee owners in the immovable properties left
behind by them and to utilise these properties for giving part compensation to displaced persons. This step was taken in view of the
stalemate which was continuing in regard to a satisfactory solution
of the immovable evacuee property problem, despite protracted negotiations, correspondence and personal discussions at all levels. Mean147 MofEA
<pg14>
While, the evacuee properties were rapidly deteriorating and the displaced persons were feeling frustrated. It has been made clear to,
the Government of Pakistan that this step will not prejudice a satisfactory agreement being reached between the two countries on the
immovable property issue.
CANAL WATERS.
The Indus Basin Working Party, consisting of engineers of India
and Pakistan, assisted by the engineers and the management of the
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, is at
present engaged in the task of preparing a plan for the division of
the waters of the Indus system of rivers between the two countries
in accordance with a proposal put forward by the Bank in February1954. This proposal envisaged in general that the waters of the three
eastern rivers, namely the Beas, the Ravi and the Sutlej, should. be,
allocated for use by India and those of the three western rivers,
namely the Indus, the Chenab and the Jhelum, by Pakistan. The
Working Party accompanied by representatives of the Bank is visiting the Indus basin once again to enable them to finalise a plan as;
early as possible.
EAST BENGAL AND THE MINORITIES.
The condition of the minorities in East Bengal showed no signs
of improvement. As a matter of fact, there was an increased exodus
of Hindus from that province. During recent months, the migration
of Hindus from East Bengal has been in the neighbourhood of over
20,000 persons per month.
The Central Ministers for Minority Affairs of India and Pakistan
met in New Delhi in July 1954 for an informal discussion to review
the working of the Prime Ministers' Agreement of April 1950 regarding the protection of minorities in the two countries. It was agreed
that the Ministers would meet again and undertake as soon as,
possible a joint tour of selected areas in the Eastern Zone.
During the visit of the Governor-General of Pakistan on the occa-

sion of the celebration of India's Republic Day, an opportunity was
taken by the Indian Minister of Rehabilitation to discuss with
Maj-General Iskander Mirza the condition of the Hindu minority in
East Bengal, and it was decided that the two Ministers should tour
East Bengal in the near future with a view to investigating the matter
personally.
OTHER MATTERS.
One of the major difficulties in the way of improvement of relations between the peoples of the two countries has been the restrictions on travel and trade. The question of the removal of these
<pg15>
difficulties is to be taken up in the forthcoming discussions. Meanwhile, certain welcome steps have been taken in this regard. For
several years past, there was no direct passenger rail traffic between
India and Western Pakistan. During the year under review, this
traffic was resumed between Amritsar and Lahore and the first train
left Amritsar for Lahore on the 28th October 1954.
Another significant event was the Indo-Pakistan Cricket Test
Match held in Lahore in January 1955. For the period of the match,
the passport and visa rules were relaxed and nearly 25,000 Indian
nationals visited Lahore to witness, the match. These visitors received a warm welcome in Lahore. It is expected that similar facilities will be provided for other sporting events of this nature.
RECOVERY OF ABDUCTED WOMEN AND CHILDREN.
The Abducted Persons (Recovery and Restoration) Act, 1949 as
subsequently amended is valid upto the end of May, 1955.
The Agreement reached between India and Pakistan at the conference held in New Delhi on the 6th and 7th May and signed on
the 8th May, 1954, in which important decisions were taken with a
view to speeding up recovery work, was ratified and the Instruments
of Ratification were exchanged between the two Governments on
the 2nd February, 1955.
The table below shows the recoveries made both in India and
Pakistan since the problem arose in 1947:
Muslim Abducted persons recovered in India.
From
6-12-47
1954
to
31-12-49
Restored to relatives

1950

1951

1952

1953

in Pakistan.
12,552 1,413 1,974 1,162 2,040
,114
20,255
Restored to relatives
in India
344
276
328
126
926
812
2,812

1

-----------------------------------------------------------------------12,896 1,689 2,302 1,288
2,966
1,926
23,067
Non-Muslim Abducted Persons recovered in Pakistan
Arrived in India
160
8,844

6,272

Restored to relatives
in Pakistan .
60
207

31

871

25

743

30

474

31

324

30

------------------------------------------------------------------6,303
220

896

773

505

354

9,O5
<pg16>
D. SOUTH-EAST ASIA

India's relations with her neighbours in South-East Asia continued
to be friendly. Several countries in this region share India's
approach in matters of foreign policy and desire to create an area
of peace.
The Prime Ministers of India, Burma, Ceylon, Indonesia and
Pakistan met together for the first time in April. 1954 at Colombo
and the Conference made evident a substantial community of outlook on many problems. In particular the Conference devoted itself
to the problem of Indo-China and its deliberations are acknowledged
to have been useful in bringing about a settlement. The Prime Ministers met again at Bogor in Indonesia on the 28th and 29th December
1954. The Conference discussed details regarding the Asian-African
Conference to be held under its sponsorship at Bandung in the latter
half of April. The Conference will be at Ministerial level and will
determine its own procedure and agenda. The objects of the Conference are:
(a) to promote goodwill and co-operation among the nations of
Asia and Africa; to explore and advance their mutual
interests and to establish and further friendly relations;
(b) to consider social, economic and cultural problems and
relations of the countries represented;

(c) to consider problems of special interest to Asian and African
peoples like racialism and colonialism; ,
(d) to view the position of Asia and Africa in the world today
and the contribution they can make to the promotion of
world peace and co-operation.
India, though not represented at the Geneva Conference on IndoChina, played an important role in bringing about the agreements.
The nomination of India as Chairman of the International Commissions for Supervision and Control in Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia
was a recognition of this role. India accepted the Chairmanship of
the three commissions even though this entailed heavy responsibilities and a great burden on her resources.
On the invitation of the Government of India the representatives
of the Governments of Canada, Poland and India met in New Delhi
from the 1st to 6th August 1954 to study the terms and provisions in
the agreement relating to the International Commissions and the
functions and duties arising therefrom and to initiate the necessary
<pg17>
principles to establish the Commissions in Vietnam, Laos and
Cambodia on the due date. The Delhi Conference decided to send
an advance party led by the Commonwealth Secretary to discuss
detailed arrangements with the parties concerned.
The International Commissions started functioning on 11th August
1954. Considerable progress has been made in the implementation
of the Geneva Agreements. The majority of the prisoners of war
and civilian internees on both sides have been released. The armed
forces have generally been withdrawn and regrouped in designated
areas. Transfer of administration from the French to the Democratic
Republic of Vietnam has been completed in the Hanoi perimeter.
The Indonesian Prime Minister, Dr, Ali Sastroamidjojo, visited
India for four days in September 1954 at the invitation of our Prime
Minister. During this visit informal talks were held on various
matters of common concern. Both were anxious to further the cause
of peace in the world and particularly in South-East Asia and were
in general agreement on the approach to these problems.
Shrimati Vijaya Lakshmi Pandit, who was the President of the
United Nations General Assembly, visited Ceylon, Burma and,
Indonesia on invitations from these Governments. On her way to
Indonesia she paid a goodwill visit to Singapore and Malaya,
The Prime Minister halted for a night at Bangkok as a guest of,
the Government of Thailand on his way to Djakarta. On his way
back to India the Prime Minister visited Malaya.

At the invitation of the Government of India an Indonesian Press
Delegation visited India during the year.
Dr. S. K. Chatterjee, Emeritus Professor, Calcutta University,
addressed the Indonesian Language Congress held at Medan on the
development and progress of our national language. Dr. Djunda,
Director of the Indonesian National Planning Bureau, and Mr. Utojo
Sutoto of the Indonesian Ministry of Economic Affairs visited India
in June 1954 to study the progress of the Five-Year Plan.
A Trust has been created for the award of scholarships to
students of Indian origin in Malaya. The Trustee is the Commissioner of India in Malaya. He is assisted in the selection of candidates by a Committee consisting of the Vice-Chancellor of the University of Malaya, and four Indians nominated by the Commissioner.
In October the Committee awarded three scholarships in Medicine,
<pg18>
The Trade Agreement between India and Indonesia which was
signed on the 30th January 1953 and was valid up to the 31st December 1953, was extended up to the 30th June 1955.
The Treaty of Friendship between India and the Philippines Which
was signed on the 11th July 1952 came into force on the 29th April
1954 when the instruments of ratification were exchanged at Manila.
A Political Mission in Cambodia and Consulates-General in Laos
and Vietnam were established.
E. EAST ASIA
(i) CHINA
The cordial relations existing between India and China were
strengthened further by a number of events of international importance. On the 29th April, 1954, an agreement was signed concerning
Trade and Intercourse between the Tibet Region of China and India.
This agreement contains, inter alia, five principles, popularly known
as panchashila, which have become the guiding principles in the
relationship between India and China.
Trans-border trade with Tibet and pilgrim traffic to Kailash and
Mansarovar showed considerable improvement mainly because of
the confidence inspired by the Agreement.
During the year under review, heavy floods destroyed the Government of India buildings at Gyantse and about 40 of the employees
and their families lost their lives. A rescue party was sent to render
all possible aid to them. In addition, foodgrains, cloth and medicines
were rushed from India and distributed among the Tibetan flood victims.
At the invitation of the Government of India, Premier Chou En-lai

visited Delhi for three days in the last week of June. The two Prime
Ministers discussed many matters of common concern. In the joint
statement issued at the conclusion of Premier Chou En-lai's visit,
the two Prime Ministers reaffirmed their adherence to the above
mentioned five principles. At the invitation of the Government of the
People's Republic of China the Prime Minister of India paid a return
visit to China in the latter half of October. He was given a warm
reception by the Government and people of China and exchanged
views with Chinese leaders. Earlier, a Trade Agreement between
India and China was signed on the 14th October, at New Delhi. The
agreement is valid for an initial period of 2 years and thereafter it
can be renewed by negotiation. A direct Delhi-Peking telegraph communication service, the second telegraph link between India and
China, was inaugurated on the 3rd January 1955.
<pg19>
On the cultural side an agreement was reached for the exchange
of students between India and China. Two Chinese students have
come to India to study Hindi and one Indian student has gone to
China for the study of the Chinese language. It is intended to
expand this scheme in the coming years to cover the study of Fine
Arts, Medicine, History, etc.
In response to an invitation from the Government of India. a
cultural Delegation from China consisting of 67 members, including
eminent musicians and opera and ballet artists and led by the ViceMinister of Culture, H.E. Mr. Cheng-Chen-to, toured India from the
4th December 1954 to the 20th January 1955.
On the technical side, a small delegation of engineers led by
Shri Kanwar Sain, Chairman, Central Water and Power Commission,
visited China for two months as guests of the Government of People's
Republic of China, to study Chinese flood control measures.
(ii) JAPAN
Discussions continued between India and Japan on the settlement
of claims relating to Japanese assets in India and Indian assets in
Japan as provided for in Articles 4 and 5 of the Treaty of Peace
between India and Japan.
An air agreement for extending the Air India International services to Tokyo and providing for Japanese Air services to India has
been finalised and will, it is hoped, be signed shortly.
The Japanese Government have offered two scholarships to Indian
students for the study of Japanese language and literature in Japan.
(iii) KOREA
India continued her efforts to be helpful in finding a peaceful
solution of the Korean problem.

Of the 88 ex-prisoners of war brought from Korea by the Indian
Custodian Force, 87 are still in India, one having been repatriated
to China as desired by him. Of the remaining 87 32 want to settle
in India and they are being given training at the various, training
establishments of the Ministries of Defence and Rehabilitation. The
cases of those ex-prisoners who have opted for neutral countries other
than India-mostly South American countries-have been referred
to the Secretary General of the United Nations. He is in touch with
the Governments of these countries and his reply is awaited.
<pg20>
F. SOUTH PACIFIC REGION
(i) AUSTRALIA
Approximately 56 per cent. of the contribution promised, by the
Australian Government for economic development programmes in
Ceylon, India, Indonesia, Pakistan and Indo-China has been either
spent or planned to be utilized. Australia has placed emphasis on
aid for agricultural development And 54 per cent. of the amount
committed has been for this The total allocation to India both used
and committed is approximately pound 6.4 million. This year it was
agreed to provide 24 diesel cars estimated to cost pound 1.2 million as a
contribution to the rehabilitation and expansion of railways. In
addition, Australia has agreed to provide radio equipment estimated
to cost pound 500,000. A senior engineer from All India Radio recently
visited Australia to assist in drawing up detailed specifications.
(ii) NEW ZEALAND
New Zealand has allocated pound 1 million to help India to meet the
cost of constructing the All-India Medical Institute, a centre of PostGraduate Medical Training and Research. Project estimates and
detailed drawings are being prepared.
G. WEST ASIA
India and the countries of West Asia are bound by ancient ties
of history and culture. Various measures were taken during the
year to strengthen relations with them. A number of treaties and
agreements were entered into with these countries. With Iran, a
Treaty of Commerce and Navigation was signed on 15 December
1954. The treaty provides for the entry of the nationals of either
country into the other and the right to engage in commerce, industry and trade and to acquire movable and immovable property.
The nationals of either country, are not to be subjected to taxes, etc.,
heavier than those imposed on the nationals of the most favoured
nation; reasonable facilities will be afforded to the nationals of
either party for making remittances to the country of domicile for
the support of families and other essential payments; and they Will
have access to courts of justice and tribunals.

With Iraq, a Cultural Agreement was signed in July 1954. The
Agreement provides for the exchange of university or college
teachers and members of scientific and cultural institutions; scholarships are to be instituted in the territory of either party for the
students of the other; cultural institutions are to be established in
each other's territory; and sports competitions between the nationals
of the two countries are to be encouraged.
<pg21>
The Trade Agreement concluded with Iraq in May 1953 expired
on 31 December 1954. It was renewed for a period of one year
with effect from 1 January 1955.
An Air Agreement with Iraq is now being finalised, and will be
concluded shortly.
The Treaty of Friendship, Commerce and Navigation concluded
with the Sultan of Muscat and Oman was ratified in February 1954.
The Treaty provides for the appointment of a Consul by either party
in the territory of the other. The Government of India have decided
to establish a Consulate at Muscat and a Consul with the necessary
complement of staff has been posted to Muscat.
A trade delegation led by Shri M. P. Birla visited Bahrein,
Kuwait, Iraq, Iran, Syria, Lebanon, Turkey, Egypt and the Sudan.
The exhibition of Indian products in Egypt attracted a large number of visitors from West Asia. The Government of India also
participated in the Trade Fair at Damascus.
In the cultural field, the Government of India has decided to
establish an institute of Islamic studies at Aligarh. The institute
will provide for the study of modern Arabic and the Persian and
Turkish languages. Dr. Zakir Hussain, the Vice-Chancellor of the
Aligarh University, recently visited West Asian countries for, recruiting Professors for the Institute.
The Cultural Scholarship Scheme of the Government of India
continued to play a useful part in the promotion of cultural relations. During the year 11 students from West Asian countries
were granted such scholarships for studies in India. The Government of Iran also offered a few scholarships to Indian scholars for
the study of Persian and two scholars were selected for the purpose.
A special mission consisting of Dr. Syed Mahmud and Dr.
Shaukatullah Ansari visited Saudi Arabia in March 1954 to convey,
on behalf of the President, felicitations on the accession of King
Saud to the throne and condolences on the death of King Ibn Saud.
An Indian Parliamentary delegation headed by Shrimati Sucheta
Kripalani visited Turkey in November 1954. It will be recalled

that a Turkish Parliamentary delegation visited India in 1953 at the
invitation of the Speaker.
Shri Sadath Ali Khan, Parliamentary Secretary, visited Cairo,
Beirut, Damascus and Baghdad on his way back to India from New
147 M of E A
<pg22>
York, where he had gone to attend the ninth session of the U.N.
General Assembly.
Gen. Nuri-Es-said, Iraqi statesman and now Prime Minister of
Iraq visited India in March 1954 as a State guest. He had several
talks with the Prime Minister on the situation in West Asia.
The Government of India contributed 5,000 lbs. of tea and cotton
cloth worth over Rs. 25,000 for flood relief in Iraq.
The Government of Iraq have made a gift of Iraqi dates worth
pound 5,000 for distribution amongst flood victims in India.
A delegation of Iranian railway engineers toured India to study
the technical and administrative working of the Indian Railways.
The Head of the Hissarak Institute of Iran visited various human
and animal serum institutions in India.
Sayad Hassan Taqizadeh, Iranian statesman and scholar, came
to India as Visiting Professor at the Aligarh Muslim University.
An Officer of the Directorate of Plant Protection, Quarantine
and Storage is to make an on-the-spot study of anti-locust operations
in Iran.
The Government of Iran have offered saplings for plantation
at Mahatma Gandhi's Samadhi.
Indians in Iran have donated 10,000 Rials for flood relief in Iran.
As a token of goodwill, the Iranian Government have presented 40
books on various aspects of Persian literature to the Khodabaksh
Library, Patna.
H. AFRICA
(i) EGYPT
Dr. Abdel Hazek Sidkey, Minister of Agriculture, and Madame
Durria Shafique, a feminist leader, visited India.
The Prime Minister spent two days in Cairo on his way back
to India from the Commonwealth Prime Ministers Conference. A
joint communique issued after his talks with the Egyptian Prime

Minister indicated "the existence of an identity of views on major
international issues."
A treaty of friendship is being negotiated and is expected to
be concluded soon.
<pg23>
(ii) SUDAN
The Government of Sudan has requested the Government of
India for the services of judicial and other officers. An Indian
officer was sent to advise the Sudan administration on a compensation scheme for expatriated officials.
The Indian community in the Sudan have offered two scholarships to Sudanese students for, study in India, and the Egyptian
Government have sent a Sudanese student to Aligarh University.
(iii) ALGERIA
The Government of India sent cloth worth Rs. 20,000 for earthquake sufferers in Algeria.
(iv) BRITISH EAST AFRICA
The main event in British East Africa during 1954 was the
reconstitution of the Government in Kenya in pursuance of the
promised constitutional reforms. There has been set up a Council
of Ministers which comprises, in addition to the Governor and the
Deputy Governor, six non-official members, six official members,
and two nominated members. Of the six non-official members,
three are drawn from the European elected members of the Legislative Council, two are Asians and one is an African. Of the two
Asians one is a Minister with and the other a Minister, without
portfolio. There will be no change before 1960 in the proportion
of members of the councils, either as between the main racial
groups or as between officials and non-officials. These changes,
though modest, mark a beginning in multi-racial government in
the area.
The State of Emergency proclaimed in Kenya in October 1952,
following the outbreak of violent activities on the part of the members of the Kikuyu tribe, continued during the year under review.
There has been no appreciable decrease either in the incidence Of
crime amongst the Kikuyus, or in the severity of repressive measures adopted to counter them. In an effort to induce mass surrender of terrorists, the Government of Kenya have announced now
surrender terms. The European settlers have, however, been
pressing the government to "punish" the Kikuyu till they either
surrender or are liquidated.
The Government of India, who are interested in enlarging the
area of peace, wish to see this spiral of violence and counter-violence

broken speedily and racial concord established. Whilst condemning
violence in unequivocal terms, they have made it clear that repression alone offers no solution, and that efforts should be made to deal
<pg24>
with the numerous economic and political disabilities of the indigenous population.
India is opposed to racial domination; she stands. for co-operation
between different races and for the political and economic emancipation of the Africans. She has advised Indians in these areas to.
identify themselves with the interests of the country of their adoption and hot to seek any special privilege: at the expense of the
Africans.
A section of the European settlers do not relish this expression,
of sympathy with the, aspirations of the Africans for self-development. They have been carrying on a systematic, campaign vilifying
India as a country that has "imperialistic designs" in Africa. TheGovernment of India have made it clear that such propaganda is
not likely to promote either friendly relations between the two,
countries, or inter-racial accord in East and Central Africa.
The declared policy of the Government of the United Kingdom
in regard. to British colonies is the advancement of all communities.
that have made their home there, without discrimination on grounds.
Of race, colour or creed, and the evolution of a mutiracial and fully
integrated society, progressively moving forward towards self
government and equal partnership in the Commonwealth. The
Government of India have welcomed the formulation of this policy
and are watching. with interest its implementation. The setting up,
in Nairobi of a Royal Technical College, open to all races, is a step,
towards this goal. This College, established under an autonomous.
Governing Council by the Royal Technical College Act of 1954. and
mainly residential, is to be the main instrument of higher technical,
commercial and arts education. Indians in East Africa have donated
handsomely for this college. Approximately Rs. 15 lakhs have been
donated, by India out of the, Gandhi Memorial Fund. This will be,
utilised. for the endowment of various Chairs.
CENTRAL AFRICA
When the scheme for federating the territories of Northern
Rhodesia, Southern Rhodesia and Nyasaland was being considered,
the Government of India had expressed the view that the Federation should be promulgated with the consent of the African peoples
who constitute approximately 98 per cent. of the population. The
Federation was, however, brought into being in the, teeth of African
opposition. The Government of India expressed the hope that steps
would be taken to remove the disabilities from which non-Europeans
were suffering, and that the rights of Indians, particularly that of

<pg25>
immigration, would be safeguarded. But soon after assuming
charge the Federal Government declared that its policy was to stop
further Asian immigration.
The Asian community residing in the Federation is also not being
treated fairly. Southern Rhodesia, a unit of the Federation, has by
an enactment prohibited the entry into it of Asians residing in the
two northern units-Northern Rhodesia and Nyasaland.
(vi) ETHIOPIA
Relations with Ethiopia continued to be friendly
(vii) SOUTH AFRICA
In accordance with their apartheid policy, the South African
Government enacted a number of legislative measures discriminating against the non-European population in the Union. A detailed
memorandum summarising these measures was prepared by the
Government of India and submitted to the UN Commission on
Racial Situation in South. Africa.
Further steps were taken by the Union Government to implement the Group Areas Act. As before, the people of Indian origin.
continued to oppose measures of racial segregation embodied in
the Act.
(viii) WEST AFRICA
In contrast to most other parts of Africa, the territories in
Vest Africa-particularly the: Gold Coast and Nigeria-present a
happy picture of peace, prosperity and progress. New Constitutions
have been promulgated both in the Gold Coast and Nigeria. The
former, under its new constitution, has an all-African Cabinet and
an all-African Legislature-the first colony in Africa to achieve
this distinction. Recently, however, in the Central part of the Gold
Coast, the Ashanti people led by their spiritual and temporal head,
the Ashantihene, have voiced a demand for a federal constitution.
Nigeria is a Federation and wide powers have been delegated
to its three component units.
The Government of India are watching with interest the political
evolution of these territories.
I. EUROPE
The Prime Minister attended the Commonwealth Prime Ministers
Conference held in London in February 1955.
<pg26>

Shrimati Vijaya Lakshmi Pandit visited Yugoslavia and the United
Kingdom in June-July 1954. She also visited the Headquarters of
the F.A.O. in Rome and the European Headquarters of the United
Nations in Geneva.
On the resignation of Shri B. G. Kher, Shrimati Vijaya Lakshmi
Pandit was appointed High Commissioner in the United Kingdom.
and Ambassador to Ireland. She presented her credentials to the
Queen on 21 December 1954.
A marked feature of India's relations with Europe during the
year was the development of cultural and economic relations with
the countries of Eastern Europe. This development reflected the
growing appreciation in these countries of India's independent foreign
policy and her endeavour to promote the peaceful co-existence of
nations with differing political and economic systems.
During the year the USSR and India exchanged visits of a number
of cultural and scientific delegations which served to promote understanding at a popular level in both countries of each other's achievements. Contacts between the people of India and the people of the
Soviet Union took place in other fields also through exchange of
delegations. A delegation of Soviet Scientists attended the 41st
Session of the Indian Science Congress at Hyderabad at the end of
which it visited various other centres of scientific research in the
country. An Indian delegation of doctors was invited to attend a
Medical Congress in Tashkant. A delegation of industrialists and
agricultural experts from India toured the USSR in October. Another
agricultural delegation visited the USSR at the invitation of the
Soviet Government to see the Agricultural Exhibition organised in
Moscow. A delegation of students and professors from five Universities and Colleges of India was invited for a month's tour of the
USSR in October. India also received some technical assistance out
of the fund of four million roubles placed by the USSR at the disposal of the United Nations Technical Assistance Board for technical
assistance to underdeveloped countries. Under the programme, a
few Soviet statistical experts were loaned to the Indian Statistical
Institute. Negotiations also took place during the year for the erection of a steel plant in India with Soviet assistance and a delegation
of Soviet steel experts visited India to finalise the details.
A very considerable development of friendly relations with Yugoslavia took place during the year culminating in the visit of Marshal
Tito to India in December. A joint statement issued after Marshal
Tito's talks with Mr. Nehru declared:
"The President and the Prime Minister desire to proclaim that
the policy of non-alignment adopted and pursued by their
<pg27>
respective countries is not neutrality or neutralism and,
therefore, passivity as sometimes alleged, but is a posi-

tive, active and constructive policy seeking to lead to
collective peace on which alone collective security can
rest."
The two leaders also declared their considered view that the relations
between these two countries must continue to be based on the principle of, the recognition of each other's sovereignty, independence and
integrity, of non-aggression, of equality, of mutual respect and noninterference in the domestic affairs of each other and on the promotion, both for themselves and the whole world, of the approach and
conditions of peaceful co-existence.
Relations with Yugoslavia developed in certain other fields also.
Two Yugoslav Agricultural experts visited India for a short term
to study problems of irrigation and agriculture. Under a reciprocal
arrangement for training of Army Medical Officers, two Indian Army
Medical doctors went to Yugoslavia and two Yugoslav Army doctors
came to India for short attachment to Indian Army hospitals. Under
the reciprocal scholarships scheme some Yugoslav students came to
study in Indian institutions and the same number went to Yugoslavia.
Diplomatic relations at Legation level were established with the
People's Republics of Bulgaria and Rumania. The Indian Ambassador in Belgrade has been concurrently accredited as Minister to
both countries.
An agricultural delegation visited Poland. A delegation led by
the Deputy Minister of Food and Agriculture attended the United
Nations Agricultural Exhibition held in Moscow in August 1954.
J. THE AMERICAS
(i) THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
During a brief visit to the U.S.A. in November 1954, the Vice
President, Dr. S. Radhakrishnan, presented an ivory gavel on behalf
of the Rajya Sabha to Vice President Nixon, Chairman of the U.S.
Senate.
Air Agreement of 1946.-The Air Services Agreement between
India and the United States was due to terminate on the 14th
January 1955 in terms of the notice of termination served by the
Government of India. Towards the end of December 1954, an attempt
was made to reach, through negotiation, an arrangement acceptable
to both Governments for the continuance of the Agreement. As it
<pg28>
was not possible, however, at that late stage to reconcile divergent
points of view, the Agreement was terminated on January 14th, 1955.
As a temporary measure, the Government of India have authorized
the PAA and TWA to operate two services a week each for another
year.

Treaty of Friendship and Establishment.-The question of resuming negotiations with the representatives of the U.S. Government
for a Treaty of Friendship and Establishment is under consideration.
(ii) LATIN AMERICA
In September 1954, Shri V. K. Krishna Menon visited Argentina,
Peru and Chile as the personal envoy of the Prime Minister. Later
Dr. S. Radhakrishnan, Vice President, paid goodwill visits to Canada
and the following Latin American States:- Mexico, Argentina, Chile,
Bolivia, Peru, Colombia and Brazil.
(iii) CANADA
Arrangements are being made to send an elephant as a gift to
the Granby Zoo, Ottawa, in time for the opening of the Zoo by the
Governor-General of Canada.
K. EXTERNAL PUBLICITY
INFORMATIONAL ACTIVITIES
During the year under review, there was an expansion in the
activities of the Ministry in regard to the dissemination of information abroad on the developments which have taken place in the
various segments of Indian national life.
As against 30 posts in 26 countries last year, there are at present
35 publicity posts in 29 countries. The new posts are at New York,
San Francisco, Berne, Accra and Bangkok. In addition, skeleton
publicity staff for Mauritius, Fiji and Goa has also been sanctioned.
Co-ordinated efforts at foreign publicity were made by a regular
supply to our Publicity posts of suitable books, articles, films and
feature stories.
Indian missions abroad were supplied with 14,958 volumes of the
latest books on India. These books were in English and our national
and regional languages. They deal with various aspects of India's
cultural heritage, history, art, literature, drama, music, with social
and economic conditions, with political developments and with the
geography of India.
<pg29>
Mobile libraries were established in the West Indies and Mauritius
and mobile cinema vans were sanctioned for Fiji, Indonesia, Ceylon
and British East Africa.
For general and regional publicity abroad 20 pamphlets on India
in different languages-Arabic, Indonesia, Spanish, Dutch, Italian,
French, German and English-were produced. On the occasion of

the Republic Day, our Information Posts brought out special bulletins.
A pamphlet in Urdu "Tuffut-ul-Hajaj" was produced and distributed
to Hajis at the time of Haj. 10,000 of copies of an Indian Art Calendar
for 1955 were distributed in foreign countries. The calendar contains 12 exquisite miniatures of 18th century paintings.
In order to increase photo publicity, 61,000 prints in black and
white, 600 prints in colour and 18,000 ebonoids were distributed
abroad. 16,000 prints were supplied to our Missions abroad for noncommercial exhibitions. Our delegations in Indo-China were supplied with 78 documentaries and a feature film.
Approximately 1,800 Indian gramophone records were supplied to
Indian Missions abroad for use at social and national functions as
well as for loan to cultural and broadcasting organisations.
Publications issued by the Ministry of Information and other
Government Departments were also supplied to our posts.
In the course of the year, our posts received a number of feature
films, documentaries and news reviews.
In regard to our service of supplying news daily to our posts,
facilities for receiving transmissions in morse were extended to our
post in Kabul. This brings the number of Information Posts receiving the daily morse-reports from Headquarters to 27. The news
received from such transmissions are edited and incorporated in news
bulletins and regular hand-outs. We have also continued to supply
to the various departments of the Government of India a daily survey
of news regarding India published in the foreign press. This is
supplemented by a fortnightly survey of a more general character.
The rate for Press telegrams from India to China was reduced
by nearly half. The question of reducing the rates for telegrams
between India and other Asian countries is under examination.
Government have purchased Arabic translations (with copy
rights) of six Indian classics-the Ramayana, Mahabharat, Bhagwad
Gita, Shakuntala, Nala Damyanti, and Divine Chronicles. The translations are by the Labanese poet the late Wadie Brais Boustany. It
has been decided to distribute copies of these in the countries of
West Asia. One of the largest South American firms, Messrs.
147 M of E. A.
<pg30>
Guillermo Kraft Ltd., Buenos Aires, signed a contract with the Navajivan Trust for the publication of a Spanish translation of Gandhiji's
Autobiography.
CULTURAL ACTIVITIES
Increased efforts were also made to acquaint people in other coun-

tries with various aspects of Indian culture. This was done through
art exhibitions, dance and music performances, articles in the foreign
press and bulletins, radio broadcasts, lectures, etc.
A large scale exhibition, entitled `Indian Art Through Ages' organized by Shri Subho Tagore and sponsored by the Government of
India, visited several countries of the Middle East and Europe. Exhibitions of India's art were also held in Djakarta, Peking, New York,
Buenos Aires, Colombo, Singapore, etc.
An Indian Cultural Delegation sponsored by the Government of
India, and consisting of musicians and dancers, was sent to the
U.S.S.R., Poland and Czechoslovakia. Their performances were
highly appreciated.
Smt. Mrinalini Sarabhai, a well-known Indian classical dancer,
gave performances of Bharatnatyam and Kathakali in Europe. Her
tour was partly sponsored by the Government of India. Indian
dances were also arranged in many other countries.
A Cultural Delegation from the People's Republic of China also
paid a visit to India and, during a six-week stay, gave performances
in all the principal cities.
Shrimati Indrani Rehman and her troupe also visited Ceylon and
gave a number of highly successful performances. A Delegation of
writers, poets and composers from the U.S.S.R. and a Press Delegation from Indonesia visited India during the year. Three Indian
journalists attended the First World Congress of Press Entities held
in Sao Paulo (Brazil). It is proposed to invite Press Delegations from
Germany, Burma and the Gold Coast to visit India during 1955-56.
L. MISCELLANEOUS
(i) INDIANS OVERSEAS
The Government of India's policy has been to encourage persons
of Indian origin settled abroad to acquire the citizenship of their
country of domicile. The office of the Indian High Commission in
South Africa was closed down with effect from the 1st July 1954,
but efforts are being made, in accordance with the resolution of the
<pg31>
United Nations General Assembly, to enter into direct negotiations
with the South African Government to discuss the general question
of the treatment of persons of Indian origin. If these efforts succeed,
the discussions will include the question of the removal of the ban
on the entry of the wives and children of these persons of Indian
origin.
In Malaya, Indians, who have been demanding reservation of seats,
have been encouraged to co-operate with the other communities. In
Burma, land nationalization has affected 1,256,000 acres of the two

million acres owned by Indians, but neither this measure, nor the
exchange control regulations, are directed particularly. against the
Indian community.
(ii) EMIGRATION
There was no change during the year in the administration of
the provisions of the Indian Emigration Act (Act VII of 1952). No
notification permitting emigration of unskilled workers was issued
and such emigration, therefore, continued to be prohibited. Notifications were, however, issued permitting labourers already settled in
Malaya and Burma to return to those countries after short visits to
India. Permission was also granted from time to time to the dependents of labourers already settled in Ceylon and Malaya to proceed
to those countries. Emigration for "skilled work" (as defined in the
Act) continued to be permissible on compliance with the formalities
prescribed under the Act. Such emigration took place notably to the
Persian Gulf area, for employment in the Oil Companies, and to
Burma, for employment under various Government and QuasiGovernment bodies in that country.
With the imposition with effect from the 1st August 1953, of restrictions on the entry of outsiders into Malaya, pressure of traffic
to that country declined considerably and consequently passengers no
longer experienced any difficulty in obtaining sea-passages, and there
were no longer any noticeable malpractices of passage brokers and
touts, black-marketing in tickets, etc.
As a result of a concerted drive to prevent illicit emigration to
Ceylon, e.g., by the appointment of a Special Officer, Special Police
Staff, combing out of areas noted for illicit traffic, etc., there was a
marked fall in the incidence of such traffic. As against 5,079 illicit
emigrants deported from Ceylon during the period from the 1st July
1952 to the 31st December 1952 and 4,302 in 1953, the number of
deportees in 1954 fell to 977.
Certain developments in Ceylon necessitated the withdrawal of
the general exemption from the ban on the departure of Indians for
<pg32>
unskilled work to Ceylon. Under the general exemption, labourers
settled in Ceylon and coming to India for short visits could previously
return to Ceylon without any restrictions. Care was however, taken
to ensure that labourers who had already come to India, and persons
who were in possession of Temporary Residence Permits issued to
them by the Ceylon Immigration authorities permitting their entry
and stay in Ceylon, were not prevented from leaving India.
A scheme proposed by the Government of North Borneo for the
emigration of 10,000 Indian workers-cum-settlers to that country had
been withdrawn by that Government and the considerable interests
that the scheme had aroused in India slowly died down.

Instructions were issued to, the Protectors of Emigrants at the
ports for a liberalisation of the examination of passengers wishing
to proceed overseas, from the point of view of the Indian Emigration
Regulations, in order to spare them as much inconvenience as
possible. Owing to this, as well as to a decrease in the outward
traffic to Malaya, there was some reduction of work in the Emigration
offices in the Madras State and some temporary posts were
accordingly retrenched.
It was felt that the Indian Emigration Act needed some amendments to bring it in line with the present day requirements e.g.,
extension of the provisions of the Act to departures by air, and the
matter was under consideration when the year closed.
(iii) HAJ
Arrangements were made for over 7,000 pilgrims to visit Hejaz.
They were given facilities such as exemption from income-tax certificates, and permission to take Indian currency, food rations and
cloth. Medical assistance was also provided at Jedda, Mecca and
Medina.
(iv) DISTINGUISHED VISITORS FROM ABROAD
During the year under review, a large number of distinguished
visitors from abroad, including heads of states and heads of governments, ministers and eminent public men visited India. In many
cases, they were guests of the Government. They were afforded
opportunities to meet leading personalities in this country, and to
see some of the development projects and other nation-building
activities as also the cultural life of this country.
<pg33>
H. E. Marshal Josip Broz Tito, President of the Federal People's
Republic of Yugoslavia, paid a state visit to this country in December
1954-January 1955. He was accompanied by the Vice-President, the
Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, two members of the Federal
Executive Council, the Commander-in-Chief of the Navy, his
Secretary-General, and several other high ranking civil and military
officers. His tour of the country included visits to Bombay, Delhi,
Bhakra-Nangal, Simla, Chandigarh, Gwalior, Agra, Lucknow,
Banaras, Sindri, Tatanagar, Chittaranjan, Calcutta, Madras,
Bangalore, Mysore, and Cochin. H.E. Mr. Ghulam Mohammed,
Governor General of Pakistan, accompanied by three Ministers of
the Central Government of Pakistan and several members of his
personal staff, visited India in connection with the Republic Day
Celebrations at the invitation of the President. Notable among
others, who also visited India were, H. E. Chou En-lai, Prime Minister
of the People's Republic of China, H. E. Ali Sastroamidjojo, Prime
Minister of Indonesia, the Rt. Hon'ble Me. R. G. Cassey, Minister for
External Affairs of Australia, the Hon'ble Mr. S. C. Shirley Corea,

Commerce, Trade and Fisheries Minister of Ceylon, who led a Trade
Delegation, Mr. Kung Yuan, Vice-Minister for Foreign Trade of the
People's Republic of China, who led a Trade Delegation from his
country, the Hon'ble Mr. Montagu Jayawickrema, Minister for
Transport and Works of Ceylon, who led a Railway Delegation, H. E.
Syed Ibrahim El-Mufti, and H. E. Hammad Tewfik, Ministers for
Commerce and Finance respectively of the Sudan, Mr. Abu Rannat,
Chief Justice designate of the Sudan, H. E. Sayid Nuri es-Said,
present Prime Minister of Iraq, the Rt. Hon'ble Mr. Hugh Gaitskell,
former-Chancellor of the Exchequer, and the Rt. Hon'ble Mr. P. C.
Gordon-Walker, former Secretary of State for Commonwealth
Relations of the United Kingdom, Mr. M. Popovic, Chairman of the
Yugoslav. Committee for National Economy, Dr. Djuanda, Director of
Planning of Indonesia, The Hon'ble U Khin Mating Lat, Minister for
Health of the Government of Burma, Dr. Abdel Razek Sidky,
Minister of Agriculture of Egypt, Madam Suraya Agaglou, a feminist
leader of Turkey, and Mr. Reginald Sorensen, British member of
Parliament. These visits show the increasing interest which is being
taken by other countries in India's development plans and their
desire to understand India's foreign policy.
Government hospitality was also extended to the following
visitors: Madame Durria Shafique, an Egyptian feminist leader and
political worker, delegates from Poland, Canada, France, Viet Nam,
Cambodia, Laos and the Democratic Republic of Viet Nam to the
Indo-China Conference held in the first week of August, 1954, a
Chinese Cultural Delegation led by His Excellency Mr. Cheng Chen
to, Vice Minister for Culture of China, and Col. Abdul Razak,
Commander-in-Chief of the Royal Afghan Air Force.
147 MofEA
<pg34>
(V) CONSULAR DIVISION
The two sections comprising the Consular Division of the Ministry
were amalgamated into one in the month of June. The change,
besides promoting better coordination of the work, has resulted in a
saving of one Section Officer.
The Division deals with the compilation and revision of Indian
Foreign Service Instructions; levy of consular fees; all consular
matters including repatriation, relief payments and recoveries,
extradition and deportation and enquiries about welfare and whereabouts of Indians abroad in Europe, South-East Asia, Arab world and
Turkey; residual work relating to the scheme of financial assistance
to the evacuees from Burma, Malaya, etc., and long-term schemes for
the maintenance of refugee orphans who came to India from Burma,
Malaya, etc.
Compilation of the chapter of the Indian Foreign Service
Instructions continued to engage the attention of the Division and
the following chapters were finalized during the year:-

(i) Fees.
(ii) Shipping.
(iii) Exchange Control.
(iv) Taking of Evidence and Service of Documents abroad.
It is hoped that printed copies of these chapters will be available
shortly for issue to Indian Missions and Posts abroad. The chapter
on "Notarial Acts" is awaiting finalization as the rules under the.
Notaries Act, 1952 have not been published so far. The result is that
this Act has not yet been brought into force.
The Special Marriage Act 1954 (43 of 1954) has come into force
with effect from the 1st January 1955. Section 3(2)(b) of the Act
empowers the Central Government to appoint Indian Diplomatic and
Consular Officers abroad as Marriage Officers for the purpose of
solemnising marriages among Indian citizens residing in foreign
countries. The Division has taken action to appoint Marriage
Officers on the recommendations of Indian Missions abroad and has
also drafted rules under section 50 of the Act for the guidance of
the said Marriage Officers. The draft rules will be published after
necessary legal scrutiny.
One hundred and twenty-nine judicial documents, such, as powers
of attorney, affidavits, etc., intended for use in foreign countries, were
legalised during the year as against ninety three legalised last year
<pg35>
The Division dealt with eighty-four cases of deaths of Indian
nationals abroad during the same period as against eighty cases in
the preceding year. As a result of the action taken by it, in thirteen
cases the estates left by deceased Indian citizens were transferred
to their legal heirs in India. The remaining cases are still the subject
of correspondence with the foreign authorities concerned.
Seventy judicial documents, e.g., Letters of Request and Commissions, etc., received through the various State Governments for
service in Europe, South East Asia, Arab world and Turkey, were,
after proper scrutiny, forwarded to the authorities concerned through
Indian Missions abroad as against fifty-nine dealt with last year.
Nine cases of Letters of Request. Commissions, etc., received from
abroad for service in India, were also dealt with by the Division. It
received twenty-two applications from Indian citizens for help and
assistance in remitting funds from Indo-China, Indonesia, etc., for the
maintenance and education of their dependents in India. All these
cases were referred to Indian Missions in the countries concerned
for necessary action to avoid hardship to the dependents in India.
There were thirty-seven cases of relief and repatriation of desti-

tute Indian citizens from countries like Thailand, Iraq, Malaya,
etc., at a cost of Rs. 9,000, as against 28 last year. The recoveries
effected from the repatriates after their arrival in India have in
comparison been negligible, the policy of the Government being not
to subject the repatriated to undue hardship. The Division also dealt
with fifteen cases of extradition of undesirable aliens from India in
only one of which deportation orders were passed before the close
of the year.
As stated in the last year's report, the total amount advanced
under the Government of India's Scheme of Financial Assistance to
Evacuees from Burma, Malaya, etc. (War Zones) was about
Rs. 7,17,97,000 including a sum of Rs. 85,000 paid in territories which
are now in Pakistan. The rate of recoveries, after this lapse of time,
has considerably slowed down and the State Governments concerned
have been asked to submit proposals for writing off recoveries in
cases where, owing to the destitute condition of the evacuees,
recovery of advances is not possible. The Branch Secretariat of this
Ministry in West Bengal, entrusted with the work of recovery and
write off of advances given to evacuees in that State, has continued
to function during the year. Temporary staff for the same purpose
also remained employed in the State of Madras.
The scheme for the long-term maintenance of evacuee children
from Burma, Malaya and other places whose parents died while
<pg36>
trekking to India during the World War II has continued in operation
during the year under review. Instructions have been issued to the
State Governments to, assist the evacuee orphans after they have
attained the age of majority i.e., 18 years, and to arrange the marriage
of orphan girls. The cost of the scheme is shared in the ratio of
50: 50 by the Centre and the State Government concerned.
(vi) DIPLOMATIC AND CONSULAR MISSIONS IN INDIA
Forty-four countries have diplomatic representation in India, and
there are eighty-nine consular posts. Two new diplomatic missions
were established and the status of one legation was raised to that of
an Embassy. Eight new consular posts were established, three at
Bombay, two at Calcutta, two at New Delhi, and one at Madras.
-----------INDIA
BHUTAN USA PERU FRANCE AFGHANISTAN BURMA NEPAL LATVIA SWITZERLAND
PAKISTAN INDONESIA SRI LANKA CHINA CAMBODIA LAOS VIETNAM CANADA POLAND
REPUBLIC OF SINGAPORE THAILAND TOTO PHILIPPINES JAPAN KOREA AUSTRALIA CENTRAL
AFRICAN REPUBLIC NEW ZEALAND IRAN IRAQ OMAN EGYPT KUWAIT LEBANON SUDAN
SYRIA TURKEY SAUDI ARABIA UNITED KINGDOM ALGERIA KENYA ETHIOPIA NIGER
NIGERIA YUGOSLAVIA ITALY IRELAND RUSSIA BULGARIA ARGENTINA CHILE MEXICO

BOLIVIA BRAZIL COLOMBIA GHANA FIJI MAURITIUS NORWAY SLOVAKIA GERMANY SOUTH
AFRICA MALI
Mar 13, 1955

United Nations And International Conferences
PART III
UNITED NATIONS AND INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCES
The 9th Session of the General Assembly commenced its work in
a climate which augured well for constructive work preceded as it
was by the successful Geneva Conference which brought to an end
the fighting in Indo-China. Unlike those in the past, the debates
during this Session were remarkably free from acrimony.
For the first time, a resolution on Disarmament was co-sponsored
by all the major powers. That resolution enables the Disarmament
Commission and its Sub-committees to continue their work, and the
Indian proposal for an "Armaments Truce" was referred by the
General Assembly to the Disarmament Commission for further
study.
The resolution on the peaceful uses of atomic energy, as revised
and adopted by the General Assembly, took into account some of
the suggestions made by India, particularly the following:(a) The General Assembly should pronounce itself in favour
of the early establishment of the proposed agency.
(b) The proposed agency should not, as intended originally by
the Western Powers, be constituted on the pattern of
the Specialized Agencies.
(c) The views of Members like India who have manifested
their interest in the subject should be taken into account
fully by the Powers taking part in the initial negotiations and such Members should be consulted before the
details of the proposed Agency are finalised.
This resolution was also adopted unanimously.
On the question of people of Indian origin in South Africa, a
resolution suggesting direct negotiations between India, Pakistan and
the Union of South Africa, if necessary with the aid of a person
designated by the Secretary-General of the U.N. was adopted. The

matter will again come up for discussion at the next Session of the
General Assembly.
Likewise, the question of race conflict in the Union of South
Africa will also come up for consideration by the General Assembly
at its next Session. Meanwhile the U.N. Commission dealing with
this subject continues in being.
<pg37>
<pg38>
There are now 21 States who are waiting for admission to the
U.N. Their admission has been blocked as a result of differences
among the permanent members of the Security Council. At the
9th Session of the General Assembly, India and three other States
submitted a joint draft resolution which would refer all pending
applications back to the Security Council whose favourable recommendation is essential for the admission of any new State. The
resolution also suggested for the consideration of the Security
Council the desirability of invoking the provisions of Article 28(2)
of the Charter, whereby a "periodic meeting" attended by Foreign
Ministers of the States represented on the Council could be convened
to solve the deadlock. This resolution was adopted unanimously by
the General Assembly.
TRUST TERRITORIES
At the 8th Session of the U.N. General Assembly, India was
elected for the first time to the Trusteeship Council for a term of
3 years beginning from the Jan 01, 1954.
The Trust Territory of Togoland under British Administration
has been administered as a part of the Gold Coast colony. In view
of the impending attainment of self-government by the Gold Coast
the British Government informed the General Assembly that she
would no longer be able to administer this Territory as a part of the
Gold Coast and suggested that as the objective of the Trusteeship
system, namely attainment of self-government, had been achieved to
a large extent, the Trusteeship agreement should be terminated. In
view of the fact that, under article 76(b) of the Charter, the ultimate
decision should be in accordance with the freely expressed wishes
of the people, India submitted a draft resolution suggesting the
despatch of a Special U.N. Visiting Mission to, the two Togolands to
study the problem at first hand. This resolution was adopted by a
large majority.
On the question of the status of the Territory of South West
Africa, the General Assembly passed a resolution laying down special
rules regarding procedure in dealing with the reports and petitions
relating to South West Africa. By another resolution, the General
Assembly requested the International Court of Justice for advisory
opinion on the voting procedure to be followed in the General

Assembly in dealing with such reports and petitions.
ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL
India is represented on all the functional commissions of the
Economic and Social Council except the Commission on the Status of
Women and continues to take an active part in the deliberations of
the ECOSOC. At the 9th Session of the General Assembly India
<pg39>
and 19 other countries submitted a joint draft resolution which would
decide in favour of establishing. a Special U.N. Fund for economic
development of under-developed areas (SUNFED) and which
suggested certain preparatory measures also. As certain States were
not favourably disposed to the immediate establishment of such a
Special Fund, a working group was formed to evolve a commonly
acceptable resolution. The final resolution expresses the hope that
a special fund would be established "as soon as practicable" and
extends the appointment of Mr. Scheyven, the Special Rapporteur,
for another year to enable him to continue his consultations with
various Governments and directs him to submit a further report.
The Indian Delegation took an active part in formulating the final
resolution.
India has been taking increasing interest in the working of the
U.N. Children's Fund and has increased her contribution to this fund
by rupees one lakh. At the initiative of India and Uruguay, the
General Assembly adopted a resolution recommending that, with
effect from 1956, a Universal Children's day should be instituted by
all countries for promoting the ideals and objectives of the Charter
and the welfare of the children of the world and for expressing the
support of the Governments for the purposes of UNICEF.
India has continued to evince interest in the work of the UNESCO
which has accepted India's invitation to hold its 9th General Conference in India in 1956. Dr. A. L. Mudaliar, Vice Chancellor of
Madras University, was elected chairman of the Executive Board of
UNESCO. Among the important conferences that took place in
India during 1954, mention may be made of the symposium on Wind
Power and Solar Energy at Delhi and the 4th World Forestry
Congress at Dehra Dun.
ADMINISTRATIVE AND BUDGETARY
As a result of the strenuous efforts made by our Representatives,
India's share of the U.N. budget has been reduced from 3.40 per cent.
to 3.30 per cent.
On the subject of the organization of the U.N. Secretariat, the
Indian Delegation was able to secure the agreement of the SecretaryGeneral of the U.N. to the principle that he should, as a general rule,
avoid the recruitment of persons who have taken active part in

political controversies. The Indian Delegation also pleaded strongly
for increased representation of Asia at all levels in the U.N. Secretariat. A resolution co-sponsored by India, Argentina, Lebanon and
Yugoslavia approving the measures taken by the Secretary-General
in the re-organisation of the Secretariat and requesting him to make
a further report to the 10th Session was also adopted unanimously
by the General Assembly.
PERU
SWITZERLAND CHINA INDIA USA SOUTH AFRICA PAKISTAN URUGUAY ARGENTINA
LEBANON YUGOSLAVIA
Jan 01, 1954

Appendix I EXTRACTS FROM THE SPEECHES AND
STATEMENTS OF POLICY IN PARLIAMENT
APPENDIX I
EXTRACTS FROM THE SPEECHES AND STATEMENTS OF POLICY IN PARLIAMENT OF THE MINISTER FOR EXTERNAL AFFAIRS
Panchashila
"The House knows about the five principles, which were included
in. the joint statement, that we issued here when Prime Minister
Chou En-Lai came here. I do not think anyone present can possibly
take exception to these five principles or any of them. What were
they? They were recognition of territorial integrity and sovereignty
and independence, non-aggression, non-interference, mutual respect,
etc. Can anyone take exception to them? And yet people have
taken exception to it. On what grounds? Oh! they say "How can
you believe that this will be acted upon"? Of course if you cannot
believe in anything, there is no fun in talking or writing, and the
only thing left is to live in isolation or to fight and subdue the other
party-there is no other way. It is not a question of believing the
other party's word; it is a question of creating conditions where the
other party cannot break its word, or if I may say so, where it finds
it difficult to break its word. May be the other party breaks its
word, and it is likely to find itself in a much worse quandary. These
conditions are created by the joint statement that was made both in
India and in Rangoon, and if these five principles are repeated by
the various countries of the world in their relations to each other,
they will create an atmosphere. That does not mean that all the
forces of aggression and interference and mischief in various
countries have been ended. Of course not; they are there, but it
does mean that you make it slightly more difficult for them to
function and you encourage the other forces, and that is the way for
human relationship whether of the individual or of the bigger

groups".
(Lok Sabha-Sep 29, 1954).
Co-existence
"The word co-existence has been used and thrown about a good
deal in the past few months and it has come to mean something; and
yet, so far as we in India are concerned, our whole policy has been
based, right from the beginning, since we started functioning in the
international sphere, on the conception of co-existence. That word
<pg40>
<pg41>
or that idea or conception is not new to us, naturally. It had to be
so because on the one hand we do not wish to interfere with others
In any way and on the other hand we will not like to be interfered
with by others. So the natural consequence of this approach is coexistence; it can be no other. It is only when you want to lnterfere
or when you are afraid of being interfered with, that naturally coexistence is upset; nobody in the world today can be certain but you
can form your own guess as to whether the forces aiming at interference with each other can be checked, controlled or not. If they
cannot be checked then of course there can be no co-existence and
conflicts arise. And we have arrived at a stage in the world when
a conflict and a big conflict is likely to become immediately a big
world war. There are no small stages left now although this problem
of understanding whether co-existence is possible or not is a very
important one. But one thing is quite clear. If it is not possible
then the only alternative is world war-co-destruction-I do not
know what you would call-so that whether one likes the present
state of affairs in the world or not, one has in effect to choose between
a policy which is likely to lead to war on the bigger scale and the
acceptance of the general approach meant by the word `co-existence',
that is, countries existing where they are, not interfering with
others".
(Rajya Sabha-August 26, 1954).
China and India
"The mere fact of a closer understanding between India and
China is a factor of vital importance not only to those two countries
but to others also. Therefore, the visit of Premier Chou-En-lai to
India and my visit to China assumed a significance of some historic
Importance.
Apart from conflicts which exist in many parts of the world, the
major difficulty appears to be the prevalence of fear and the reactions
to that all-pervading fear. The two great groups of nations which
have been ranged against each other for several years suspect each
other of aggressive designs. Each charges the other with evil intentions and with preparations for external aggression or internal subversion. Every act of one country or one group which is aimed at
the other leads to a counter-act. Thus tension grows and a vicious
circle continues.
We discussed this matter in Peking, as we had done previously in

New Delhi, and we agreed that everything should be done to remove
this fear and apprehension from men's minds so as to produce an
atmosphere which is more helpful in the consideration and solution
<pg42>
of problems. The leaders of China assured me that they were
anxious to do this and I have no doubt that they meant what they
said because circumstances that exist today demand such a course of
action even from the point of view of national interest. The `Five,
principles', or the Pancha Shila as I would like to call them, to which
we agreed some months ago, appear to me to offer a firm basis for
friendly intercourse between nations".
*

*

*

*

*

"Briefly put, I would say that the political consequences of my
visit to China were a deeper understanding between India and China.
and what they stand for and what they work for, and a knowledge
that there is much in common in the tasks that confront them, and it
is desirable for them to cooperate in as large a measure as possible
India, as she is situated geographically and politically, can be of
some service in interpreting some countries to others and thus helping to remove misunderstandings. Probably my visit also helped a
little in easing the existing tensions in Indo-China and in South-East
Asia. As such, it helped in the larger and vital problem of world
peace".
(Lok Sabha-Nov. 22, 1954).
China and U.N.
"In regard to the United Nations, this House knows that we have
stood for the People's Government of China being represented there.
Recently the United Nations have passed a resolution that this
matter will not be considered for a year or so. I have long been convinced of the fact that a great part of our present-day difficulties,certainly in the Far East, but I would like to go farther and say in
the world-is due to this extraordinary shutting of one's eyes to the
fact of China. Here is a great country and it is totally immaterial
whether you like it or dislike it. Here is a great country and the
United Nations, or some countries of the United Nations, refuse to
recognise that it is there. The result is that all kinds of conflicts
arise. I am convinced in my mind that there would have been no.
Korean War if the People's Government of China had been in the
United Nations-it is only, guess-work-because people could have
dealt with China across the table. It adds to the complexities and
difficulties of the world problems".
*

*

*

*

"Remember this: that it is not a question of the admission of
China to the United Nations. China is one of the founder-members
<pg43>
of the United Nations. It is merely a question of who represents
China. This fact is not adequately realised. It is not a question
really of the Security Council, or anybody else deciding, as they
have to decide, of new countries coming in. China is not a new

country. It is a founder-member of the United Nations. It is really
a question, if you like, of credentials,-who represents China, a
straightforward question. And it surprises me and amazes me, how
this straightforward question has been twisted round about, and
made the cause of infinite troubles. There would be no settlement
in the Far East, or South-East Asia till this major fact of the People's
Government of China is recognised. I say one of the biggest factors
towards ensuring security in South-East Asia and in the Far East is
the recognition of China by those countries, and China coming into
the United Nations. There would be far greater assurance of security that way than through your South-East Asia Treaty Organisation, or the rest.
If China comes in, apart from the fact that you deal with China
face to face at the United Nations and elsewhere, China assumes certain responsibilities in the United Nations. Today it is a very odd
position. Sometimes the United Nations passes resolutions directing
the People's Government of China to do this or that. The response
from China is: "Well, you do not recognise us; we are not there;
we are not a part of it; how can we recognise your directions?"which is an understandable response. Instead of adding to the responsibility and laying down ways of cooperation, you shut the door
of cooperation and add to the irresponsible behaviour of nations in
this way, and call it security. There is something fundamentally
wrong about it. The result inevitably is that the influence of the
United Nations lessens, as it must. I do not want it to lessen,
because, whatever it may be, it is one of our biggest hopes of peace
in the world".
(Lok Sabha-Sept. 29, 1954).
Indo-China
"At Geneva, the Indo-China Conference assumed the greater importance. The historic role of this Conference was that it was the
alternative, or the deterrent, to what threatened to lead to World.
War III. This is the feature of the Geneva Conference on Indo-China
that gives it a memorable place in history.
The mediatory role of the two Presidents of the Conference,
Mr. Eden and M. Molotov, and the dominant desire that pervaded
<pg44>
Geneva despite all conflicts and deadlocks, was that there should be
settlement and the grim alternative must be averted.
Apart from the two Conference Presidents, the Chinese Prime
Minister, whom we had the pleasure of welcoming in this country,
distinguished himself as a constructive statesman. He also brought to
the Conference the first-hand sense of the reality of the new Asia.
His visit to India appears to have assisted him to understand the
Asia outside of China and also to appreciate the evolving South East
Asia pattern of collective peace.
Great the role of others was, the main task and therefore the
determining role rested with the principal belligerents-France and
the Democratic Republic of Vietnam. Direct negotiations between
them first proposed in this House and later affirmed at Colombo,
became an important feature in regard to some aspects. To the

Prime Minister of France, M. Mendes-France, and the representatives of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam our gratitude is due for
the courage and vision with which they tackled this difficult problem.
The three other Governments in Indo-China, represented at the Conference, namely, Cambodia, Labs and Vietnam, all intimately involved in the horrors of war, also made their contribution to the
settlement. Indo-China has been a truly negotiated settlement
where not any one of the, belligerents but peace has been victor.
The Armistice settlement tests on the agreement between the
combatants, represented by the two High Commands. On them
rests the responsibility of maintaining. it. But, from the beginning
of the Conference, the role, functions, composition and the procedure
of the neutral or impartial Supervisory Commissions bedevilled the
deliberations, and stood deadlocked for a long time. The agreement
reached on the functions as now set out and the composition of the
Commissions with Canada, Poland and India proved the turningpoint. To India, a place. on the Commissions was proposed by every
participant and on every occasion. Finally, the Chairmanship of
India became one of the necessities for a settlement.
India had not been a participant at the Conference. She had not
sought a place on the Commission. Indeed, we did not even disclose
whether we would or would not accept responsibility. When this
responsibility was offered to us, we could not refuse for our refusal
would have meant imperilling the whole agreement. We have thus
to shoulder this heavy and onerous responsibility".
*

*

*

*

*

(Lok Sabha-August 25, 1954).
<pg45>
Korea
"The, Conference on Korea adjourned inconclusively, but it should
be noted and affirmed that the Conference has not broken up. The
problem of Korea has to be resolved in the interests of Asian and
world stability and peace. It is not Without significance that no
party at Geneva was willing or ready to force the Conference to a
catastrophic or even formal end. The great majority of the States
represented wished and sought at least partial solutions. The proposals made there contain the elements of advance and a concern to
find a settlement. They can be a kind of bridgehead from which a
hopeful landing to the shores of a Korean settlement may, and indeed, should be planned or envisaged. The Geneva Conference
should not be permitted to lapse. Endeavours to make progress towards peace in Korea should be continued".
(Lok Sabha-August 25, 1954)
Asian Outlook
"And so here was this conference in Geneva, talking and discussing
about Asian problems but they realized there the importance of the
Asian outlook, they realized that they could not ignore what Asia
felt in this matter. First of all there was of course one country
which is intimately involved i.e., the People's Republic of China,
which was represented there, but another important factor was that

a number of Asian countries which were not represented nevertheless
were constantly referred to and talked about i.e., the so-called
Colombo Conference countries. That is to say, the Colombo Conference which wag held immediately before the Geneva Conference and
which considered many of these problems, the Indo-China problem
specially, and passed certain resolutions of recommendations with
regard to it attracted a great deal of attention at Geneva. That was
because it was supposed, and rightly supposed to represent the viewpoint-of a very large part of Asia, in fact the part of Asia very intimately connected geographically and otherwise by virtue of proximity, with the Indo-China problem. So, we saw in Geneva this
impact of reality on an unreal way of dealing with things, and the
unreal way of dealing with this problem was to forget Asia, generally speaking. But that fact that Asia was there and that Asia had a
certain definite viewpoint in regard to it could not be ignored and
so Asia was continually impinging on them although it was not present at the conference table".
(Rajya Sabha-August 26, 1954)
<pg46>
Commonwealth
"This whole question has to be viewed, not from a background of
sentiment this way or that way but, if I may say so, pure advantage,
advantage to our country nationally, advantage to the policies we
might pursue internationally. That is the only test, does it come in
the way or does it help? I do submit that our association with
the Commonwealth has not come in our way in the least".
*

*

*

*

*

"In what way have our policies been changed, interfered with by
this link? That is the point that we have to consider."
"I submit that in no way, in either the internal economics, or
external policy or anything, has this come in our way. On the other
hand, it has been definitely helpful to us and helpful to the cause of
world peace".
"My point is that in these international affairs, the fact that there
was this thin, tenuous, link with the Commonwealth has helped the
cause of world peace".
(Lok Sabha-September 30, 1954)
External Interference
"Most of these countries are afraid, not of what Governments do
officially, but what they might do sub rosa through the activities of
the Communist Party in these countries. And the fact of the matter
is, that one of the serious difficulties that has arisen in international
affairs is, that previously one country was against another; you
knew where you were; there might be some people in your country,
a handful, who might sympathise with the other country and two
nations came into conflict. Now we have this new development that
in national groups there are, what I might call if you like, international groups who oppose the national group and who psychologically,
emotionally, intellectually if you like, are tied up with another

nation's national group. That creates difficulties. In fact that is one
of the essential difficulties of the situation. I am not discussing
Communism, its theory and practice. I am merely pointing out the
essential difficulty of the situation of all these countries. And if
there was such a thing as the Communist Party in a country, that is
a national Communist Party, that is a party which had nothing to do
with another country, that is a different matter. It has got a certain
policy, economic, political, whatever it is. It is one of various
parties. The difficulty comes in, because that party in your country
is, as I said, intellectually, mentally and otherwise tied up with other
groups in other countries. And the other country might well utilise
<pg47>
that for its own advantage. That is the fear that comes to all these
South-East Asia countries, Whether it is Burma and Thailand or any
other country; with the result, unfortunately, that problems, economic and other problems which could be considered by themselves,
get tied up with these extraneous issues, and different types of reactions are created. Therefore, I think that just as in the old days
there was the Comintern, that international Communist organisation which was wound up some time during the last war, then later
came the Cominform. which was, I suppose, something of the old type
in a different garb, I think that these organisations and the activities
that flow from that area have caused a good deal of apprehension
and disturbance in various countries and nations. And now, as a
reaction to this, we have other forms of international interferences
in national affairs growing up in various countries, not in that ideological way, but in a practical governmental, sub rosa way. It is
extraordinary how this kind of thing is growing in most countries,
not on one side but on every side".
(Lok Sabha-September 29, 1954)
Colonialism
"Apart from all these, the major fact is that what is called `colonialism' is in its retreat and has to be so. We talk about the crisis
of our time and many people do it in different ways. Probably in
the United States of America the crisis of the time is supposed to be
communism versus anti-communism. May be so to some extent.
Well, the crisis of the time in Asia is colonialism versus anti-colonialism. But let me say of course all these things overlap. Now
take the case of Indo-China and look back at the history of IndoChina, the tragic history of seven-and-a-half years of war-terrible destruction. Was that not due to an attempt to prolong the colonial era
there when it had ceased to have any real strength or significance?
The result has come or will come, has come almost, that is, those
countries will be independent and free from colonial control. But if
a wise decision had been taken seven years ago that would have
avoided the horrors of this war and all kinds of other developments
and consequences that have taken place. That wise decision was
taken in Burma and in India. In Indonesia there was trouble, you
remember, repeated trouble, but however it was solved to some
extent; one can see the difference. Where this has been recognised,
the trend of modern history, modern events in Asia have been recognised, there has been a peaceful changeover and friendship between
those countries that dominated and those that were dominated,
Where it was not whether in Asia, Whether in Africa, there is continuous trouble, the trouble of fighting a war and all that is going

<pg48>
on and it is patent that that cannot end until the freedom of thesecountries is recognised.
Now it is in this larger context of freedom of countries, individual
countries that we should also see this problem of little Goa. I can
understand the Portuguese having a soft corner in their hearts and
minds for the days of Portugal's grandeur. Each country has its
periods and we do not grudge them that, but that does not justify in
any sense, logically or otherwise, for them to adopt a policy today of
holding on to Goa against the wishes of the people of Goa-it could
not be justified at any time".
(Rajya Sabha-August 26, 1954)
Manila Treaty
"Now, I put it to the House, has this Manila Treaty relaxed tensions in South-East Asia or increased them? Has it taken South-East
Asia or any other port of the world move towards peace and security
or has it not? I confess, I neither see any lessening of tension nor
any advance towards peace. In fact, the reverse. The good atmosphere that was created by the Geneva agreements has, to some
extent, been vitiated. Now, that is not a good thing. Has the
Manila Treaty created any bulwark for peace and security? The
Treaty, itself, as a matter of fact, does not go very far. Those who
were of a certain notion, I presume previously, have expressed their
opinion, if you like in a more corporate way. It does not add to the
strength of those countries, even increase their strength, for their
strength as such was there may develop a little more. So, positively,
it has little contribution to make. Negatively, it has definitely added
to the tensions and fears of the situation".
*

*

*

*

*

"Now, another aspect of the SEATO or SEADO-whatever it is
called-is a curious thing. I can understand a number of countries
coming together for their own defence and coming to some agreement and making an alliance. Now, this particular SEATO treaty,
although the alliance or the agreement that emerges is not very
strong so far as the military aspect is concerned goes somewhat beyond those very countries. There is constant reference in that agreement or treaty to an area, an area not of the countries concerned but
of course, to an area beyond these countries which are. parties to that
treaty; an area which those countries themselves can designate: "this
is also in our area". That, I submit, is a dangerous extension of this
idea".
ously

"It seems to me, this particular Manila treaty is looking dangerin this direction of spheres of influence to be exercised by
<pg49>

powerful countries; because, ultimately, it is the big and powerful
countries that will decide and not the two or three weak and small
Asian countries, that may be allied to them.
Another fact I should like to mention is this: in. this treaty there

is reference, of course, to aggression. One can understand external
aggression, but there is reference also to a fact or situation created
within this area which might entitle them to intervene. Now,
observe the words `a fact or situation created in that area'. It is
not external invasion. That is to say, some internal development in
that area might entitle these countries to intervene. Does this not
affect the whole conception of integrity, sovereignty and independence of the countries of this area?"
*

*

*

*

*

"Again, we have ventured to talk about an area of peace and we
have thought that, perhaps, one of the major areas of peace might
be South-East Asia. Now, the Manila treaty rather comes in the way
of that area of peace. It takes up that very area which might be
an area of peace and almost converts it into an area of potential war.
All these facts, I find disturbing".
(Lok Sabha-September 29,1954).
Goa
"I would like to say on behalf of our country and Government
that we have no animosity towards Portugal or her people. We,
believe the freedom of the Goans, now subject to Portugal, would
be again for Portugal as well. We will continue to pursue, with
patience and firmness, the path of conciliation and negotiation.
Equally, we must declare that we would be false to our history and
betray the cause of freedom itself if we did not state, without reserve,
that our country and Government firmly and fully believe in the
right of our compatriots in Goa to free themselves from alien rule
and to be reunited with the rest of the mother land. This will serve
the cause of friendship and understanding even as freedom to India
has led to friendly relations between the United Kingdom and India.
We would therefore invite the Portuguese Government to cooperate
in the peaceful consummation of these endeavours."
(Lok Sabha-August 25, 1954)
Hydrogen Bomb
"We have maintained that nuclear (including Thermonuclear)
chemical and biological (bacterial) knowledge and power should not
be used to forge these weapons of mass destruction. We have advo<pg50>
cated the prohibition of such weapons, by common consent, and
immediately by agreement amongst those concerned, which latter is
at present the only effective way to bring about their abandonment".
*

*

*

*

*

"Pending progress towards some solution, full or partial, in respect of the prohibition and elimination of these weapons of mass
destruction, which the General Assembly has affirmed as its nearest
desire, the Government would consider, among the steps to be taken
now and forthwith, the following:
(1) Some sort of, what may be called, "Standstill Agreement" in

respect, at least, of these actual explosions, even if arrangements
about the discontinuance of production and stockpiling, must await
more substantial agreements amongst those principally concerned.
(2) Full publicity by those principally concerned in the production
of these weapons and by the United Nations, of the extent of the
destructive power and the known effects of these weapons and also
adequate indication of the extent of the unknown but probable effects.
Informed world public opinion is in our view the, most effective
factor in bringing about the results we desire.
(3) Immediate (and continuing) private meetings of the Subcommittees of the Disarmament Commission to consider the "Standstill" proposal, which I have just mentioned, pending decisions on
prohibitions and controls etc., to which the Disarmament Commission
is asked by the General Assembly to address itself.
(4) Active steps by States and peoples of the world, who though
not directly concerned with the production of these weapons, are
very much concerned by the possible use of them, also at present,
by these experiments and their effects. They would, I venture to
hope, express their concern and add their voices and influence, in as
ineffective a manner as possible to arrest the progress of this destructive
potential which menaces all alike.
The Government of India will use its best efforts in pursuit of
these objectives".
(Lok Sabha-April 2,1954)
USA
INDIA
CANADA

CHINA KOREA SWITZERLAND FRANCE VIETNAM SRI LANKA CAMBODIA
POLAND BURMA THAILAND INDONESIA PORTUGAL PHILIPPINES

Sep 29, 1954

Appendix II JOINT STATEMENT OF PRIME MINISTERS OF INDIA

APPENDIX II
(i) JOINT STATEMENT OF PRIME MINISTERS OF INDIA AND
CHINA (Jun 28, 1954)
His Excellency Chou En-lai, Prime Minister and Foreign Minister
of the People's Republic of China, came to Delhi at the invitation of
His Excellency Jawaharlal Nehru, Prime Minister and Foreign
Minister of the Republic of India. He stayed here for three days.
During this period the two Prime Ministers discussed many matters
of common concern to India and China. In particular they discussed
the prospects of peace in South East Asia and the developments that
had taken place in the Geneva Conference in regard to Indo-China.
The situation in Indo-China was of vital importance to the peace of

Asia and the world and the Prime Ministers were anxious that the
efforts that were being made at Geneva should succeed. They noted
with satisfaction that some progress had been made in the talks at
Geneva in regard to an armistice. They earnestly hoped that these
efforts will meet with success in the near future and that they would
result in a political settlement of the problems of that area.
The talks between the Prime Ministers aimed at helping, in such
ways as were possible, the efforts at peaceful settlement that were
being made in Geneva and elsewhere. Their main purpose was to
arrive at a clearer understanding of each other's point of view in
order to help in the maintenance of peace, both in cooperation with
each other and with other countries.
Recently India and China have come to an agreement in which
they have laid down certain principles which should guide the relations between the two countries. These principles are
(i)

Mutual respect for each other's territorial integrity and
sovereignty;

(2)
(3)

Non-aggression;
Non-interference in each other's internal affairs;

(4)

Equality and mutual benefit; and

(5)

Peaceful co-existence.

The Prime Ministers reaffirmed these principles and felt that they
should be applied in their relations with other countries in Asia as
<pg51>
<pg52>
well as in other parts of the world. If these principles are applied
not only between various countries but also in international relations
generally, they would form a solid foundation for peace and security
and the fears and apprehensions that exist today would give place
to a feeling of confidence.
The Prime Ministers recognised that different social and political
systems exist in various parts of Asia and the world. If, however,
the above-mentioned principles are accepted and acted upon and there
is no interference by any one country with another, these differences
should not come in the way of peace or create conflicts. With the
assurance of territorial integrity and sovereignty of each country and
of non-aggression, there would be peaceful co-existence and friendly
relations between the countries concerned. This would lessen the
tensions that exist in the world today and help in creating a climate
of peace.
In particular,
would be applied to
where the political
democratic, unified
used for aggressive
This will lead to a
well as to friendly
The adoption of the

the Prime Ministers hoped that these, principles.
the solution of the problems in Indo-China
settlement should aim at the creation of free,
and independent States, which should not be
purposes or be subjected to foreign intervention.
growth of self-confidence in these countries as
relations between them and their neighbours.
principles referred to above will also help in

creating an area of peace which, as circumstances permit, can be
enlarged, thus lessening the chances of war and strengthening the
cause of peace all over the world.
The Prime Ministers expressed their confidence in, the friendship
between India and China which would help the cause of world peace
and the peaceful development of their respective countries as well
as other countries of Asia.
These conversations were held with a view to help in bringing
about a greater understanding of the problems of Asia and to further
a peaceful and cooperative effort, in common with other countries;
of the world, in solving these and like problems.
The Prime Ministers agreed that their respective. countries should
maintain close contacts so that there should continue to be full understanding between them. They appreciated greatly the present opportunity of meeting together and having a full exchange of ideas leading to a clearer understanding and cooperation in the cause of peace
<pg53>
(ii) JOINT STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE FEDERAL
PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF YUGOSLAVIA AND THE PRIME
MINISTER OF INDIA.
"The President of the Federal People's Republic of Yugoslavia,
His Excellency Marshal Josip Broz Tito, who is paying a State visit
to India, in response to the invitation of the Government of India,
has spent five days in New Delhi. During this period, His Excellency
has had several conversations with Shri Jawaharlal Nehru, Prime
Minister of India.
These conversations have been informal and friendly in character
and have covered, in general terms, the more basic and pressing
aspects of world affairs and, more particularly, those matters of
common interest which engage their common and grave concern.
The similarities of historic background and social and economic
conditions of their countries and the fact that they have emerged as
independent nations, through powerful movement of national liberation, have endowed their understanding of each other and of their
countries with a deeper significance and given to their friendly
relations a greater ease and facility.
Yugoslavia and India have devoted their energies, both in the
domestic and international fields, for the promotion of peace and
methods of negotiation and conciliation as a solvent of international
(conflicts and problems. They have sought to base their own relations with each other and with the rest of the world on the basis of
equality and friendship with all nations.
The President and the Prime Minister desire to proclaim that the
policy of non-alignment adopted and pursued by their respective
countries is not `neutrality' or `neutralism' and therefore passivity
as sometimes alleged, but is a positive, active and constructive policy
seeking to lead to collective peace, on which alone collective security
can really rest.
They have felt that their countries and Governments are not only
fully aware of the grim alternative, namely war in this atomic age

but of the profound truth that wars do not solve problems but only
Tender them more difficult of solution and, in addition, create new
and more stubborn ones.
Yugoslavia and India live in the awareness that in peace alone
their hard-won and cherished independence can be consolidated and
endure and give to them and their peoples opportunities of selfdevelopment, economic advance and prosperity and social progress
and stability.
The President and the Prime Minister desire to state, as their
considered view, that the relations of their two countries and Gov<pg54>
ernments are, and must continue to be based on the principles of the
recognition of each other's sovereignty, independence and integrity,
of non-aggression, of equality, of mutual respect and non-interference
in the domestic affairs of each other or of other countries, and on the
promotion, both for themselves and for the world, of the approach
and conditions of peaceful co-existence. This basic conception should
govern international relations and be the foremost element in the
policy and work of the United Nations.
It follows, therefore, that the policy of their two countries and
their approach to world peace cannot be based upon force or the
accumulation of armaments as an instrument either of negotiation or
of solution of conflicts. The President and the Prime Minister,
therefore, repudiate the erroneous conception, which has become
prevalent in some quarters of a "third bloc" or "third force" of nonaligned countries. This is a contradiction in terms because such a
bloc would involve them in the very system of alignments which they
regard as undesirable.
The President and the Prime Minister are convinced that the
principles on which they have agreed for the governance of their
mutual relations are capable of wider application. If "they were sop
accepted, they would make a substantial contribution to the lowering
of world tensions and the resolving of pending conflicts. They will
widen the area of peace and diminish the terrible prospect of war,
promote greater confidence and open up greater opportunities of
world cooperation.
INDO-YUGOSLAVIA FRIENDSHIP
The President and the Prime Minister express their willingness
and confidence in the friendship of Yugoslavia and India, which is
welcomed and acclaimed by their peoples. They will seek to promote and strengthen the economic and cultural relations between
their two countries. They recall with satisfaction the understanding
and unity of endeavour that prevails between their two countries in
the United Nations and elsewhere, in the common cause of peace
and humanity, and have decided that these contacts and relationships should be furthered and strengthened.
The President and the Prime Minister, believing that the lowering
of world tensions is an essential prelude to the development of
collective peace, welcome the signs of the easing of certain tensions
in the world which have recently emerged and, at the same time
will devote their sincere endeavour to further easing world tensions

and to prevent their increase.
<pg55>
The President and the Prime Minister wish to affirm solemnly
that the hope of advance of the peoples of the world and even the
survival of civilisation render our acceptance of the necessity of
peaceful co-existence, not merely as an alternative but as ark
imperative.
The fact that Yugoslavia and India are pursuing similar general
aims constitutes a firm basis for the strengthening of their mutual
relations notwithstanding the geographical distance which separates
them, and they are happy to feel that bonds of warm friendship and
fraternity bind them together".
(iii) JOINT COMMUNIQUE BY THE PRIME MINISTER OF
BURMA, CEYLON, INDIA, INDONESIA AND PAKISTAN
The Prime Ministers of Burma, Ceylon, India, Indonesia and.
Pakistan met at Bogor on the 28th and 29th December 1954. The.
main object of their meeting was to consider matters concerning
the proposed Asian-African Conference suggested at the first meeting of the Prime Ministers at Colombo last April.
The Prime Ministers took advantage of the opportunity of
their present meeting to review briefly, and in general terms, problems and issues of common interest and concern to them all.
The Prime Ministers agreed that an Asian-African Conference
be held under their joint sponsorship. They also reached agreement
on all consequential matters.
The purposes of the Asian-African Conference would be:
(a) to promote goodwill and co-operation among the nations:
of Asia and Africa, to explore and advance their mutual
as well as common interests and to establish and further
friendliness and neighbourly relations;
(b) to consider social, economic and cultural problems and
relations of the countries represented;
(c) to consider problems of special interest to Asian and
African peoples, e.g., problems affecting national
sovereignty and of racialism and colonialism;
(d) to view the position of Asia and Africa and their peoples:
in the world of today and the contribution they can
make to the promotion of world peace and co-operation.
The Conference will meet in Indonesia in the last week of
April 1955. The Government of Indonesia have agreed to make the
<pg56>
necessary arrangements for this Conference on behalf of the sponsoring countries. A Conference Secretariat representing the sponsoring countries will be set up in Indonesia.
The Prime Ministers agreed that the Conference should have

a broad and geographical basis, and that all countries in Asia and
Africa, which have independent governments, should be invited.
With minor variations and modifications of this basic principle, they
decided to invite the following countries:
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
(16)
(17)
(18)
(19)
(20)
(21)
(22)
(23)
(24)
(25)

Afghanistan
Cambodia
Central African Federation
China
Egypt
Ethiopia
Gold Coast
Iran
Iraq
Japan
Jordan
Laos
Lebanon
Liberia
Libya
Nepal
Philippines
Saudi Arabia
Sudan
Syria
Thailand
Turkey
Viet-Uam (North)
Viet-Nam (South)
Yemen

The above twentyfive countries, together with the five sponsoring
countries, namely, Burma, Ceylon, India, Indonesia and Pakistan,
will, it is hoped, participate in the Conference.
Representation at the Conference will be at Ministerial level
and it is hoped that each country invited will be represented by
<pg57>
her Prime Minister and/or Foreign Minister, together with such
other representatives as each Government might wish to include in
its delegation.
The Conference will determine its own procedure its own procedure and
agen
da,
the general scope of which is set out in the purpose of the Conference.
The Prime Ministers wished to point out that acceptance of
the invitation by any one country would in no way involve or even
imply any change, in its view of the status of any other country.
It implied only that the country invited was in general ageement
with the purposes of the Conference. They had also borne in mind
the principle that the form of Government and the way of life of
any one country should in no way be subject to interference by
Another. Any view expressed at the Conference by one or more
participating country would not be binding on or be regarded as
accepted by any other, unless the latter so desired. The basic pur-

pose of the Conference is that the countries concerned should become better acquainted with one another's point of view. The
Prime Ministers hoped that this clarification would enable all the
invited countries to accept their invitation.
The Prime Ministers wished to state that in seeking to convene an Asian-African Conference, they were not actuated by any
desire for exclusiveness in respect of the membership of the Conference. They did not desire either that the participating countries
should build themselves into a regional bloc.
The Prime Ministers expressed gratification at the results of
the Geneva Conference on Indo-China and the cessation of hostilities. They expressed the hope that the Geneva Agreements would
be fully respected and implemented by all concerned and that there
would be no outside interference which would hinder their successful implementation.
The Prime Ministers, in the context of their well-known.
attitude towards Colonialism, took note of the case of West Iran.
The Prime Ministers of Burma, Ceylon, India and Pakistan supported the position of Indonesia in this matter. They expressed the
earnest hope that the Netherlands Government would reopen negotiations to implement their obligations under the solemn agreements
concluded by them with Indonesia.
The Prime Ministers expressed their continued support of
the demand of the peoples of Tunisia and Morocco for their national
independence and their legitimate right to self-determination.
<pg58>
The Prime Ministers reiterated their grave concern in respect
of the destructive potential of nuclear and thermonuclear explosions for experimental purposes which threaten not only their countries, but the world, and their far-reaching and yet unascertained
effects which may do permanent damage to human life and civilization. The earnestly requested all concerned to bring about a
cessation of such experiments. They also request the Disarmament
Commission to take this matter into immediate consideration.
The
economic development of Asian countries, which is so
urgently necessary for the happiness and well-being of their peoples, required a planned approach with a view to the utilization,
in the most effective manner, of the available resources. An essential pre-requisite of such an approach is full knowledge of these
resources. Surveys of physical resources, particularly of the mineral
and sub-soil wealth of each country, should therefore be conducted,
and co-operation in the supply of technical personnel and in other
ways should be made available.
The Prime Ministers considered that co-operation in the
economic sphere for the supply of technical personnel and in all
other ways should engage the attention of their Governments. They
considered that a committee of experts should be set up to consider
economic questions of common interest to their countries.
The Prime Ministers, meeting on the eve of the New Year,
expressed the earnest hope that the year 1955 would witness a
further growth in the friendly co-operation of the countries repre-

sented in the Conference as well as other countries, and further the
cause of world peace.
(iv) JOINT COMMUNIQUE OF THE PRIME MINISTERS OF EGYPT
AND INDIA-16TH FEBRUARY 1955.
On February 15 and 16, 1955 during the visit of the Prime Minister of India to Cairo, as the guest of the Government of Egypt, the
Prime Ministers of Egypt and India had a series of friendly and informal talks on a wide range of subjects, political, economic and
social affecting generally the problems of world peace and welfare
2nd, more particularly, the situation in the Middle East, SouthEast Asia and the Far East.
Egypt and India have in the recent past been brought close to
each other by similar urges and problems. International develop<pg59>
ments and association in the United Nations have brought them
closer to one another.
The conversations between the two Prime Ministers indicated
the existence of identity of views on major international issues.
In view of the tremendous developments of weapons of warfare,
war means today utter ruin for humanity. It cannot solve any problem.
The Prime Ministers, therefore, believe that every attempt must
be made to prevent war and develop a climate of peace.
International disputes should be settled peacefully by negotiation. Military alliances and power entanglements, which increase
tension and rivalry in armaments, do not add to the security of a
country.
The coming of the atomic and nuclear age has made it imperative
to control weapons of mass destruction and to utilize atomic energy
for peaceful purposes, more especially for the progress of underdeveloped areas.
Both Prime Ministers are in the fullest sympathy with the aspirations and efforts for freedom of the peoples of areas which are
under colonial rule.
The Prime Ministers reviewed the tasks confronting their two
Governments in the economic and social spheres. Both have as
their objectives the attainment of social and economic justice and
the raising of the standard of living of their peoples. Areas of cooperation in these spheres were explored with particular reference
to planned development.
The two Prime Ministers look forward to meeting each other at
an early date in Delhi and continuing their friendly contacts. They
look forward also to their meeting at the Asian-African Conference
in Indonesia and trust that it will contribute to the advancement
of world peace and welfare.
INDIA
CHINA

USA

SWITZERLAND

PERU

YUGOSLAVIA

BURMA

INDONESIA

PAKISTAN

SRI

LANKA AFGHANISTAN CAMBODIA EGYPT ETHIOPIA IRAN IRAQ JAPAN
LEBANON LIBERIA LIBYA NEPAL PHILIPPINES SAUDI ARABIA SUDAN
THAILAND TURKEY YEMEN THE NETHERLANDS MOROCCO TUNISIA

JORDAN
SYRIA

Jun 28, 1954

Appendix III INDIAN MISSIONS ABROAD

Jan 01, 1954
APPENDIX III
INDIAN MISSIONS ABROAD
Embassies
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.

Afghanistan.
Argentina.
Belgium.
Brazil.
Burma.
China.
Czechoslovakia.
Egypt.
Ethiopia.
France.
Germany
Also Head of the Indian Military Mission, Berlin.
Indonesia.
Iran.
Iraq.
Ireland
Head of the Mission resident in London.
Italy.
Japan.
Mexico Head of the Mission resident at Washington. First
Secretary acts as Charge dAffaires ad interim during absence
of Ambassador from Mexico.
Nepal.
Netherlands.
Poland
Ambassador resident in Moscow.
Switzerland.
Thailand.
Turkey.
United States of America.
U.S.S.R.
Yugoslavia.
<pg60>
<pg61>

1.
2.
3.
4.

Australia.
Canada.
Ceylon.
New Zealand

Head of the Mission resident in Canberra.

LAOS

5.

Pakistan--Deputy High Commissioners at Dacca and Lahore
and Assistant High Commissioners at Hyderabad and Rajashahi.
6. United Kingdom.
Legations
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.

Austria
Bulgaria
Chile
Denmark
Finland
Hungary
Jordan
Luxemburg
Lebanon
Libya
Norway
Philippines.
Rumania
Sweden.
Syria.
Jedda (Saudi Arabia).
Vatican

Minister resident in Berne
Minister resident in Belgrade.
Minister resident in Buenos Aires.
Minister resident in Stockholm.
Minister resident in Stockholm.
Minister resident in Moscow.
Minister resident in
Baghdad.
Minister resident in Brussels.
Minister resident in Cairo.
Minister resident in Cairo.
Minister resident in Paris.
Minister resident in Belgrade.

Minister resident in Berne.
Special

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

Missions

Berlin.
Bhutan.
Sikkim.
Sudan (Khartoum).
United Nations.
Cambodia.
<pg62>
Commissions

1. Aden.
2. British East Africa.
3. British West Indies (including British Guiana).
4. Fiji.
5. Gold Coast.
6. Hong Kong.
7. Mauritius.
8. Malaya.
9. Nigeria
Head of the Mission resident in Accra.
10. Central African Federation Commissioner resident in Nairobi.
Consulates-General and Consulates
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.

Alexandria.
Belgian Congo
Copenhagen.
Geneva.
Basra.
Goa.
Meshed.
New York.
Ruanda Urundi

Consul-General resident in Nairobi.

Consul-General resident in Nairobi.

10. Saigon.
11. San Francisco.
12. Shanghai.
13. Lhasa.
14. Medan.
15. Muscat.
16. Hanoi (Vietnam).
17. Vientiane (Laos).
18 Madagascar
Head of the Mission resident in Port LouisVice-Consulates
1.
2.
3.
4.

Jalalabad (Afghanistan).
Kandahar (Afghanistan).
Zahidan (Iran).
Kobe (Japan).
<pg63>
Agencies

1.
2.
3.
4.

Malaya.
Gyantse.
Gartok.
Yatung.

INDIA
AFGHANISTAN ARGENTINA BELGIUM BRAZIL BURMA CHINA NORWAY SLOVAKIA
EGYPT ETHIOPIA FRANCE GERMANY INDONESIA IRAN IRAQ IRELAND UNITED
KINGDOM ITALY JAPAN MEXICO NEPAL RUSSIA POLAND SWITZERLAND THAILAND
TURKEY USA YUGOSLAVIA AUSTRALIA CANADA NEW ZEALAND PAKISTAN AUSTRIA
BULGARIA CHILE DENMARK SWEDEN FINLAND HUNGARY JORDAN LEBANON LIBYA
PHILIPPINES SYRIA SAUDI ARABIA BHUTAN SUDAN CAMBODIA FIJI HONG KONG
MAURITIUS GHANA NIGER NIGERIA KENYA CONGO OMAN VIETNAM LAOS CENTRAL
AFRICAN REPUBLIC MADAGASCAR
Jan 01, 1954

Appendix IV FOREIGN MISSIONS IN INDIA

Jan 01, 1954
APPENDIX IV
FOREIGN MISSIONS IN INDIA
(i) Embassies
1.
2.
3.
4.

Afghanistan.
Argentina.
Belgium.
Brazil.

5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.

Burma.
China.
Czechoslovakia.
Egypt.
Ethiopia.
France.
Federal Republic of Germany.
Indonesia.
Iran.
Iraq.
Italy.
Japan.
Mexico.
Nepal.
Netherlands.
Poland.
Thailand.
Turkey.
United States of America.
U.S.S.R.
Yugoslavia.

(ii) High Commissions
1. Australia.
2. Canada.
3. Ceylon.
4. Pakistan.
5. United Kingdom.
<pg64>
<pg65>
(iii) Legations
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.

Austria.
Chile.
Denmark.
Finland.
Holy See (Apostolic Internunciature)
Hungary.
Jordan (Vacant).
Norway.
Philippines.
Portugal.
Saudi Arabia.
Sweden.
Switzerland.
Syria.

(iv) Foreign Consular Offices in India

1
2
3
4
5

Country

Location

Status

Afghanistan
Austria
Austria
Austria
Belgium

Bombay
Calcutta
Madras
Bombay
Bombay

Consulate-General.
Consulate.
Consulate.
Consulate.
Consulate-General.

6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18

Belgium
Belgium
Bolivia
Brazil
Brazil
Burma
Burma
China
China
Colombia
Colombia
Costa Rica
Costa Rica

Calcutta
Madras
Calcutta
Bombay
Calcutta
Calcutta
Madras
Bombay
Calcutta
Calcutta
Madras
Bombay
Madras

Consulate-General.
Consulate.
Consulate-General.
Consulate (vacant)
Consulate.
Consulate-General.
Vice-Consulate.
Consulate-General.
Consulate-General.
Consulate (vacant)
Consulate-General.
Consulate.
Consulate-General.

<pg66>
Country
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60

Cuba
Czechoslovakia
Denmark
Denmark
Denmark
Denmark
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
Egypt
Egypt
El Salvador
Finland
France
France
France
France
Germany
Germany
Germany
Greece
Greece
Haiti
Indonesia
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Israel
Italy
Italy
Japan
Japan
Liberia
Luxemburg
Monaco
Monaco
Nepal
Netherlands
Netherlands
Netherlands
Netherlands
Nicaragua
Nicaragua

Location
Calcutta
Bombay
Bombay
Calcutta
Cochin
Madras
Bombay
Calcutta
Bombay
Calcutta
Calcutta
Bombay
Bombay
Calcutta
Cochin
Madras
Bombay
Calcutta
Madras
Bombay
Calcutta
Calcutta
Bombay
Calcutta
Bombay
Bombay
Bombay
Bombay
Calcutta
Bombay
Calcutta
Calcutta
Bombay
New Delhi
Bombay
Calcutta
Bombay
Calcutta
Cochin
Madras
Bombay
Calcutta

Status
Consular Agency.
Consulate-General.
Consulate.
Consulate.
Consulate.
Consulate.
Consulate-General.
Consulate.
Consulate-General.
Consulate
Consulate.
Consulate.
Consulate.
Consulate-General.
Consular Agency.
Consulate.
Consulate-General.
Consulate-General.
Consulate.
Consulate-General.
Consulate-General.
Consulate.
Consulate.
Consulate.
Consulate-General.
Consulate-General
Consulate.
Consulate.
Consulate.
Consulate-General.
Consulate-General.
Consulate.
Vice-Consulate.
Consulate-General.
Consulate.
Consulate-General.
Consulate-General.
Consulate.
Consulate.
Consulate.
Consulate.
Consulate.

<pg67>

61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73
74
75
76
77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
89

Country

Location

Norway
Norway
Norway
Norway
Panama
Peru
Portugal
Portugal
Portugal
Saudi Arabia
Spain
Spain
Spain
Sweden
Sweden
Sweden
Switzerland
Switzerland
Switzerland
Switzerland
Syria
Thailand
Turkey
U.S.A.
U.S.A.
U. S.A.
Uruguay
Venezuela
Yugoslavia

Bombay
Calcutta
Cochin
Madras
Bombay
Calcutta
Bombay
Calcutta
Madras
Bombay
Bombay
Calcutta
Madras
Bombay
Calcutta
Madras
Bombay
Calcutta
Cochin
Madras
Bombay
Calcutta
Bombay
Bombay.
Calcutta
Madras
New Delhi
Calcutta
Bombay

(v) List of New Diplomatic Missions opened
year 1954-55.

Status
Consulate-General.
Consulate-General.
Vice-Consulate.
Consulate.
Consulate-General.
Consulate-General.
Consulate-General.
Consulate.
Consulate.
Consulate-General.
Consulate.
Vice-Consulate.
Vice-Consulate.
Consulate-General.
Consulate.
Consulate.
Consulate-General.
Consulate.
Consular Agency.
Consular Agency.
Consulate-General.
Consulate-General.
Consulate.
Consulate-General.
Consulate-General.
Consulate.
Consulate-General.
Consulate-General.
Consulate-General.
in India during the

1. Embassy of Poland, New Delhi.
2. Legation of Saudi Arabia, New Delhi.
(vii) List of New Foreign Consular Missions opened in India during
that of an Embassy.
The status of the Legation of Ethiopia in India has been raised
to that of an embassy.
<pg68>
(vii) List of New Foreign Consular Missions opened in India during
the year 1954-55.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

Consulate for Austria at Bombay.
Consulate for Costa Rica at Bombay.
Consular Agency for Cuba at Calcutta.
Consulate for Finland at Bombay.
Consulate-General for Germany at Calcutta.
Consulate for Germany at Madras.
Consulate-General for Monaco at New Delhi.

8.

Consulate-General for Uruguay at New Delhi.

INDIA
AFGHANISTAN ARGENTINA BELGIUM BRAZIL BURMA CHINA NORWAY SLOVAKIA
EGYPT ETHIOPIA FRANCE GERMANY INDONESIA IRAN IRAQ ITALY JAPAN MEXICO
NEPAL POLAND THAILAND TURKEY USA YUGOSLAVIA AUSTRALIA CANADA PAKISTAN
AUSTRIA CHILE DENMARK FINLAND HUNGARY JORDAN PHILIPPINES PORTUGAL
SAUDI ARABIA SWEDEN SWITZERLAND SYRIA BOLIVIA COLOMBIA COSTA!!CUBA
DOMINICA ECUADOR EL SALVADOR GREECE HAITI ISRAEL LIBERIA MONACO
CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC NICARAGUA PANAMA PERU SPAIN URUGUAY VENEZUELA
Jan 01, 1954

Appendix V TREATIES, CONVENTIONS AND AGREEMENTS

APPENDIX V
TREATIES, CONVENTIONS AND AGREEMENTS CONCLUDED BY
INDIA WITH OTHER COUNTRIES DURING 1954-55
1.

Instruments of Ratification of the Treaty of Friendship, Commerce and Navigation between India and the Sultan of Muscat
exchanged on Feb 01, 1954.
2. Agreement on Trade and Intercourse between Tibet Region of
China and India signed at Peking on 29 April 1954.
3. Indo-Pakistan Agreement on Recovery of Abducted Persons signed at New Delhi on 8 May 1954.
4. Trade Agreement with Hungary signed at New Delhi on 17 June
1954.
5. Cultural Agreement with Iraq signed at Baghdad on July 5, 1954.
6. Anti-Locust Convention with Iran signed on 14 July 1954.
7. Trade Agreement with Italy signed on July 29, 1954 at New
Delhi.
8. Trade Agreement between the Republic of India and the Republic
of China signed at New Delhi on 14 October 1954.
9. Trade Agreement with East Germany signed at New Delhi on
16 October 1954.
10. Indo-French Agreement on the de facto transfer of French Establishments to India signed at New Delhi on 21 October 1954.
11. Treaty of Commerce and Navigation with Iran signed on 15
December 1954.
Treaties and Agreements renewed during 1954-55
12. Trade Agreement with Finland renewed at New Delhi on 15
April 1954.
13. Trade
Agreement with Austria renewed at Vienna on 5 May
1954.
14. Trade Agreement with Indonesia renewed at New Delhi on 24
November 1954.
15 Trade Agreement with Iraq renewed at Baghdad on 22 December 1954.

16. Trade Agreement with Czechoslovakia renewed at Prague on 31
December 1954.
17. Trade Agreement with West Germany renewed at New Delhi on
5 February 1955.
18. Trade Agreement with Bulgaria renewed at Moscow on 9 February 1955.
<pg69>
INDIA
OMAN USA CHINA PAKISTAN HUNGARY IRAQ
AUSTRIA INDONESIA CZECH REPUBLIC NORWAY

IRAN ITALY GERMANY FINLAND
SLOVAKIA BULGARIA RUSSIA

Feb 01, 1954

Appendix VI INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATIONS OF WHICH INDIA IS A MEMBER

Jan 01, 1954
APPENDIX VI
INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATIONS OF WHICH INDIA IS A
MEMBER
1. United Nations General Assembly.
2. United Nations Commissions and Committees:(a) International Law Commission.
(b) Committee on Information from the Non-Self-Governing
Territories.
(c) Peace Observation Commission.
(d) Committee on Contributions.
(e) Administrative and Budgetary Committee.
3. United Nations Trusteeship Council.
4. United Nations Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC).
5. The following functional Commission of ECOSOC:(a) Commission on International Commodity Trade.
(b) Human Rights Commission.
(c) Narcotic Drugs.
(d) Population Commission.
(e) Social Commission.
(f) Statistical Commission.
(g) Transport and Communications Commission.
6. United Nations Economic Commission for Asia and the Far East
(ECAFE), its Committees and Sub-Committees.
7. India is also a member of the following Specialised Agencies
of the United Nations:(a) Food and Agricultural Organisation (F.A.O.).
(b) General Agreement on Tariff and Trade (G.A.T.T.).
(c) International Bank for Re-construction and Development
(IBRD).
(d) International Civil Aviation Organisation (I.C.A.O.).
(e) International Labour Organisation (I.L.O.).

(f)
(g)
(h)

International Monetary Fund (I.M.F.).
International Tele-Communication Organisation (I.T.U.).
United Nations Educational. Scientific and Cultural Organisation (U.N.E.S.C.O.).
<pg70>
<pg71>

8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.

(i) Universal Postal Union (U.P.U.)
(j) World Health Organisation (W.H.O.).
(k) World Meteorological Organisation (W.M.O.).
International Association for Bridges and Structural Engineering,
Zurich.
International Astronomical Union, Brussels.
International Cargo Handling Co-ordination Association, London.
International Commission on Irrigation and Drainage, Paris.
International Commission on Large Dams, Paris.
International Committee of the Red Cross, Geneva.
International Conference of Social Work, Paris.
International Cotton Advisory Committee, Washington.
International Council of Archives, Paris.
International Council of Scientific Union, London.
International Criminal Police Commission, Paris.
International Customs Tariff Bureau, Brussels.
International Electro-Technical Commission, Geneva.
International Federation for Documentation, The Hague.
International Federation for Housing and Town Planning, The
Hague.
International Federation of University Women, London.
International Hospital Federation, London.
International Institute for the Unification of Private Law, Rome.
International Institute of Administrative Sciences, Brussels.
International Institute of Scientific Travel Research of the International Union of Official Travel Organisation, Geneva.
International Materials Conference, Washington.
International Organisation for Standardisation, Geneva.
International Railway Congress Association, Brussels.
International Scientific Radio Union, Brussels.
International Tea Committee, London.
International Tin Study Group, The Hague.
International Union of Aviation Insurers, London.
International Union for the Protection of Nature, Brussels.
International Union of Biological Sciences, Paris.
International Union of Crystallography, Cambridge.
International Union of Geodesy and Geophysics, Paris.
<pg72>

39.
40.
41.
42.
43.
44.
45.
46.

International Union of Geography, New York.
International Union of History of Sciences, Paris.
International Union of Official Travel Organisation, Geneva.
International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry, Paris.
International Union of Pure and Applied Physics, Paris.
International Union of Theoretical and Applied Mechanics, Delf,
Netherlands.
Permanent International Association of Navigation Congress,
Brussels.
Permanent International Association of Road Congress, Paris.

47.
48.

Union International Centre Le Cancer, Paris.
World Union of Free Thinkers, Lourain, Belgium.

GIPD-DME-147M ofEA-24-3-55-1900

INDIA
USA SWITZERLAND BELGIUM CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC UNITED KINGDOM FRANCE
LATVIA ITALY
Jan 01, 1954


