1969-70

Contents
REPORT
1969-70
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS
NEW DELHI
CONTENTS
CHAPTER
I
II
III
IV
V
VI
VII
VIII
IX
X
XI
XII
XIII

PAGES

General Survey
India's Neighbours
South East Asia
East Asia
West Asia and North Africa
Africa, South of the Sahara
Europe
The Americas
United Nations and International Conferences
Technical and Economic Co-operation
External Publicity
Passport and Consular Services
Administration and Organisation

1
21
37
46
49
57
61
65
68
78
82
86
90

(i)
APPENDICES
NUMBER

PAGES

I

International Conferences, Congresses, Seminars
etc., in which India participated in 1969

95

II

International Organisations of which India is a
member

107

III

Governing Bodies of the Specialised Agencies
and other Agencies of the United Nations of
which India is a member

114

IV

Foreign Diplomatic Missions in India

115

V

Foreign Consular Offices in India

117

VI

Distinguished Visitors from Abroad

120

VII

Foreign Dignitaries who visited India in
connection with the funeral of the late
President Dr. Zakir Husain

123

VIII

Indian Missions/Posts Abroad

128

IX

Treaties/Conventions/Agreements concluded or
renewed by India with other countries in 1969

139

X

Expenditure on Headquarters and Missions/
Posts Abroad during 1969-70

149

(iii)
INDIA
USA
Jun 12, 1968

GENERAL SURVEY
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS
ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1969-70
CHAPTER I
GENERAL SURVEY
A decade of significant changes came to an end during
the year under review. Man's landing on the moon and his
safe return to earth was an event of unparalleled significance.
It marked the beginning of the snapping of chains that have
bound man to this planet through the ages. And it marked the
beginning of a whole new set of ideas and concepts. Even as
the world situation kept changing, situation in India also underwent many changes. Under these circumstances the foreign
policy of India could not stand still and be rigid.
The merit of India's foreign policy, enunciated by Pandit
Jawaharlal Nehru, is its flexibility to meet the changing challenges. It was never a doctrinaire policy. It was construed as a
positive and dynamic policy capable of evolving and adjusting
itself to changing conditions and needs to serve India's national
interests.
Developments over the last decade have been a vindication

of the concepts of peaceful co-existence and non-alignment and,
at the same time, resulted in securing greater acceptance for
these concepts. The developments in the inter-relations of the
two super-powers during the year under review and indeed over
the last decade have shown that though the fundamental
ideological and power conflict between them had not abated,
they have increasingly sought ways and means of avoiding
direct confrontation with each other. This thaw between the
two super-powers was particularly significant in the realm of
disarmament. From Nov 17, 1969 to December 22, 1969
the representatives of the United States and the Soviet Union
met in Helsinki to hold talks concerning the limitation of
<pg1>
<pg2>
strategic arms. These talks were of preliminary nature, but
they resulted, according to a communique issued at Helsinki,
in better understanding of each other's views and also on the
general range of questions which would be the subject of further
U.S.-Soviet exchanges.
The importance of S.A.L.T. lies in the fact that the two
nuclear giants have now come to recognize the perils of augmenting the balance of terror and have decided to deal directly
with each other in order to minimise the dangers implicit in it.
This can be interpreted as yet another instance of the compulsions of co-existence. India welcomed the S.A.L.T. Along with
other countries in the UN and in the Committee of Disarmament India has played an active part in discussions on universal
and total disarmament, particularly with regard to prohibition
of weapons of mass destruction, chemical and biological
weapons and cooperation in the peaceful uses of outer space,
the sea-bed and the ocean floor.
In Asia, 1969 began with indications of new changes,
particularly with hopes of peace in Vietnam. The opening of
talks in Paris on January 25, 1969 among U.S.A., D.R.V.N., Republic of Vietnam and the National Liberation Front of South
Vietnam marked a new turning point. On May 8 the N.L.F.
delegation in Paris put forward a ten-point proposal laying
down "the principles and main content of an over-all solution".
The main points of the 10-point proposal were unconditional
withdrawal of U.S. troops from South Vietnam and the formation of a Coalition Government in South Vietnam. One interesting point in the proposal was that "the question of Vietnamese armed forces in South Vietnam shall be resolved by the
Vietnamese parties among themselves". On May 14, President
Nixon made counter proposals the crux of which was that "over
a period of twelve months, by agreed upon stages, the major
portions of all U.S., Allied and other non-South Vietnamese
forces would be withdrawn," and that an international body,

<pg3>
acceptable to both sides, would supervise the withdrawal, the
cease-fire and the elections in South Vietnam. Even though
neither of these proposals has been accepted by both parties
in toto, they appear to provide room for negotiations and
mutual adjustments. As the year advanced the Paris talks ran
into deadlock, and apprehensions arose with regard to the
continuance of the de-escalation in the fighting in South
Vietnam. However, the fact that the parties to the conflict
are directly engaged in negotiations holds some hope for peace
in Vietnam. India has consistently advocated a peaceful negotiated settlement and during the period under review took every
opportunity through diplomatic and other channels to plead
for and promote such a settlement. India's views were spelt
out by the Minister of External Affairs Shri Dinesh Singh in
his speech before the U.N. General Assembly : "All parties to
this dispute agree that the people of Vietnam should be left
free to determine their own destiny, and no one seems to hold
a brief for keeping foreign forces in that land. The first step
to be taken is the immediate cessation of hostilities. Thereafter
necessary arrangements have to be made for the withdrawal of
foreign troops to enable the people of Vietnam to decide their
future free from foreign interference. This process can be
carried out effectively only if arrangements which inspire the
confidence of all parties concerned can be established. The
first step would, therefore, be to have a Government which is
adequately representative to command the confidence and
support of all sections of the people. Such a Government
would be in a position in Vietnam to supervise the withdrawal
of foreign forces and prepare for holding of fair elections. To
facilitate this process for bringing peace in Vietnam the international community should pledge its full cooperation and
support."
For Asia a settlement in Vietnam is bound to usher in
a new phase, offering both a challenge and an opportunity. It
<pg4>
is Government of India's hope and belief that a settlement of
the Vietnam problem will make it possible to ensure peace
and economic development of this region, and it is in touch
with various Governments towards this end.
An interesting development for Asia during the period
under review was the proposal for collective security in Asia
put forward by Mr. Leonid Brezhnev, Secretary-General of the
Communist Party of the Soviet Union, in June 1969. Later on
July 10, Mr. Gromyko, the Foreign Minister of the Soviet Union
in his speech to the Supreme Soviet of the U.S.S.R. elaborated
on this proposal. He said that the proposed system of collective

security was not "spearheaded against a certain country or a
group of countries" and that the whole question was one of
"collective efforts of all States, for safeguarding security in that
part of the world in their common interest". Mr. Gromyko
further explained that the whole question required discussion
and consultation among the interested States and he hoped
that it would be studied by the Governments of these States.
During the visit of the Indian Minister of External Affairs,
Shri Dinesh Singh, to Moscow in September 1969, the Soviet
leaders gave further clarifications of their ideas. What was
clear was that the central principle of the proposed system
was an agreement among Asian nations to renounce the use
or threat of force in the settlement of disputes. It was further
clarified that the proposal did not mean the creation of any
military pacts or groupings; on the contrary, if the Governments
concerned gave up the use or threat of force in the settlement
of disputes, no such pacts would be necessary. It was also
clarified by the Soviet leaders that the countries of the region
could also enter into economic cooperation under this
system.
The reaction of most Asian nations has been one of
waiting to see what the precise nature and content of
<pg5>
the proposal is going to be. It was, however, recognized that
the proposal marked a new development of some significance,
and that it was a declaration of the fact that the, Soviet Union
was as much an Asian as a European power. Indeed one of
the developments in Asia has been the slow extension of
Soviet Union's bilateral economic, trade and cultural relations
with a number of countries in Asia. Government of India's
attitude to the question has been made clear by Prime
Minister and the Minister of External Affairs. We believe
that security can be best ensured by economic cooperation and
ensuring respect for the territorial integrity and independence
of various countries by renouncing the use of force in the
settlement of disputes and by refraining from interference in the
internal affairs of other countries.
In this connection it may be recalled that the Prime
Minister of India had suggested for consideration the idea of
an agreement or convention to ensure respect for the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of the countries of
the region. India believes that a political arrangement of this
kind involving Asian countries as well as the great powers
would go a considerable way in reducing tension and preserving
the existing State system in the region and in promoting peace
and cooperation. Most of the countries of the region have in
principle welcomed this suggestion of the Prime Minister.

During the period of the report, developments in the
Indian Ocean assumed considerable importance. The British
decision to withdraw from Singapore, Malaysia and from the
Persian Gulf caused anxiety in some quarters that a powervacuum was being created in the Indian ocean which outside
powers would try to fill. Government of India believe that
British withdrawal would not create any more power-vacuum
than the liquidation of the Empire had created.
The countries in the Indian Ocean or its periphery have
<pg6>
been developing politically, economically and, indeed
in every field, contributing to the stability of the region as a
whole. India is of the view that it would be most unfortunate if
this movement towards stability is disturbed by the introduction
of foreign naval forces into the region. India's view has been
that the Indian Ocean should be an area of peace and a nuclearfree zone, free of military bases and big-power tensions. We
have, of course, recognized the freedom of the seas under
international law.
On the larger question of the future of South East
Asia and Asia generally India has consistently held the view
that fundamentally the peace and security of the region depend
on the economic development and political stability of the
countries of the region. Neither South East Asia nor the
Indian Ocean is considered by us a vacuum to be filled by
outside powers. We hold that independent development of
the countries of the region and regional cooperation amongst
them as well as international cooperation with outside powers
interested in the welfare of the region would be the best
method of ensuring peace and security in the area. It was for
this reason that India continued to state its opposition to
military pacts in Asia. We welcomed the signs of disillusionment on the part of many countries in the region in the
efficacy of these pacts and the new trend towards economic
development and regional economic cooperation as a possible
alternative.
A very constructive development in Asia during the
period has been in the field of regional economic cooperation.
Military pacts like S.E.A.T.O. and C.E.N.T.O. receded into the
background and the concept of economic, scientific and
technical and cultural cooperation within the region gained
ground. While various sub-regional groupings for economic
cooperation functioned in the region, India emphasized the
<pg7>
importance of broad-based regional cooperation encompassing
the whole region and open to all countries of the region

irrespective of their social, political or economic systems.
India had played an important part in the formation of the
Asian Council of Ministers under E.C.A.F.E. in December 1968.
During the period under review India did everything possible.
to strengthen this body as the over-all instrument of regional
cooperation in Asia. India made a significant contribution
in the effort to work out an integrated strategy for the
economic development of Asia in accordance with the
directive of the Asian Council of Ministers.
While supporting regional cooperation in Asia in the
economic, technical, cultural and political fields, India did
not, in the conduct of its foreign policy, neglect the development of bilateral relations with countries in the region.
Indeed we believe that the building up of bilateral relations in
various fields is the main substance of policy in the pursuit of
India's national interests and aspirations and it is on this
foundation of a network of bilateral relations that the multilateral super-structure of economic cooperation should be
erected. In conformity with this approach, during the period
under review, India took various steps to promote relations
with countries of the region. The visit of the Prime Minister
to Australia, New Zealand, Singapore and Malaysia in 1968
and her visits to Ceylon in 1967, Nepal in 1966 and to Japan
and Indonesia in 1969 symbolised the importance India
attaches to countries in this region.
Events in China during the period under review showed
that the Cultural Revolution, at least the tempestuous phase
of it, had ended, and the country was returning to what
might be described as revolutionary normalcy. The holding
of the Ninth Congress of the Communist Party of China in
April 1969 was an indication of this process. The new power
<pg8>
structure of the party which emerged from the Congress
reflected a tripartite balance between the People's Liberation
Army, the Government and Party bureaucracy and the mass
organizations and revolutionary groups with the P.L.A. occupying a dominant position.
The main question in 1969-70 was which direction
the foreign policy of China would take after the Cultural
Revolution. Would China come out of its self-imposed
isolation and resume normal diplomacy and state relations?
An indication of a return to normalcy in diplomatic relations
was the fact that a number of Chinese Ambassadors who were
recalled during the Cultural Revolution have returned to their
posts. This combined with the circumstances of China's
present position in the international field indicated that China
is probably preparing to stage a diplomatic come-back. It
would, however, be unrealistic to anticipate any fundamental

change in Chinese foreign policy, particularly towards India.
The Report by Vice-Chairman Lin Piao to the Ninth Congress
emphasized all the known basie elements of Chinese foreign
policy-opposition to the United States and to the Soviet
Union, with an emphasis on hostility towards the Soviet Union.
The principles of peaceful co-existence were re-stated, but at
the same time China pledged support and encouragement to
'national liberation movements' and 'armed revolutionary
struggles' in Asia, Africa and Latin America, specifically
emphasising support to such armed struggles in neighbouring
countries like Laos, Thailand, Burma, Malaysia, India etc.
India has been following developments in China's internal
and external policies. India has always supported the bringing
in of the People's Republic of China into the main stream of
international life and her acceptance as a member of the comity
of nations. Consistent with this belief and in accordance with
our desire to live in friendship with the people of China, we
voted in the U.N. General Assembly last year in favour of the
<pg9>
restoration of the Chinese seat in the U.N. to the People's
Republic of China. With regard to our bilateral problems with
China, both the Prime Minister and the External Affairs Minister
in various statements issued in 1969-70 made it clear that India
did not look upon these differences as fixed for all time and
that we have always been willing to seek avenues of settlement
in consonance with our national honour and interests. During
the debate in the Lok Sabha on April 8, 1969, External Affairs
Minister made India's position clear when he said that "we
have no enmity with the people of China; we wish them well.
We also do not wish to interfere in China's internal affairs,
but where China violates the norms of international behaviour
and threatens our security or when China attempts subversion
in our country we must be ready to meet them." The External
Affairs Minister added that "the policies of China will have to
change one day. China is sailing against the winds of friendship
and cooperation blowing all over the world. We cannot say
when this will happen but we can say that when it does happen
we shall not be found wanting in responding to it adequately."
The year under review saw the outbreak of major border
clashes between China and the Soviet Union. The issues
surrounding this conflict are vast and imponderable and
the manner in which they are solved is bound to affect the
situation in Asia and the world. Following the talks in Peking
between Premier Kosygin and Premier Chou En lai, the two
countries decided to open negotiations in Peking from October
20. After a brief interval the talks have resumed. It is
important that the two countries have been engaged in negotiations not only on the border question but on the broader
questions of relations between China and the Soviet Union.

India welcomed the, commencement of these talks. Earlier on
April 8 the External Affairs Minister had outlined in Parliament India's attitude. He said : "We are not in favour of
altering historically established borders. Should some grave
<pg10>
differences arise, they should be settled peacefully by bilateral
discussions. We are against the use of force to change positions
unilaterally."
Another development of great potential significance
to Asia and the world was the possibility of a thaw in the
relations between China and the United States. The resumption
of bilateral talks between the U.S. Ambassador and the Chinese
Charge d'Affaires in Warsaw on 20 January, 1970 marked
a new beginning. The coincidence of these talks with the
S.A.L.T. in Helsinki and the Sino-Soviet talks in Peking presaged
the emergence of a new situation. The U.S.A. has also announced further relaxation of regulations governing trade and
contacts between America and China. These developments
can be of profound significance to the world, even though
international relations today and in the future will not be
determined exclusively by relations amongst the big powers
alone but by a multiplicity of forces including the role of
middle and small powers and also of world public opinion.
One of the interesting characteristics of the international
situation in 1969-70 was the diffusion of political power side
by side with the phenomenon of the detente between the super
powers.
Developments during the period indicated that Japan
had outgrown its exclusively economic and commercial role in
Asia and was rapidly becoming a factor of considerable
political importance. The economic strength of Japan as the
third most developed industrial nation in the world had already
become a major political factor in itself. The visit of Japanese
Premier Mr. Sato to the United States in November and the
agreement arrived at between him and the American President
marked the changing role of Japan in the international field.
The decision to revert the administrative rights over Okinawa to
Japan in 1972 is of significance. The other major decision was
to renew the Security Treaty between Japan and the U.S.A. After
<pg11>
1970 when the Treaty is renewed, Japan will have the right to
terminate this agreement by giving one year's notice. This
together with Japan's growing strength and developing relations
with various powers, is likely to give a greater. degree of
fiexibility to Japanese foreign policy. Japan has already
consolidated its economic and trade relations with the countries
of South East Asia. She has been developing economic and

trade relations with China. Relations between Japan and the
Soviet Union have also been developing extensively. All
these mark out Japan as a new and important international
factor particularly in Asian politics. India has been consistently
pursuing a policy of friendship and cooperation with Japan.
The visit by Prime Minister Shrimati Indira Gandhi to Japan
last year was a significant milestone in Indo-Japanese relations
and demonstrated the importance we attach to cooperation
between India and Japan.
Nearer home in Pakistan some significant changes
have taken place during the period under review. On 25
March, 1969, President Ayub Khan handed over power to Gen.
Yahya Khan who on March 31 was proclaimed as President
of Pakistan. These changes were preceded by popular movements for a return to democracy and autonomy for provincial
units. In response to these popular demands President Yahya
Khan on November 28 announced that General Elections to
the National Assembly on the basis of "one man one vote"
would be held on October 5, 1970, that political parties would
be allowed to resume their activities from 1 January, 1970, and
that martial law would prevail until a popular Government was
formed. He also announced that West Pakistan would be
split into four provinces as it existed at the time of creation
of Pakistan, that the National Assembly would be required
to frame a Constitution within 120 days of its first sitting and
that if the National Assembly was unable to complete its task
within the stipulated period it would stand dissolved and the
<pg12>
Nation would have to elect a fresh Constituent Assembly.
India hopes that the return to democratic government in
Pakistan will be, smooth and peaceful and would open up
prospects of normal and friendly relations between the two
countries.
The hopes raised by the change-over in Pakistan have
not materialised so far. Pakistan has pursued its policy of
hostility towards India and continued its rigid stand that
unless problems like Kashmir and Ganga waters were solved
first, it was not prepared even to establish normal relations
between the two countries in other fields e.g., commercial,
cultural, communications etc. India continued her efforts to
persuade Pakistan to normalize and improve relations in all
fields. In July 1969 Prime Minister Shrimati Indira Gandhi
in a letter to President Yahya Khan suggested resumption
of normal relations, air services, travel and economic and
commercial relations between the two countries. She also
repeated India's offer of a 'no war pact' and suggested the
setting up of a joint India-Pakistan body at any level acceptable
to Pakistan for settlement of differences without any preconditions. President Yahya Khan in his reply stuck to the Pakistani

stand regarding Kashmir and Ganga waters and introduced the
idea of a "self-executing" machinery which in effect would
propel every difference between the two countries automatically
towards arbitration. On 12 January, on the anniversary of
the Tashkent Declaration, the Prime Minister again wrote to
President Yahya Khan affirming that "mutual trust, friendship
and cooperation between our two peoples can be the best
guarantee for peace and prosperity on the sub-continent" and
that "the Tashkent Declaration, incorporating the acceptance
by the two sides to renounce force and to resolve all our
differences bilaterally through peaceful negotiations, provides a
sound basis towards this objective".
<pg13>
One note-worthy development was that, in spite of
Pakistan's efforts to internationalise India-Pakistan problems,
more and more countries, during the period under review, have
veered round to the view that the differences between the two
countries of the sub-continent should be settled bilaterally
between them by direct negotiations.
In West Asia, the Arab-Israeli conflict continued to
cause anxiety. The great powers remained involved in this
conflict lending support to either Israel or to the Arabs but at
the same time striving to contain or end the conflict. There
was general acceptance on the part of the powers that a settlement of the dispute can be found only in accordance with the
Security Council resolution of November 22, 1967. Towards
the end of March 1969 Ambassador Jarring, dissatisfied at the
lack of progress in his quest for a solution, withdrew from the
scene and in July four-power talks at the United Nations
recessed without having made any significant progress. Later,
however, two-power talks between the U.S.A. and the U.S.S.R.
took place and certain proposals and counter-proposals were
put forward. Nothing, however came out of these, and,
finally, four-power,. talks were resumed at the U.N. on 2
December, 1969. The situation has been deteriorating in West
Asia with the Israelis conducting air raids on Arab territories,
particularly on targets in U.A.R. and the arms race between the
Arabs and Israelis gathering new momentum. The Palestine
Liberation Organisation acquired greater importance in the
Arab countries and the commando movement gained wider
recognition. Change of Governments in the Sudan and Libya
also indicated the direction of political development in the
Arab World in the face of the continuing crisis in West Asia.
During the year the Arab nations made fresh efforts to strengthen their unity. They met in December in a Summit Conference of Arab countries to consider the mobilisation of
political, economic and military resources of Arab countries
<pg14>

for the liberation of territories occupied by Israel. Some
practical progress was made in mobilising support for the
cause. A new trend which emerged after the Arab Summit
was the closer relations and coordination of policies among
some of the Arab States like U.A.R., Sudan, Syria and Libya.
The Government of India has on several occasions
during the period under review reiterated its stand that the
Security Council resolution of 22nd November, 1967, should
be speedily implemented in order to resolve the crisis in West
Asia. Stating India's policy, India's Minister of External
Affairs, Shri Dinesh Singh, said in Parliament : "So far as we
are concerned, there are two things which are very clear in our
mind. One is that fruits of aggression cannot be permitted to
be retained by any country. At the same time, Israel has a
right to exist." He added that "our sympathy is with the
Arab countries, because we feel that they have been wronged.
We have given every possible support to them in their struggle
to strengthen their countries and preserve their national
interests."
In Africa the 30-month old tragic civil war in Nigeria
came to an end on 12 January, 1970. With the surrender of
Biafra and the re-establishment of Nigerian unity, it is hoped
that not only peace would return to Nigeria but one of the
impediments to African cooperation will be removed. Another
notable development of the year was the return of civilian rule
in Ghana after a period of three years of military regime.
The struggle against apartheid and racial discrimination in South Africa and Southern Rhodesia and the movement against Portuguese colonialism in Africa continued unabated during the year. In the U.N. as well as outside India
continued to pursue its consistent and unequivocal opposition
to colonialism, neocolonialism and racial discrimination in
Africa, particularly against apartheid in South Africa. India
<pg15>
considers this as a fundamental issue and has supported all the
initiatives taken by the international community against the
policy of apartheid. In regard to Southern Rhodesia, we
adhered to our basic stand that it was primarily the responsibility of the British Government to lead Rhodesia to independence based on majority rule. On November 14, 1969, in an
aide memoire handed over to the U.K. High Commission in
India, the Government of India expressed its concern over the
recent developments in Rhodesia, namely, the result of the socalled referendum conducted by the illegal Smith regime for
the adoption of an apartheid-type constitution, the imminent
declaration of a "Republic", the introduction of Land Tenure
Bill in the so-called Rhodesian Parliament and the passing of
the new Constitution Bill by a Committee of that Parliament.

It was also emphasized that efforts should be made to ensure
proper implemention of the UN Resolution and that further
steps should be taken towards more effective application of the
sanctions against Southern Rhodesian regime. On the question
of Portuguese colonialism in Africa, India continued to condemn and oppose it consistent with its historic policy. We
continued to extend our sympathy and support to the liberation
movement in Angola, Mozambique and Portuguese Guinea.
Notwithstanding the many problems besetting Africa the
question of accelerating the economic development and improvement in the living conditions of the people engaged the
active consideration of the countries on the continent. India
extended full support to this struggle of the African people for
freedom and development.
Changes of a far-reaching nature have been taking
place in Europe also. The relinquishment of the Presidentship
of France by General. de Gaulle on 28 April 1969, removed
from the European political scene a leader of great grandeur.
The new Government in France formed under the Presidentship
of Mr. Georges Pompidou is expected to follow the broad out<pg16>
lines of General de Gaulle's policies, but there is expectation
of a larger measure of pragmatism in the conduct of French
policies. Already hopes have been raised that the question of
Britain's entry into the European Common Market would be
reopened. In Britain public opinion gathered strength in
favour of entry into the Common Market and all the three
political parties declared themselves in favour of it. Negotiations in this matter are expected to take place in July 1970.
This development marked the beginning of a new phase in
European cooperation as well as in the policy of Britain with
its new preoccupation with European affairs. India followed
these developments in Europe with interest. As regards British
entry into the Common Market it was impressed upon U. K.
to ensure that any arrangements she may reach with the E.E.C.
will not be at the expense of the present special arrangement
between U.K. and the Commonwealth and of Indo-British
commercial relations.
The new coalition government under the Social Democratic Chancellor Willy Brandt which came into being in
October 1969 marked a significant political change in Europe.
Chancellor Willy Brandt initiated certain policies which would
have far-reaching significance on the future shape of Europe.
He announced a policy of detente and greater understanding
between F.R.G. and the Soviet Union and the countries of
Eastern Europe. On the German question he proposed direct
talks between the two German governments maintaining that
even if there existed two States in Germany they were not
foreign countries to each other and their relations can only

be of a special nature. The G.D.R., however, insisted on
recognition by F.R.G. that G.D.R., is a fully sovereign State.
Notwithstanding these differences the "ostpolitik" of Chancellor Willy Brandt taken together with the policy of detente
with the U.S.S.R. held out the hope that a new chapter in
East-West relations in Europe might well be opened. The
<pg17>
movement towards European security further confirmed this
prospect.
India's relations with G.D.R. registered marked development
during the period under review. There was a significant growth
of trade between India and the G.D.R. as well as a general
increase in contacts at various levels. This expansion in relations resulted in the establishment of an Indian Government
Representation in East Berlin with effect from 4 October,
1969.
In April 1969 the Soviet Government, following the
Budapest meeting of the Warsaw Pact countries in March, proposed to European countries the convening of a European
Security Conference. There was favourable reaction in principle to this proposal from a number of countries in Europe.
The Government of Finland took the initiative in May to
write to all European governments favouring the idea of a conference and offering hospitality of its soil for convening it in
the spring of 1970. The general opinion in Western Europe
was that United States and Canada should also be invited to
the conference and that considerable preparation would be
necessary to ensure the success of the conference Some
countries like Britain went further and took the view that the
conference should be held only after some progress has been
made in bilateral and multi-lateral negotiations on substantive
questions like Germany, Berlin, reduction of forces in Europe
etc. What is significant for the future is that a proposal for
European Security has been under discussion and that it envisaged cooperation between the East and West in Europe and
the eventual liquidation of the two military blocs. India
welcomed the detente in Europe, the move for a European
Security Conference, the new policies of the Soviet Union and
the F.R.G. in Europe and also the increasing role played by the
countries of Eastern Europe in European and international
relations.
<pg18>
Developments at the United Nations during the year
reflected some of the major trends in the direction of peace,
co-existence and cooperation , notwithstanding the differences
and conflicts in the world. The Soviet Union introduced a
resolution in the XXIV General Assembly putting forward a

proposal for strengthening international peace and security
which was discussed and will be taken up again at the next
session. The Assembly adopted a programme for the celebration of the XXV Anniversary of the world organization in
1970. It was declared that the theme of the anniversary should
be "peace, justice and progress". It may be recalled that
Prime Minister, Shrimati Indira Gandhi in her address to the
XXIII Session of the General Assembly in 1968 had made a
suggestion that the 25th anniversary of the U.N. should be
made a "year of peace". During the year under review India
took active part in the deliberations at U.N. and its Special
Agencies. Support to U.N. and the principles of the Charter
remained one of the main pillars of India's foreign policy.
The foregoing survey has shown that the international
situation has witnessed many far-reaching changes during
1969-70. When the world has been changing, and India
itself has been changing, the foreign policy of India could not
stand still and remain rigid and inflexible. Indeed one of the
major merits of the foreign policy enunciated by Jawaharlal
Nehru was that it had never been a rigid and doctrinaire
policy, but a positive and dynamic policy based on principles
which allowed it to grow and adjust itself to changing conditions and needs. The changes in the world which have taken
place, like the growth of co-existence and the loosening of
military pacts, have not invalidated but rather vindicated the
basic principles of India's foregin policy and the concept of
non-alignment. Today, in spite of the visible end of the cold
war and the general acceptance of co-existence, the two super
powers maintain their basic rivalries in the realm of ideology
<pg19>
and power politics. Non-alignment, therefore, continues to
remain valid and there is necessity as well as scope for nonaligned nations to continue their activities in the interests of
international peace and progress.
India participated in bilateral as well as collective
consultations which took place last year among non-aligned
nations for devising methods of continued activities on their
part in the international field. A consultative meeting of nonaligned States was held in Belgrade in July. An Indian
delegation headed by the Foreign Secretary, Shri T.N. Kaul,
participated in this meeting. Later, the Heads of Delegations
of Non-aligned States met at the United Nations towards the
end of September. The Indian delegation under the leadership
the External Affairs Minister, Shri Dinesh Singh, took active part
in the discussions at this meeting in New York. The question
of holding a preparatory meeting and a Summit Conference
and preparations for the observance of the 25th anniversary of
the United Nations were the major topics discussed at the
meeting. India was of the view that adequate preparations

were necessary before a Summit Meeting of Non-aligned
Nations is held. In New York, it was decided to hold a
preparatory conference in Dar-es-Salaam early in 1970. As
regards the continued activities of non-aligned nations in
various fields, India took the stand that these activities should
be intensified and coordinated and that the non-aligned nations
could make a significant contribution to international affairs in
the Seventies.
In accordance with the principles of India's foreign
Policy we have tried our best to follow a policy of friendship
and cooperation with all the nations of the world irrespective of
differences in social and political systems. Indeed, cooperation
has been the main theme of India's foreign policy and we believe
that it ought to be the keynote of the policies of nations in the
Seventies. Of course, the course of international cooperation
<pg20>
is beset with a multitude of problems, differences and conflicts which pull in a contrary direction. However, India believes that for the world as a whole, for the super powers, for
the advanced nations as well as the middle, the small and the
developing countries, cooperation has now become almost
inevitable if mankind is to move forward along the path of
peace and progress and if nations are to fulfil even their own
particular national interests and aspirations.
INDIA
USA FINLAND VIETNAM FRANCE TOTO CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC RUSSIA MALAYSIA
REPUBLIC OF SINGAPORE AUSTRALIA NEW ZEALAND JAPAN NEPAL INDONESIA CHINA
BURMA LAOS THAILAND POLAND PAKISTAN MALI UZBEKISTAN ISRAEL LIBYA SUDAN
SYRIA NIGER NIGERIA GHANA SOUTH AFRICA UNITED KINGDOM ANGOLA GUINEA
MOZAMBIQUE GERMANY HUNGARY CANADA YUGOSLAVIA
Nov 17, 1969

INDIA'S NEIGHBOURS
CHAPTER II
INDIA'S NEIGHBOURS
AFGHANISTAN
The close and friendly relations between India and Afgha-

nistan were highlighted by the visit of Prime Minister Shrimati
Indira Gandhi to Afghanistan from Jun 05, 1969 to 10, 1969. Discussions held during this visit revealed the great scope for
collaboration in economic and technical fields between the two
countries, particularly in irrigation, power, agriculture, smallscale industries, education and culture. The Prime Minister
agreed to place at the disposal of the Government of Afghanistan technical expertise available in India in these fields. One
important outcome of her visit was the setting up of a Joint
Commission at the Ministerial level to study and plan various
projects for the mutual benefit of the two countries based on
the coordination of the resources and capabilities of each
country. This Commission is also to examine measures for the
expansion of trade between India and Afghanistan. The Joint
Commission held its first meeting in New Delhi on the 16th
and 17th of March, 1970 when a large area of economic and
technical cooperation programmes to be undertaken by the two
countries was identified. During the Prime Minister's visit
agreement was reached on the importance of economic
cooperation among the countries of the region. One matter
of special interest was the hope expressed by the two Prime
Ministers that the existing difficulties in the way of the land
transit trade of the region would be ended soon so that economic cooperation and trade between countries of the region
could be developed to the maximum extent.
<pg21>
<pg22>
The trade arrangements between India and Afghanistan
were renewed in a Protocol signed in New Delhi in August
1969.
BURMA
The close and friendly relations with Burma were reaffirmed on the occasion of Prime Minister Smt. Indira Gandhi's visit
to that country from 27th to 30th March, 1969. This visit provided an opportunity for a wide ranging exchange of views on
bilateral and international issues and the Prime Minister took
the occasion to especially acknowledge the assistance given by
Burma against the anti-Indian activities of misguided elements
along our common borders. General Ne Win, Chairman of the
Revolutionary Council of the Union of Burma had visited India
in February, 1969 and made a second friendly and informal
visit in January, 1970, which provided a further opportunity for
another exchange of views at the highest level thus characterising the particularly close ties which exist between the two
countries. It was decided during the visit to enter into early
talks for the further expansion of trade between the two
countries. Trade with Burma has shown a. significant increase
over the past year and both Governments have expressed

interest in institutionalising arrangements for further expansion
of this trade. There has also been some expansion of the
cultural exchanges between the two countries, particularly in
the field of education.
Both in the course of these high level discussions and
through normal diplomatic correspondence there have been
significant developments during the year in settling the problems relating to persons of Indian origin in Burma. The
Government of Burma has agreed to deal with the problems of
repatriates, detenues and assets expeditiously and sympathetically and has also taken in hand the question of conferment of
Burmese citizenship on those who are eligible for it under
<pg23>
Burmese law. Further joint consideration of these matters is
in progress.
The Joint Indo-Burma Commission for demarcation of the
boundary completed the allotted demarcation work of 240
miles during the field season from November 1968 to April
1969 and in pursuance of meeting of the Commission held in
May 1969 has taken in hand the verification of the portion
already demarcated and the physical demarcation of a further
250 miles of the border.
CEYLON
The close relations with Ceylon were illustrated by the
presence of the Governor-General of Ceylon on the occasion of
the funeral of the late President Dr. Zakir Husain. The close
friendship was again demonstrated by the warm welcome
extended to the President of India during his State visit to
Ceylon from January 8 to 12, 1970.
Economic relations between the two countries have also
been taken a step further following the visit of the then Commerce Minister, Shri Dinesh Singh, to Ceylon in January, 1969
to inaugurate the Indian Industrial Exhibition when economic
discussions were also held. A further credit of Rs. 50 million
has been extended by India to Ceylon and the Shipping
Corporation of India has entered into a collaboration agreement
to assist the newly established Shipping Corporation of Ceylon.
Following the visit of the Ceylon Minister of State, Mr. J. R.
Jayawardane in March, 1969 a number of joint ventures are in
the process of being set up in Ceylon including the field of
textiles, production of scooters and assembling of trucks. The
Joint Committee on Economic Cooperation proposed practical
steps to reduce the trade imbalance and further expand trade
between the two countries. There have also been fruitful
discussions on joint cooperation in regard to tourism and other

<pg24>
fields in which there are possibilities of further cooperation.
Prominence has been given to the pooling of experience
of the two countries in agricultural research and development.
The visit of Shri K. L. Rao, Minister for Irrigation and Power,
provided an occasion to exchange views with the Ceylon
Government in respect of one of the major irrigation projects
in that country. India and Ceylon continued their efforts to
evolve and coordinate joint international packaging and
marketing of tea.
In implementation of the Indo-Ceylon Agreement of 1964
over 2,20,000 persons have applied for Indian citizenship and
over 2,50,000 persons for Ceylon citizenship. Indian citizenship
has been conferred on over 66,000 persons, 15,000 of whom
have returned to India. A beginning has been made in the
conferment of Ceylon citizenship on some 2,500 persons and
in view of the sufficiency of applications effective absorption of
the stateless population in Ceylon has now begun. The Joint
Committee for Implementation of the Agreement, which is in
permanent session in Colombo has successfully dealt with a
number of matters of detail relating to transfer of assets, travel
facilities and rehabilitation of repatriates.
NEPAL
During the year under review India and Nepal discussed
various matters of common interest to both countries in an atmosphere of understanding, mutual trust and traditional
friendship. The Minister of External Affairs, Shri Dinesh
Singh, paid two visits to Nepal in June 1969 and February 1970
The tatter visit was in response to an invitation by H. M.
the King. The Foreign Minister of Nepal paid a goodwill visit
to India in May 1969. The Minister of External Affairs during
his visits conveyed India's abiding interest in the progress of
Nepal. It was agreed between the two Governments that official groups would go into the various questions of bilateral in<pg25>
terests in greater depth in order to evolve recommendations for
specific solutions and plans for further cooperation.
In pursuance of this decision, a Nepalese official delegation
led by the Nepalese Foreign Secretary held discussions in Delhi
with an Indian delegation led by the Indian Foreign Secretary
between August 29 and September 4, 1969. Joint and separate
recommendations were made by the delegations of the. two
countries to their respective Governments. The implementation of these recommendations is expected to help the process
of removing minor irritants in the relations between the two
countries. The joint statement issued at the end of the talks

stressed the close historical, geographical, cultural, economic
and political relations existing between India and Nepal. The
agreed recommendations are now being implemented and other
matters of mutual interest are being pursued through diplomatic channels with a view to finding lasting solutions.
The close and friendly relations existing between India and
Nepal were reflected in the large number of visits exchanged
between high dignitaries of the two countries. Their, Majesties
the King and Queen of Nepal made a brief halt at Delhi on
their way to Europe on September 5, 1969 and had talks with
the President, Prime Minister and the External Affairs Minister
of India. A Nepalese delegation, headed by their Prime Minister
Shri Kirti Nidhi Bista, represented Nepal at the funeral of President Zakir Husain. In February 1969 the then Indian Chief
of Army Staff General Kumaramangalam visited Nepal at the
invitation of the Nepalese Commander-in-Chief. The King of
Nepal honoured the Indian Chief of Army Staff by investing
him with the honorary rank of General in the Royal Nepal
Army. In December of the same year the C-in-C of the
Nepalese Army General Surendra Bahadur Shaha paid a 10-day
return visit to India and was conferred with the honorary rank
of General in the Indian Army by the President of India.
<pg26>
During the same period a 17-member delegation of the
Rashtriya Panchayat of Nepal led by the Chairman Hon'ble
Shri Lalit Chand visited India in December 1969-January
1970. A group of about 500 Buddhist pilgrims from Nepal
visited places of Buddhist interest as well as other cultural
centres in India.
The scope of Indo-Nepalese cooperation in the field of
economic development registered a remarkable increase in the
year under review. The main emphasis of the cooperation
programme was on projects designed to build the economic infrastructure of Nepal for further development. India
had provided an expenditure of nearly Rs. 60 crores towards
the cooperation programme by March 31, 1969 and a sum of
Rs. 14.5 crores was allocated for the financial year 1969-70.
The following projects constructed under Indo-Nepal Programme
of Economic Cooperation were inaugurated and handed over
to H.M.G. of Nepal:
1. Dakshin Kali Road (19 Kms.)
2. Pokhara Hydel Project (II phase) (500 Kw)
3. Tribhuvan University Girls Hostel and Boys
Hostel and Arts Block.
Two major projects Sonauli-Pokhara Road (210 Kms.)

and the Kathmandu-Calcutta telephone link, are nearing
completion while satisfactory progress was made in respect
of other important projects like the Eastern Sector of
the Mahendra Raj Marg, the 5 Kw radio telephone link
between Delhi and Kathmandu, the Trisuli Hydel Project and
the Chatra Canal. Under the Chatra Canal Scheme, India has
taken additional responsibility for the construction of irrigation
canals upto 5 cusecs at a cost of Rs. 50 lakhs. The Survey
work on the central sector of the Mahendra Raj Marg has also
been taken up.
<pg27>
During 1969, work was started on a modern stadium in
Kathmandu and two coaches for football and athletics are
being deputed from India. A number of other welfare schemes
in various parts of Nepal are also being financed from out of
the Cooperation Programme Funds. Apart from the construction of hospitals, a significant project of medical assistance was the running of eye relief camps in Kathmandu,
Pokhara and Dharan by the Blind Relief Society of India
with the deployment of Indian doctors and equipment. 11,303
patients were treated in these camps and 1,600 patients were
operated upon. An Indian Railway Survey Team began a traffic
and engineering survey for the laying of a broad gauge
railway line from Raxaul at the Indian border to Hitauda in
Nepal.
India continued to provide training facilities in various
educational institutions in India for higher studies in engineering, medicine and other fields to Nepalese students both on
scholarships and on self-financing basis. Till 1969-70, H.M.G.
had deputed 2,452 candidates for training in India, under the
Technical Cooperation Scheme of Colombo Plan.
PAKISTAN
India continued to make efforts to improve relations with
Pakistan. As explained in the chapter on General Survey, the
Prime Minister of India wrote to President Yahya Khan in
July 1969 proposing normalisation of relations and the setting
up of an Indo-Pakistan body for settling differences through
bilateral consultations and negotiations. Pakistan's response
to this proposal was negative.
The representative of Pakistan referred to Kashmir as usual
in his address to the U.N. General Assembly in October 1969.
The Minister of External Affairs, Shri Dinesh Singh, exercising
his right of reply explained the Indian position in the correct
perspective and reminded the U.N. that it was India and not
<pg28>

Pakistan which had brought up the question of Kashmir before
the world organisation and that the only question was Pakistan's
aggression on the Indian State of Jammu and Kashmir.
Pakistan has been constructing, with the assistance of the
People's Republic of China, a second road in Pakistan-occupied
part of Kashmir-from Mor Khun in northern Kashmir to the
Khunjerab Pass on the Kashmir-Sinkiang border. The road
is being built mainly for military purposes and it extends the
Chinese road network in Tibet and Sinkiang into the subcontinent. The Government of India lodged protests with the
Governments of Pakistan and China against the construction of
the road, pointing it out that it was a threat to the peace and
tranquility of the region.
Talks at the official level of Secretaries in regard to the
Ganga waters and other projects on the Eastern Rivers
between India and Pakistan continued during the year.
In continuation of the meeting of December 1968, meetings
were held at Islamabad in March 1969 and in New Delhi in
July 1969 during which technical data was exchanged between
the two sides. Unfortunately, the value of this progress in
exchange of technical data was offset by Pakistan putting
forward a wholly unrealistic scheme for a barrage on the Padma
River which would require about 58,000 cusecs of water.
During the summer months, this comprises practically the
entire flow of the Ganga. India explained to Pakistan that
such an unrealistic approach could not possibly form the basis
of meaningful discussion on this question. The proposed
Pakistan barrage would result in large-scale flooding of Indian
territory and damage to Indian interests. Further, India's
needs of the waters of the Ganga were overwhelmingly greater
considering the economic and social needs of the area through
which it flows. India, therefore, suggested that if Pakistan
genuinely desired an amicable outcome in this area, she should
approach the talks in a truly cooperative frame of mind and
<pg29>
with a rationally conceived scheme which took into account
the existing and forseeable realities in the area. The Secretary
level meeting between the two sides is being held in February
1970 at Islamabad.
Demarcation of the Kutch-Sind border was completed in
accordance with the Kutch Tribunal Award and Plenipotentiaries of the two countries countersigned the maps of the
demarcation at Islamabad on July 4, 1969.
No much progress has been posssible on the demarcation
of the West Bengal-East Pakistan boundary mainly because
of Pakistan's insistence that the division of Berubari agreed
under the Nehru-Noon Agreement be taken up simultaneously

with the demarcation work in this sector of the boundary.
It may be recalled that the matter of actual demarcation work
and naming of the "appointed day" for the transfer of the
southern half of Berubari are subject of an appeal before the
Supreme Court of India against an order of the Calcutta High
Court.
In the Tripura-East Pakistan sector differences regarding
the exact location of the boundary still persist.
Major portion of the boundary between Assam and East
Pakistan has been demarcated by the erection of boundary
pillars. While the Lushai Hill District boundary has not yet
been taken up for demarcation, differences over the correct
alignment of the boundary along a small portion in the CacharSylhet sector have yet to be resolved.
In accordance with the provisions of the Indus Water
Treaty, 1960, the Commissioners of the two countries met
twice during the year. India made the 10th and the last instalment of the payment under the Treaty to the World Bank in
July 1969.
<pg30>
Pakistan continued to make strenuous efforts to obtain
arms from various quarters. While the American policy
banning supply of lethal military equipment to the subcontinent is still under review, the Government of India have
impressed upon the United States that resumption of supply
of arms to Pakistan would greatly endanger the peace of the
region and lead to an arms race. The Government of India
hopes that the U.S. Government, in making a review of its
policy in this regard, would keep in mind the paramount need
of peace in the area.
Pakistan continued to get military equipment from the
Soviet Union under agreements previously entered into.
During the year under report, Pakistan has received from the
Soviet Union T-54/T-55 Tanks, 130 mm Guns, helicopters,
ammunition and spares. Our concern over the Soviet supply of
arms to Pakistan has been repeatedly expressed to the Soviet
leaders. The question was discussed by our Prime Minister
with the Soviet Prime Minister and by our External Affairs
Minister as well as our Defence Minister at various levels
during their visits to Moscow.
Pakistan has persistently refused to negotiate with India
on the question of the restoration of Indian properties seized
by Pakistan during and after the August/September 1965
conflict. Eight notes were sent to the Government of Pakistan
reminding them that all such seized properties were in the
nature of a continuing trust with them and the attempt by

Pakistan Government to dispose of these properties unilaterally
was a flagrant violation of the Tashkent Declaration. We
have also impressed upon Pakistan that the Government of India would not recognise any title that Pakistan or
a third party might claim to the Indian properties and assets
pursuant to their illegal action of seizure and disposal.
It was also made clear to the Pakistan Government that
the Government of India reserved their right to claim full
<pg31>
compensation for loss or damage to all properties/assets of
the Indian nationals and the Government of India seized by
Pakistan. The Pakistan Government, however, have persisted in
their intransigent attitude claiming unfettered legal right to
dispose of these properties which they consider they had
seized during a "war".
Pakistan has continued to advertise the sale of seized
properties and has actually sold 188 Indian vessels and buildings of the Life Insurance Corporation of India in Lahore,
Rawalpindi and Karachi. Protests have been lodged against
these sales.
Minorities in Pakistan have continued to suffer disabilities
of a social, cultural, religious and of economic nature. India
continued her efforts to persuade Pakistan to discharge her
obligations towards her minorities under the Nehru-Liaquat
Pact of 1950. The flow of migrants into India from across
the borders continued during the year. Between January and
October 15, 1969, 1,970 persons migrated to India from
Pakistan-6,923 from East and 2,247 from West Pakistan.
Corresponding figures for the same period last year were
10,817-9,233 from East and 1,584 from West Pakistan.
During the year 1969 five parties comprising
6,746 pilgrims from India visited Pakistan. Out of this, over
4,000 went to Nankana Saheb on the occasion of the
500th birth anniversary of Guru Nanak Devji in November
1969. Nine parties of Pakistani pilgrims comprising
532 persons came to India from Pakistan.
Pakistan Radio continued its hostile anti-Indian propaganda giving a false and distorted version of happenings in India
with a view to creating trouble between different communities.
The attention of the Pakistan Government was drawn to this
through two notes delivered to the High Commission of
<pg32>
Pakistan in New Delhi on June 13 and October 10, 1969. On
their part, the Government of India have taken care to see
that Article IV of the Tashkent Declaration relating to

propaganda was scrupulously observed by all the concerned
authorities in India.
PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA
The year under review did not see any improvement or
further worsening in our relations with China. Chinese forces
continued to remain in occupation of 14,500 square miles of
Indian territory as a consequence of the 1962 aggression.
While there were no clashes on the Sino-Indian border, there
were a few instances of Chinese aerial and land intrusions in
Ladakh and in the Eastern and Middle Sectors.
Chinese troops continued to remain in strength across
our borders in Tibet and Sinkiang, and they appear to have
constructed and improved roads linking military stations
across the India-China, Bhutan-Tibet, Sikkim-Tibet, NepalTibet and Sino-Burmese borders. This improved system of
communications is evidently aimed at facilitating the movement
of Chinese troops from one part of the border to another.
On the Sikkim-Tibet border the loudspeaker broadcasts
directed at Indian troops, which started in mid-1967, still
continued. However, there have been no military clashes on
the Sikkim-Tibet border since September-October 1967. At
that time the Government of India had suggested to the
Chinese Government that, for purposes of settling local
conflicts and reducing tension at the Sikkim-Tibet border,
Sector Commanders of both sides should meet in an attempt
to solve such incidents. The Chinese Government did not
reply to this constructive suggestion.
The Chinese also continued to interfere in the internal
affairs of India. In a note addressed to the Embassy of China
<pg33>
in India on 21 April, 1969, we protested against the encouragement and aid given by the Chinese authorities to sections of
Indian Nagas in their unlawful and antinational activities. It
was pointed out by the Government of India that Chinese
propaganda organs have also been instigating other sections
in India and pursuing an unprincipled policy of inciting and
aiding subversion in India.
The general political propaganda against India by Chinese
radio and press continued unabated during the period under
review. There was a deliberate attempt to discredit parliamentary democracy in India. Chinese professions of "peaceful
Co-existence", which have been repeated several times by
Chinese leaders during the year 1969 as the basis of Chinese
foreign policy do not seem to preclude interference in others
"internal affairs".

These facts, unfortunately, suggest that so far there is no
basic change in the attitude towards India on the part of the
Chinese leadership. On our part, both the Prime Minister
and the External Affairs Minister have declared several times
during 1969-70 that India wants to live in peace and friendship
with China and that it is prepared to talk with China on a
basis consistent with India's territorial integrity, sovereignty
and national honour.
STATES IN SPECIAL TREATY RELATIONS WITH
INDIA
BHUTAN
The close and friendly ties between India and Bhutan
continued to prosper during the year. With India's sponsorship, Bhutan was admitted as a member of the Universal Postal
Union in March, 1969.
<pg34>
India and Bhutan exchanged a number of goodwill delegations which further cemented the ties of kinship between the
two countries. Our extremely friendly relations with Bhutan
were highlighted by the visit of the Royal Mothers of Bhutan,
Their Royal Highnesses Ashi Pema Chhoden and Ashi Pema
Dechen, at the invitation of the Prime Minister of India in
October 1969. The Home Minister of Bhutan accompanied by
the Chief Secretary and the Police Adviser to the Government
of Bhutan visited India in April 1969. The Home Minister
of Bhutan accompanied by the Finance Minister of Bhutan
visited India again in February 1970. A delegation of senior
Bhutanese officials also undertook a Bharat Darshan tour in
February-March 1970. A Bhutanese dance troupe participated
in the Republic Day celebrations in Delhi in January 1970.
The Foreign Secretary and the Defence Secretary visited
Bhutan in April and October 1969 respectively and held
discussions with H.M. the King, Ministers and other officials of
the Government of Bhutan.
A number of Indian experts and advisory teams visited
Bhutan to advise the Government of Bhutan in various spheres
of developmental activity. Among them were : a team from
the Indian Council of Agricultural Research to advise on the
possibilities of development in the fields of agriculture, horticulture and animal husbandry ; a Census Adviser for consultations on the proposed first census of Bhutan ; an Educationist
to advise on technical and educational matters and a Fire
Adviser to establish a fire fighting system in Bhutan.
The Government of India continued assistance to Bhutan

in fulfilling her Second Five-Year Plan 1966-71. A provision
of Rs. 20 crores has been made under the Plan for
various development activities. In addition to providing grants
and loans to Bhutan, help is being given in the setting up of
revenue raising schemes like animal husbandry, agriculture, etc.
<pg35>
The tempo of Indian assistance for the construction of a network of communications including roads, telephone links,
transport services, etc., was kept up so that Bhutan would
have an infrastructure capable of further development. A
teleprinter link between Phuntsholing and Siliguri was commissioned with Indian assistance on 2nd May, 1969. At the
request of the Government of Bhutan, a number of Indian
experts were deputed to Bhutan to serve as advisers in several
fields. Nearly 200 Bhutanese scholars continued to receive
scholarships for study in various educational institutions in
India.
SIKKIM
Relations between India and Sikkim continued to remain
close and intimate. For the effective fulfilment of Sikkim's 3rd
Five-Year Plan, India has agreed to a total outlay of Rs. 9
crores to be provided in grants and loans for supporting projects designed to increase Sikkim's agricultural production,
improve her transport and communications facilities and to
achieve an expansion in the development of social services,
specialised skills and the setting up of agricultural based
industries. The Government of India provided a number of
experts in various fields connected with these projects. The
extensive damage to communications and property in Sikkim
caused by the floods of October 1968 was examined by Indian
experts and a sum of Rs. 1.02 crores has been provided to
repair such damage.
Nearly 200 Sikkimese scholars continued to receive
scholarships for study in various educational institutions in
India.
The close and friendly ties existing between India and
Sikkim were cemented further by important visits on both sides.
Under the Cultural Activities Programme, a 10-member
<pg36>
Sikkim Women's delegation visited Delhi, Bombay, Bangalore
and Madras from February 16 to March 1, 1970.
Dr. Karan Singh, Indian Minister of Tourism and Civil
Aviation, visited Sikkim in November 1969 and held discussions with H.H. the Chogyal on the prospects of tourism in

Sikkim. Secretary, Foreign Trade, visited Sikkim in April
1969 and had fruitful meetings with the Chogyal and officials
of the Government of Sikkim.
The Chogyal visited India in May 1969 and attended the
funeral of the late President Dr. Zakir Husain.
INDIA
AFGHANISTAN USA LATVIA BURMA SRI LANKA NEPAL PAKISTAN MALI CHINA RUSSIA
UZBEKISTAN CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC BHUTAN
Jun 05, 1969

SOUTH-EAST ASIA
CHAPTER III
SOUTH-EAST ASIA
Developments during the year emphasised the continuing
fluidity of the political and other forces in play inside the
region. The new policy of the United States, the increasing
interest taken by Japan and the Soviet Union in the region, the
impending British withdrawal, the attempts at accommodation
between the major powers and the increasing disenchantment
with military alliances were some of the more significant
developments. A major unsettling factor was the Chinese
policy of seeking domination by encouraging subversive groups
or elements within most countries of the region. At the same
time there was heartening evidence of the forces of nationalism exerting themselves within each country, and attempts
for the establishment of suitable regional groupings for
economic cooperation.
This situation has created opportunities for India to
improve the already good bilateral relations which exist with
countries of the region and to give them deeper content, particularly in the fields of economic, technological and cultural cooperation.
Intensive efforts were made to improve relations and
expand cooperation with countries of the region in the political, economic, technical and cultural fields. India entered into
several bilateral arrangements with various countries and also
sought to promote multilateral economic and technical cooperation.

Cultural cooperation has increased between India and the
countries of the region. Books and publications were presented
<pg37>
<pg38>
to a number of countries. Cultural troupes and delegations
made visits to and from India. Exchanges of scholars and
professors are being planned. Several countries sent entries to
the Second International Film Festival. Many countries sent
delegations to international conferences in India, including the
Inter-Parliamentary Union.
Of special significance to India's image in the region were
the goodwill visits paid by the Indian Navy to most countries.
The Chief of Naval Staff was able to visit Thailand, Singapore,
Australia and New Zealand. Special mention must be made
of the first visit of an Indian naval ship to Fiji, which was an
outstanding success.
The problems of persons of Indian origin in the countries
of the region are playing a less dominant role in bilateral relations, as suitable arrangements for their future are worked
out.
The increase of activity by foreign naval forces in the
Indian Ocean has caused concern to India and to other countries bordering it. While accepting the doctrine of the freedom
of the high seas, India along with a number of these countries,
has expressed the view that it should be kept free of foreign
forces, military bases and nuclear weapons.
AUSTRALIA
Relations between India and Australia continued to be
further deepened and strengthened. There was growing understanding of each other's positions and cooperation in a number
of fields became more substantial.
Australia continued to provide a substantial quantity of
foodgrains on liberal terms and in October 1969, made over a
further gift of 70,000 metric tons of wheat under the Food Aid
Consortium. With a view to promoting export of Indian goods
<pg39>
to Australia India participated in the Sydney Trade Fair in
October 1969, and orders for some Rs. 4 million worth of
goods are understood to have been opened on this occasion.
The Special Australian Tariff Legislation, giving preference for
products from developing countries, has been of benefit to

Indian exports.
Evidence of the mutual growth of interest lies in the
number of visits exchanged. The Union Minister of Tourism
and Civil Aviation, the Chairman of the Atomic Energy
Commission and the Chief of Naval Staff were the three
important Indian visitors to Australia, while in return the Premiers of two Australian States came to India. The exchanges
in the field of sports have also grown, and a Seminar on Indian
and Australian Literature was held in Delhi in January 1970.
CAMBODIA
The Foreign Secretary visited Cambodia in June 1969 when
he met the Head of State, Foreign Minister and other important dignitaries.
Cambodia sent a delegation to the Interparliamentary
Union. The Government of India continues to give assistance
to the Prek Thnot Project in Combodia, which is part of the
Mekong Development Plan.
India, along with other members of the International
Control Commission in Cambodia, accepted the decision of the
Cambodian Government that the International Commission
should adjourn sine die, mainly because of financial reasons.
Government of India feels that the Commission has still a task
to perform in the context of the situation in the whole of IndoChina and is willing to reconvene it if and when necessary.
Fiji
Considerable progress was achieved during the year in the
constitutional discussions between the two main political parties
<pg40>
resulting in the visit of Lord Shepherd, U. K. Minister for
Colonies and the decision to hold a constitutional conference
in London not later than April 1970, and fix a date for full
independence with the Queen as Head of State. While agreement has yet to be reached on some constitutional provisions
including the future electoral system, there is every likelihood
of Fiji proceeding towards full independence at an early date.
Relations between the various communities in Fiji have improved considerably.
The process already established of improving the dialogue
between India and Fiji was developed further during the year
both on the occasion of the visit of Dr. Karan Singh, Minister
of Tourism and Civil Aviation from 23 to 26 September
and on the occasion of the visit of INS Delhi, the first Indian
naval ship to visit that country.

INDONESIA
The close and friendly relations between India and
Indonesia were heightened by the State visit of the Indian
Prime Minister to Indonesia from Jun 28, 1969 to 3 July, 1969.
During this visit, the Governments' of India and Indonesia
agreed to further strengthen the bilateral relations between the
two countries by promoting cooperation in the technological,
cultural, commercial and scientific fields. The exchanges of
views which took place were far-reaching and showed a considerable identity of views on most matters of international
importance.
Hadji Harsono Tjokroaminoto, Indonesian State Minister
for Administrative Reforms, visited India from 3 to 8
September, 1969, with a view to study the Indian Administrative Organisations. The Foreign Minister, Dr. Adam Malik,
will be visiting India during March 1970.
Following the Djakarta Fair there was considerable
increase in Indian exports to Indonesia. The outlook for
<pg41>
economic collaboration is now much brighter. After the visit
of the Director-General for Cultural Affairs, who led the
Balinese ballet troupe to India, concrete proposals for cultural
exchanges are under consideration in the fields of education,
dance etc.
LAOS
The Foreign Secretary paid a visit to Loas from June 16
to 21, 1969, and called on the King and Cabinet Ministers.
Two Laotian Ministers, Mr. Impeng Suryadhay, Minister
of Justice, Planning and Cooperation, and Mr. Phen
Phongsavan, Minister of Interior and Social Welfare, visited
India in April 1969.
Prince Souvanna Phouma paid a visit to India in October
1969.
The situation in Laos has caused the Government of India
some concern. Unfortunately, it has not been possible for the
International Control Commission to act effectively because
of the situation in Vietnam which has a bearing on Laos. It
would be desirable if efforts could be made to bring about
greater understanding between the Laotian parties. and an
effective implementation of the 1962 Geneva Agreement. The
Crown Prince of Laos is paying a visit of India in March
1970.

MALAYSIA
The cordial relations between India and Malaysia are
being cemented by the effective cooperation between the two
countries. Agreements are under negotiation covering trade,
culture, extradition and copyright. Malaysia has given significant encouragement to Joint Ventures of which one is
already in production.
<pg42>
The Malaysian Labour Minister, Mr. Manickavasagm,
visited New Delhi in January 1969 to represent Malaysia at
the Asian Labour Ministers' Conference. He also paid a visit
in November 1969 when he represented Malaysia at the Asian
Transport Ministers' Conference.
A gift of medical supplies and medicines valued at
Rs. 25,000/- was presented to the Malaysian Red Cross to
help the victims of the race riots in that country.
Steps were taken to give further technical cooperation to
Malaysia in a number. of fields.
General elections were held in Malaysia in May 1969
which resulted in a reduced majority for the ruling Alliance
Party. Immediately after the election, tension escalated into
riots. An emergency was therefore declared and is still in force.
Parliament remains suspended.
Although there was some initial concern about the persons
of Indian origin in Malaysia, the Government of Malaysia
have given us the assurance that the problem of employment
of non-citizens will be dealt with fairly and impartially and the
question of citizenship will be considered generously.
NEW ZEALAND
In pursuance of the decisions reached on the occasion of
the visit of New Zealand Prime Minister, Mr. Holyoake, in
January 1969, to step up bilateral economic relations, a highpowered delegation of the State Trading Corporation visited
that country and held talks with various Government departments, private importers of steel and engineering goods and
representatives of the dairy, meat and wool industries.
A similar delegation from New Zealand is likely to visit India
shortly.
<pg43>
THE PHILIPPINES

The Philippines Foreign Minister, General Carlos P.
Romulo, visited India in September 1969. A Cultural Agreement was signed between the two countries during this visit.
The Agreement provides for a wider scope of cooperation in
the fields of arts, culture, book promotion, interchange of
scholars etc., between the two countries. During the discussions, it was recognised that there were increasing possibilities
for trade and economic collaboration between India and the
Philippines. The visit also served to underline the growing
identity of views on Asia and international problems between
India and the Philippines.
A delegation led by Shri K. Raghu Ramaiah, Minister for
Parliamentary Affairs, Shipping and Transport, represented
India at the inauguration of President Marcos on December 30,
1969.
Chief Justice, Mr. Hidayatullah, was invited by the
Philippines Constitution Association to attend the anniversary
of the Constitution of the Philippines between 4 and 11
February, 1970, as guest of the Philippines Government. An
honorary degree was conferred on the Chief Justice Mr.
Hidayatullah by the University of the Philippines.
SINGAPORE
The friendly relations between India and Singapore continued to develop notably in the economic and cultural fields.
Mutual understanding was promoted through visits of Ministers
in both directions. Our former Deputy Prime Minister,
Shri Morarji Desai, visited Singapore in April 1969 and the
Law Minister, Shri P. Govinda Menon, paid a visit to Singapore
in September.
Mr. S. Rajaratnam, Foreign and Labour Minister of
Singapore, visited India in January 1969, in connection with the
<pg44>
Asian Labour Ministers' Conference. This was followed by a
study tour undertaken by Mr. Tuan Haji Ya'acob, Minister of
State in the Singapore Prime Minister's office in FebruaryMarch 1969.
THAILAND
Relations with Thailand particularly in the economic field
have grown stronger during the year and the visit of Thai
Economic Affairs Minister, Mr. Bunchana, from 20 to 25
August served not only to confirm Thailand's traditional role
as a supplier of rice to India, but also to explore the expansion
and diversification of Indo-Thai trade in non-traditional items.
It was decided that such visits should take place in future on

a regular annual basis. In October a Joint Working Group
studied Thailand's import agreements, the possibilities of
increasing Indian imports of Thai shellac, and prospects of
entering into long-term arrangements for diversifying trade.
His Royal Highness Prince Dhani Nivat, President of
the Privy Council, accepted an invitation from our Vice-President to visit India in early March 1970 to strengthen the
cultural ties between the two countries. An Air Agreement
was signed between the two countries.
VIETNAM
The year opened with fair prospects for peace in this country
with the start of the four-power talks in Paris. The announcement of the NLF ten-point proposal and President Nixon's
eight-point plan of May 1969 gave further hopes of a peaceful
settlment. Unfortunately, these hopes have been dissipated by
subsequent events and it seems that a peaceful settelment is still
distant. The Government of India has been in touch with all
the concerned governments and continues to hope that a peaceful
settlement can be found within the broad framework of the
Geneva Agreement of 1954, which will permit the Vietnamese
people to pursue their destinies free of external interference. A
<pg45>
delegation led by our External Affairs Minister attended the
funeral of Dr. Ho Chi Minh in Hanoi on October 9, 1969.
During their stay they were able to meet important leaders of
the DRVN and of the NLF of South Vietnam, and also the
Cambodian Head of State, Prince Sihanouk.
A Parliamentary Delegation from South Vietnam visited
India. Another delegation was present for the IPU meeting.
Dr. Phan Quang Dan, Minister of State, paid a visit to India
in November 1969 and met our External Affairs Minister.
The DRVN Government has expressed a desire to establish closer relations with the Government of India in the
political, economic, scientific, technological and cultural fields.
Their request is being examined to see how best it should be
met, including the possible upgrading of level of representation between the two countries.
JAPAN
INDIA USA REPUBLIC OF SINGAPORE THAILAND AUSTRALIA NEW ZEALAND FIJI CAMBODIA
CHINA UNITED KINGDOM INDONESIA MALI LAOS VIETNAM SWITZERLAND MALAYSIA
PHILIPPINES CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC FRANCE
Jun 28, 1969

EAST ASIA
CHAPTER IV
EAST ASIA
JAPAN
The highlight of the year in Indo-Japan relations was the
visit to Japan by tha Prime Minister of India from Jun 23, 1969 to
28, 1969. It provided the Prime Minister with a first-hand
opportunity to witness Japan's remarkable achievements in
the technological, industrial and economic fields. The two
Prime Ministers exchanged views on a wide range of subjects
including the current international situation, particularly in
the Asian region, international peace and cooperation and
bilateral relations with special reference to the growing scope
for economic co-operation between the two countries. In the
joint communique issued on June 28, at the conclusion of the
visit, the Japanese Premier agreed to resume project aid to
India, starting with the development of the outer harbour of
Vishakapatnam, and oil exploration. It was agreed to explore
the possibilities of diversification of trade on a long-term
basis. It was also agreed that further efforts should be made
under the Indo-Japan Cultural Agreements for educational,
cultural and scientific cooperation.
India is participating in the Japan World Exhibition to
be held at Osaka in 1970.
Wide ranging official and non-official contacts between
India and Japan continued to develop. Particularly noteworthy was the third joint meeting of the India-Japan Business
Cooperation Committee which was held in Bombay in December 1969 in which leading businessmen of the two countries
participated.
<pg46>
<pg47>
KOREA
With continuing tense relations between the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea and the Republic of Korea, the
situation in Korea remained unhappy. The Government of
India's policy is to look forward to a peaceful unification of

Korea while maintaining friendly relations both with the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea and the Republic of
Korea.
Our trade with the Republic of Korea has made encouraging progress over the last two years especially in the field of
Indian railway equipment.
A goodwill delegation from the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea led by Mr. Guan He Gyong, a ViceMinister of Foreign Affairs, visited India between July 16 and
22, 1969. The delegation held discussions with the delegation
from the Ministry of External Affairs led by Foreign Secretary
on the international situation and matters of mutual interest,
including trade, economic and cultural cooperation between
India and the Democratic People's Republic of Korea.
A goodwill and economic mission from the Republic of
Korea led by Dr. Pyo Wook Han, Republic of Korea's
Ambassador in Bangkok, visited India from August 6 to 12,
1969. The Mission held talks with the delegation from the
Ministry of External Affairs led by the Foreign Secretary on
matters of mutual interest with particular emphasis on further
promotion of trade and economic relations between the two
countries.
MONGOLIA
A delegation from the Foreign Ministry of the Mongolian
People's Republic visited India between March 31, 1969 and
April 5, 1969, and exchanged views on the current international
situation and matters of mutual interest.
<pg48>
The discussions provided a welcome opportunity to review
bilateral relations. With a view to further consolidating these
relations, various proposals for extension of trade and promotion of cooperation in the economic, cultural and scientific
fields were discussed.
The opening of a Resident Mission in Ulan Bator is under
active consideration.
JAPAN
INDIA USA KOREA MONGOLIA
Jun 23, 1969

WEST ASIA AND NORTH AFRICA
CHAPTER V
WEST ASIA AND NORTH AFRICA
The political and military tensions which had arisen from
the 1967 Arab-Israeli conflict were exacerbated even further
during the past year despite several efforts by the Big Powers
and others to help in finding ways which would lead to an
ultimate settlement. India adhered to its policy and continued to work for an early settlement of the Arab-Israeli question
in accordance with the Security Council's resolution of
Nov 22, 1967. India also expressed its deep concern at the
arms race which had developed in the region and the military
confrontation marked by serious and dangerous incidents.
India condemned the burning of the Al Aqsa mosque in
Jerusalem, accepted the invitation to attend the Summit
Conference held at Rabat from September 22 to 25 to discuss
the question of the desecration of the mosque, the question of
the status of the city of Jerusalem and other political issues
concerning West Asia. It is to be noted with regret that due
mainly to Pakistan's intransigent attitude the Indian Delegation
could not attend the final session of the Conference.
Three Parliamentary Delegations visited some of the
countries of the region to help in promoting a better understanding of each other's points of view and consolidating the
goodwill that marks our relations with them. The Delegations
visited Afghanistan, Algeria, Iran, Kuwait, Lebanon, Sudan,
Syria, Turkey, and the U.A.R.
During the period under review, India not only advocated
a speedy solution of the West Asian crisis and extended
support to the Arab cause but also made systematic efforts
<pg49>
<pg50>
to further develop India's relations with the countries of
the region in the political, economic, technical and cultural
fields.
A Conference of Heads of Indian Missions in West Asia
and North Africa region was held in May 1969 to consider
India's relations with countries in the region. All aspects of
bilateral and regional relationships-political, economic, commercial and cultural, were discussed. While there was satisfaction at the growth of the friendly relations in the area, plans

to further, develop and promote closer ties in the political,
economic and cultural fields with countries of West Asia and
North Africa were discussed.
IRAN
There was a significant move forward in the cooperation
between India and Iran. The Indo-Iranian Joint Commission
met in Tehran in June 1969 and gave a new momentum to
economic collaboration between the two countries. Agreements
were reached for long-term sale of Iranian ammonia for the
Indian fertiliser industry against sale of Indian machinery and
equipment, particularly for railways, power generation and
small-scale industries, and for the training of technicians of
each country in the other. The Oil Refinery built at Madras
with Indo-Iranian-American collaboration was inaugurated by
the President in October 1969. The Joint Commission again
met in New Delhi in February 1970. The two countries signed
a Protocol for economic, trade and technical cooperation
which is expected to strengthen and diversify the cooperation
between them. Under the Protocol, India will import ammonia, phosphoric acid and sulphur from Iran while Iran will
buy railway wagons from India. All these efforts introduced
a new economic content into the historical and cultural relations between the two countries.
<pg51>
BAHRAIN, QATAR AND THE TRUCIAL STATES
India has been following with natural interest the developments in the Gulf. Shri Surendra Pal Singh, Deputy Minister
of External Affairs, paid a goodwill visit to Bahrain, Abu Dhabi
Dubai, Sharjah, Ajmin, Umm al-Qaiwan and Ras al-Khaima
from 2nd to 10th February, 1970.
Following the British Government's announcement to
withdraw its presence from the Gulf by the end of 1971,
the States under British protection have been working for
a Confederation. A number of meetings have been held
between the rulers to discuss this. During their last meeting
held at Abu Dhabi in October 1969, they elected for a
two-year term the Sheikh of Abu Dhabi as the President, the
Sheikh of Dubai as Vice-President and Sheikh Kalifa Bin
Hammed al-Thani, the Deputy Ruler of Qatar, as Prime Minister
of the proposed Confederation. Abu Dhabi has been provisionally selected as the capital. However, a number of important issues have yet to be settled before the Confederation can
come into being.
KUWAIT
Relations between India and Kuwait remained friendly and

cordial during the period under review. The period under
review witnessed the visit of Mr. Abdul Aziz Abdullah al
Sarawi, Kuwaiti Minister of Posts, Telegraphs and Telephones,
to India from 17th to 24th July, 1969 and in. the opposite
direction Shri Surendra Pal Singh, Deputy Minister of External
Affairs, paid a goodwill visit from 29th January to 2nd February
1970 at the invitation of the Government of Kuwait. Both
these visits provided an opportunity to exchange views on
matters of mutual interest.
IRAQ
India's relations with Iraq continued to remain cordial and
<pg52>
friendly. The Government of Iraq formally expressed its
appreciation of our continuing support of the Arab cause.
An Iraqi Trade Delegation visited India in October 1969 for
the Annual Trade talks between the two countries. The Iraqi
Minister of Communications, accompanied by a team of experts in various fields of transport and communications, visited
India in January 1970 to explore possibilities of Indian participation in some of the Iraqi development projects.
India continued to give training to Iraqi officials and
technicians.
JORDAN
Relations with Jordan received a setback on account of
Jordan's attitude towards Indian participation in the Islamic
Summit Conference at Rabat. Consequently the Government
of India recalled their Charge d'Affaires from Amman.
LEBANON
India's relations with Lebanon continued to be cordial.
After the Rabat Islamic Conference, Prime Minister
Rashid Karame issued a public statement expressing appreciation of India's consistent support to the Arabs and expressing
the hope that India would be able to attend future such
gatherings.
There arose some difficulties between the Lebanon's
Middle East Airlines (MEA) and the Civil Aviation authorities
in India, which resulted in the MEA suspending their flights to
Bombay with effect from November 1, 1969. Bilateral talks
were conducted resolving most of the difficulties and the MEA
has resumed its flights to Bombay.

LIBYA
On September 1, 1969, monarchy was overthrown in Libya
and a Revolutionary Council was formed with Col. Moamer
<pg53>
El Qathaffi as President. The new regime has asked for the
removal of the British and American military bases from Libyan
soil. Agreement has been reached between the parties concerned on the schedule of withdrawals.
The Government of India established a Resident Mission
in Tripoli in January 1969 with a First Secretary Charge
d'Affaires.
MOROCCO
Relations with Morocco which has been friendly, received
a setback due to developments on the occasion of the Islamic
Summit Conference held at Rabat in September 1969. This
led the Government of India's decision to recall their
Ambassador from Rabat.
PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF SOUTHERN YEMEN
President Qahtan Ashaabi submitted his resignation in June
1969. A 5-man Presidential Council under a Chairman was
formed. Prime Minister Faisal Abdul Latif also resigned and
was replaced by Mohammed Ali Haitham, who was Foreign
Minister in the earlier Government.
The P.R.S.Y. Government has launched a programme of
economic development. Certain measures to nationalise the
various business houses and establishments have also been
taken. As part of this programme all foreign banks in the
country were nationalised. These included the Bank of India,
the only Indian bank operating in South Yemen.
The P.R.S.Y. Government's relations with India remained
very friendly and cordial and India continued to render technical and economic assistance to the Republic.
SAUDI ARABIA
Relations with Saudi Arabia have continued to grow. As
a first step in building Indo-Saudi collaboration projects, a
<pg54>
technical Petro-Chemical Experts' team from India visited
Saudi Arabia from August 15 to 18, 1969, for exploring
possibilities for participating in a fertilizer complex. This was

followed by the visit of Dr. Triguna Sen, Minister for Petroleum
and Chemicals, to Saudi Arabia from October 10 to 15,
1969.
SUDAN
There was a change of Government in Sudan on May 24,
1969, resulting in the formation of a Revolutionary Council
under Major General Gaafar Mohamed Nimeri who held the
offices of both the President as well as the Prime Minister.
The existing friendly relations between India and Sudan continued to develop further. The annual Indo-Sudan Trade
Agreement was signed in Khartoum during the year, providing
yet another milestone in the growing economic relations between
the two countries. India has become an important buyer of
Sudanese cotton and Sudan has become an important buyer of
Indian jute goods.
SYRIA
The Minister of Foreign Trade, Shri B. R. Bhagat, led a
Trade Delegation to Syria in October 1969 and signed the
first Trade Agreement between the two countries. The Agreement provides for the promotion of trade, the strengthening
of economic relations and the exchange of scientific knowhow.
Discussions were also held for the import of rock phosphate,
triple super-phosphate and sulphur. The two sides also
examined the prospect of the introduction of non-traditional
Indian exports such as steel, rubber tyres and engineering
products in the Syrian market. The Indian offer, for the
construction of 135 km railway line between the phosphate
mines in Syria and the city of Homs which would facilitate the
transport of rock phosphate to the site of the Triple Phosphate
Plant, is under negotiation.
<pg55>
TUNISIA
The Tunisian Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, Mr.
Habib Bourguiba (Jr) paid an official visit to India in June
1969, during which he held discussions with the Minister for
External Affairs and called on the Prime Minister, A cultural
agreement was also signed between the two countries.
UNITED ARAB REPUBLIC
The traditionally friendly relations between India and the
U.A.R. were developed further during the period under review.
The Minister of External Affairs paid a visit to Cairo in July
1969 en route to New York. He called on President Nasser
and held discussions with the U.A.R. Foreign Minister, Dr.
Mahmoud Riad and the Special Assistant to the President on
Foreign Affairs, Dr. Mahmoud Fawzy.

The Foreign Secretary paid a visit to Cairo from July 13
to 14, 1969. He had discussions with the U.A.R. Foreign
Minister, Dr. Mahmoud Riad, the Special Assistant to the
President on Foreign Affairs, Dr. Mahmoud Fawzy and the
Under Secretary in the Foreign Office, Mr. Salah Gohar.
The Speaker of the U.A.R. National Assembly, Dr. Labib
Shukeir, led a high-powered U.A.R. delegation to the InterParliamentary Union Conference held in New Delhi in October,
1969.
Shri R. D. Bhandare, M.P. was invited by the U.A.R.
National Assembly to attend the Preparatory Committee
meeting of the International Conference of Parliamentarians
in Cairo from June 23 to 25, 1969.
The United Arab Airlines resumed their flights to India
which were suspended after the June 1967 conflict in June
1969.
<pg56>
A Ministerial meeting between India, the U.A.R. and
Yugoslavia was held in Cairo on July 15 and 16, 1969. Due
to the unavoidable absence of the Minister of Foreign Trade
and Supply, India was represented by the Secretary, Foreign
Trade, Shri K. B. Lall. The three countries agreed to take
far-reaching measures for strengthening and widening economic
cooperation and trade exchanges. They also agreed to set up
machinery of coordinators and conveners for taking action
in each field and reporting progress in the next Ministerial
meeting to be held in Yugoslavia which has been tentatively
fixed for May/June 1970.
YEMEN ARAB REPUBLIC
The Y. A. R. Government's relations with India remained
very friendly. India continues to provide technical and
economic assistance to the Y. A. R. The Government of
India has decided to establish an Embassy at Aana under a
Charge d'Affaires.
PALESTINE LIBERATION ORGANIZATION
The Palestine Liberation Organization, of which the AlFateh is the most widely known constituent, is assuming
growing importance as a political force. The Organization
has become more viable and effective due mainly to its success
in the unification of their different groups.
ISRAEL

INDIA USA MOROCCO PAKISTAN AFGHANISTAN ALGERIA IRAN KUWAIT LEBANON SUDAN
SYRIA TURKEY BAHRAIN QATAR UNITED ARAB EMIRATES IRAQ JORDAN LIBYA YEMEN
SAUDI ARABIA TUNISIA EGYPT UNITED KINGDOM YUGOSLAVIA
Nov 22, 1967

AFRICA, SOUTH OF THE SAHARA
CHAPTER VI
AFRICA, SOUTH OF THE SAHARA
In the General Survey reference was made to some of the
broad developments in the African continent during 1969-70.
The problem of Rhodesia has continued to defy solution.
During 1969, the illegal regime in Rhodesia further consolidated itself and moved towards the goal of complete apartheid
in the break-away British colony. Despite world opposition,
the Smith regime held a referendum on Jun 30, 1969 when
the white electorate numbering about 80,000 overwhelmingly
approved the new apartheid type Republican Constitution.
The illegal racist regime also passed a Land Tenure Bill which
strictly demarcates 'white' areas from 'black' areas. The socalled Rhodes-an Parliament also passed a Constitution Bill
replacing Queen Elizabeth as Head of State by a Republican
President. The passage of the Bill, in fact, put a final seal on
the new Constitution providing for a form of geographical and
political apartheid.
India has condemned all the acts of the illegal regime which
seeks to perpetuate a racial government in Zimbabwe by a
small minority of white settlers. India is convinced that the
measures so far taken by the British Government have proved
to be ineffective and has advocated strong measures in the form
of comprehensive mandatory sanctions under the United
Nations Charter. India also maintains that it is primarily the
responsibility of the British Government, as the Administering
Power, to ensure the advent of majority rule in Rhodesia and
to take effective measures, including the use of force, to bring
down the racist regime.
The situation in Angola, Mozambique, Portuguese Guinea,
South Africa and Zambia continued to be a source of concern.
<pg57>
<pg58>

The Unholy alliance between South Africa, Portugal and
Rhodesia to suppress the legitimate aspirations of the African
people in the southern part of the continent coupled with the
alarming arms build-up by South Africa is an ominous development and constitutes a grave threat to the world peace. India
has consistently and unequivocally condemned Portuguese
colonialism and South Africa's policy of apartheid. It has
lent full moral support to the cause of the oppressed people in
southern Africa at various international forums and has endeavoured to extend as much material support as possible, within
its means, to the liberation movements in Angola, Mozambique,
Portuguese Guinea, South Africa, Namibia and Zimbabwe.
Besides, India has provided a number of scholarships and
training facilities to students from southern Africa at Indian
Universities and technical institutions through the United
Nations as well as directly.
There was increased mutual cooperation in the economic
and technical fields between India and most of the countries of
Africa notably Ethiopia, Zambia, Ghana, Somalia, Nigeria
and Tanzania. In 1969, 7 Indo-African joint ventures. with
countries in Africa were approved by the Government of India,
These ventures included an aluminium. sheet rolling mill, a malt
processing project, sugar and jute mills, radio assembly unit
and rubber factory. A number of technical experts were
deputed to various African countries. India also provided
training facilities to the nominees of a number of African
Governments in technical institutes and other places of higher
learning in India under the Indian Technical and Economic
Cooperation Programme of the Ministry of External Affairs.
and the Special Commonwealth African Assistance Plan. A
number of training facilities in defence institutions were also
provided to the nominees of the African countries. A number
official delegations came to India from Tanzania, Uganda,
Zambia, Ghana and Nigeria with a view to recruiting technical
<pg59>
personnel from India. These delegations were accorded all
facilities to recruit doctors, engineers, accountants, railway
personnel, teachers etc. This growing economic and technical
assistance programme to Africa is symbolic of India's desire to
meet the African urge for development with India's own growing technical knowhow to the mutual advantage of India and
the countries of Africa.
During the year under review, the drive for Africanisation
in trade and services in the various East and Central African
countries continued unabated. The Africanisation measures
primarily affected persons of Asian origin who had not adopted
the citizenship of the countries of their domicile. While the
Government of India fully appreciated the desire and the

aspirations of the African Governments to put the trade and
commerce in their respective countries in the hands of their
own nationals, it was of the view that such measures should be
applied in a manner that no undue hardship was caused to the
people concerned who have been living in these African
countries for long periods of time. The majority of the persons of
Indian origin affected by various Africanisation measures were
British passport holders. The Government of India repeatedly
impressed upon the British Government to take full responsibility for all persons of Indian origin who hold British
passports. In spite of the legal handicaps involved, Government
have endeavoured to safeguard the interests of persons of
Indian origin in these countries to the extent possible.
Wherever necessary and possible, the Government of India
have interceded on their behalf with the Governments of the
countries concerned. The special customs and import trade
control concessions granted to Indian repatriates intending to
come to India for permanent settlement from Kenya, Uganda
and Tanzania have also been extended to repatriates from
Zambia.
During the year a Conference of Heads of Indian Missions
<pg60>
in Africa was organized in New Delhi to discuss ways and
means to further strengthen the existing cordial relations
between India and the independent African countries and to
identify areas of cooperation with the African countries in the
context of changing conditions in African continent. Major
emphasis was laid on improving India's political, cultural and
economic relations with African countries in the context of the
technological advance made in India.
India played host to a number of distinguished visitors
from Africa. From Mauritius Prime Minister Ramgoolam
paid a state visit to India in December 1969. A number of
other Ministers from Mauritius (Minister of Health, Minister
of Agriculture, Minister of Finance and Foreign Minister)
also visited India during the year. From Ethiopia the ViceMinister for Wild Life Conservation and the Vice-Minister
for Irrigation and Power also came to India. The Congolese
Minister of Agriculture also paid a visit to India during the
year. From India the then Deputy Speaker of the Lok Sabha
visited some of the countries in East Africa. A non-official
Parliamentary Delegation from India visited East African
countries during the year. Indian naval ships paid goodwill
visits to a number of countries in West and East Africa.
INDIA
ZIMBABWE USA ANGOLA GUINEA MOZAMBIQUE SOUTH AFRICA ZAMBIA PORTUGAL
NAMIBIA ETHIOPIA GHANA MALI NIGER NIGERIA SOMALIA TANZANIA UGANDA KENYA
MAURITIUS CONGO LATVIA

Jun 30, 1969

EUROPE
CHAPTER VII
EUROPE
India's relations with the countries of Europe further
strengthened through increased contacts and co-operation.
U.K.
The External Affairs Minister, Shri Dinesh Singh, visited
London in July 1969 on his way to the United States and held
discussions with Mr. Michael Stewart, the British Secretary of
State for Foreign Affairs. The annual bilateral official level talks
were held in London in January 1970. Notable among the
visits to India was a 5-member Select Committee of the House
of Commons on Race Relations and Immigration led by
Mr. Arthur Bottomley, former Secretary of State of Commonwealth Relations. Problems of emigration of Indians to U.K.
and the condition of immigrants in U.K. were discussed in
some details with the members of the Committee. In February
Mrs. Judith Hart, Minister for Overseas Development,
in Britiain, paid a visit to India when the question of technical collaboration between the two countries was discussed
in detail with Indian Ministers and officials. One of the
significant developments was the setting up, following the
visit of Shri Fakhruddin Ali Ahmed, Minister for Industrial
Development, of an Indo-U.K. Technical Collaboration Committee to act as a clearing house for the flow of technical knowhow from U.K. to India in specific fields of industry.
FRANCE
The close friendship and Indo-French cooperation which
had developed during the tenure of President De Gaulle,
continued under the new Government of President Georges
<pg61>
<pg62>
Pompidou. During December 1969 an Indo-French Colloquium was held in New Delhi which was attended by scholars

and intellectuals from both countries and contributed to the
deepening of understanding between the two countries.
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY
The new Government in the Federal Republic of Germany
headed by Chancellor Brandt took several new initiatives in
the field of foreign affairs soon after its assumption of office
in October 1969. The F.R.G. Government, while opposed to
international recognition of the G.D.R., made it clear that it
did not claim any more to be the sole spokesman of the
German people. It conceded that the G.D.R. was another State
but asserted that F.R.G. and the G.D.R. were part of the same
nation. It proposed intra-German talks between the two,
Governments in order to enlarge the scope of the cohesiveness
of the nation, and requested friendly governments to withhold
international recognition of the G.D.R. pending this process.
The F.R.G. has reactivised the proposal to Poland that negotiations might commence on the recognition of the Oder-Neisse
line as the boundary between Poland and Germany.
The F.R.G. has responded favourably to a Soviet aide
memoire on the subject of renunciation of the use of force in
inter-State relations, and has expressed its willingness to enter
into a dialogue with the Soviet Union, G.D.R. and other East
European States on the subject. The F.R.G. has also responded
favourably, though not without reservations, to Finland's
invitation to hold a Conference on European Security on
Finnish soil.
Government of India welcomed these initiatives as steps
in the direction of lessening tension in Europe and opening
up possibilities of better understanding and cooperation
between the European countries. The bilateral relations
<pg63>
between India and F.R.G. developed further in the economic,
technical, cultural and other fields.
H.E. Mr. Walter Scheel, Deputy Speaker of the German
Parliament, visited India to attend the funeral of President
Zakir Husain and also a second time during the year to hold
discussions with the Indian External Affairs Minister.
GERMAN DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC
India opened a Trade Representation in East Berlin on
Oct 04, 1969, on the eve of G.D.R.'s 20th anniversary
celebrations. This was necessitated by growing trade relations
between India and G.D.R., and was also a reflection of the
contacts progressively established between parliamentarians
and other prominent persons from different walks of life. The

late Shrimati Violet Alva, the then Deputy Chairman of the
Rajya Sabha, responded to a G.D.R. invitation to be present at
their 20th anniversary celebrations. Earlier Mr. Max Sefrin,
Deputy Prime Minister of G.D.R., visited India in a private
capacity, and was received, amongst others, by the Prime
Minister. Several Members of Parliament visited G.D.R., in
addition to exchanges of delegations on trade and cultural
matters. Relations between India and G.D.R. have continued
to improve in a spirit of friendship and mutual understanding.
YUGOSLAVIA
Relations with Yugoslavia during the year were marked
by the traditional warmth, friendship and mutual cooperation.
On a number of occasions, representatives of the two Governments exchanged views on major international questions as
also on their bilateral relations. On all these matters a large
measure of agreement and identity of views was achieved.
Cooperation between the two countries in the international
forums continue to be close.
<pg64>
Several high-level visits were exchanged signifying the
close contact existing between the leaders of the two countries.
Dr. Uvalic, Assistant Minister of Foreign Affairs of Yugoslavia,.
visited India twice during 1969. Shri T. N. Kaul, Foreign
Secretary, led the Indian Delegation to the non-aligned meeting
in Belgrade in July 1969. Shri Dinesh Singh, External Affairs
Minister, visited Belgrade in September 1969 and held discussions
with the new Yugoslav Foreign Minister, Mr. Mirko Tepavac.
The then Prime Minister of Yugoslavia represented his country
at the funeral of the late Dr. Zakir Husain, on which occasion
he and our Prime Minister reviewed the world situation and
the state of bilateral relations. An Indian Parliamentary
Delegation led by the then Speaker of the Lok Sabha, Shri N.
Sanjiva Reddy, visited Yugoslavia in June 1969. The Foreign
Minister of Yugoslavia is paying an official visit to India in.
March 1970.
OTHER EUROPEAN COUNTRIES
Relations with almost all other countries in Europe developed satisfactorily during the year. In regard to some,
particularly those in Eastern Europe, a clear tendency could
be discerned of efforts to expand trade and economic relations
with India.
The President of Rumania, H.E. Mr. Nicolae Ceausescu,
accompanied by a high-powered delegation visited India in
October 1969 and held important discussions with our Prime
Minister and other leaders when they exchanged views on the
international situation and the question of expanding bilateral

relations, particularly economic and technical cooperation.
The President of Hungary, H.E. Mr. Pal Losonczi, visited
India in November, also accompanied by a high-powered
delegation. Exchanges on the world situation and question
of bilateral cooperation figured prominently in the talks with
the Prime Minister and other Indian personalities.
The King of the Belgians accompanied by his Queen came
to India early in 1970 on a State visit.
<pg64(a)>
U.S.S.R
Relations between India And the U.S.S.R. registered a
significant growth during the period under review. The leaders
of the two countries met on several occasions. Prime Minister
Kosygin came to Delhi to attend the funeral of the late President
Zakir Husain in May 1969. He passed through Delhi in
September 1969 en route to Hanoi to attend the funeral of Ho
Chi Minh. On both occasions talks were held between him and
our Prime Minister and External Affairs Minister. The Soviet
Defence Minister, Marshal Grechko, visited India in March
1969, a visit which was returned by our Defence Minister in
October 1969. The External Affairs Minister, Shri Dinesh Singh,
visited Moscow in September 1969 and held talks with Mr.
Brezhnev, Mr. Kosygin and Mr. Gromyko and other leaders.
The Minister for Industrial Development, Internal Trade and
Company Affairs, Shri Fakhruddin Ali Ahmed, held talks in
Moscow in June 1969 and Shri Bhakt Darshan, Minister of
State in the Ministry of Education and Youth Services visited
Moscow, to sign a Cultural Exchange Programme. Dr.
V.K.R.V. Rao, Minister of Education and Youth Services,
paid a visit to the Soviet Union in October 1969 during which,
amongst other things, important decisions were taken as regards
the joint Indo-Soviet text books publication, programme.
Several Indian and Soviet delegations on scientific and technical
collaboration, aviation, and trade were exchanged during the
year.
The Government of India made known on a number of
occasions to the U.S.S.R. Government the danger to India's
security and peace on the sub-continent arising out of military
supplies by U.S.S.R. to Pakistan.
The future prospects in the development of bilateral
relations between the two countries were indicated in a speech
made by Premier Kosygin at the memorial meeting held in
New Delhi in honour of the late President Zakir Husain. Mr.
<pg64(b)>
Kosygin then said "We consider that in developing Soviet-

Indian cooperation there are still many unutilised possibilities.
Life itself demands that the relations between our two countries
should acquire a deeper content. They should be taken to a
higher stage so that they more fully conform to the spirit of
mutual respect, sympathy and confidence, which now actuates
the peoples of the Soviet Union and India."
The same sentiment was echoed in the joint communique
issued at the conclusion of External Affairs Minister Shri
Dinesh Singh's visit to the Soviet Union in September 1969.
The communique said : "The two sides considered in
all its aspects the friendly cooperation existing between India
and the Soviet Union and noted with satisfaction that in the
political, economic, cultural, scientific and other fields the
cooperation has progressed impressively and holds great opportunities for further expansion. They are convinced that this
cooperation meets the fundamental interest of the people of
the two countries and serves the cause of promoting peace. in
Asia and the world."
India is gratified at the healthy development of economic
cooperation with the U.S.S.R. and values the technical assistance
she has received from her.
INDIA
UNITED KINGDOM USA FRANCE GERMANY POLAND FINLAND YUGOSLAVIA HUNGARY
VIETNAM RUSSIA PAKISTAN
Oct 04, 1969

THE AMERICAS
CHAPTER VIII
THE AMERICAS
U.S.A.
There was a significant number of high level
visits and discussions between India and the United States
during 1969-70. The new Secretary of State Mr William P.
Rogers visited India in May 1969 and had talks with Indian
leaders. The External Affairs Minister of India visited the United
States in July when he had discussions with a wide spectrum
of U.S. personalities including the Secretary of State and

President Nixon. Later in August 1969 President and Mrs.
Nixon paid a visit to India. The annual official level talks
between India and the United States took place in Washington
in September. There were many other important visitors in
both directions, one of the noteworthy visits was that of the
U.S. delegation to the Inter-Parliamentary Union Conference
in India.
During these visits and on other occasions, President
Nixon and the Secretary of State have enunciated a new U.S.
policy for Asia, which has the potential of a constructive new
relationship between the United States and the countries of
Asia. India has always believed that the United States, has
a tremendous potential for helping the under developed countries of the world. In this, not the least of their assets is the
great fund of friendship and goodwill that exist for them in
many countries and certainly in India. The U.S. has an
important and constructive role to play not only in the plans
for progress of the countries of the Asian region, but also in
using their power and their influence to build up cooperative
and friendly relations.
Not the least important of the statements made by the
United States Administration are those which, in various
<pg65>
<pg66>
contexts, manifest an appreciation of the need for non-military
answers to problems. India hopes that this will led to a
peaceful settlement of the problems in Vietnam and other
areas. India has also noticed in the last year or two a growing
desire in the United States that India and Pakistan can and
must settle their problems amongst themselves without any
third party intervention. India hopes that the United States
will give practical effect to its new policy by forbearing from
resuming supplies of arms to Pakistan. A resumption of
supplies will not only start a retrogressive movement, but is
bound to cause considerable misgiving in India. India has conveyed her concern in this regard to the U.S. Administration.
India highly appreciates the bilateral assistance and
economic cooperation rendered by the U.S. Government and
hopes that cooperation in the economic field will further
increase in the future.
CANADA
The relations between India and Canada were marked
by the traditional cordiality and cooperation. India followed with great interest the positive role Canada is now
playing in international affairs under the leadership of its

Prime Minister Mr. Pierre Elliot Trudeau. Canada continued
to give assistance to India for specific projects as well as under
the Wheat Agreements. India was happy to welcome a 8member Canadian Parlimentary Delegation led by the Speaker
of the House of Commons in January this year.
LATIN AMERICA
During the period under review particular attention was
given to India's relations with the countries in Latin America
and the Caribbean. The Prime Minister's visit to some of the
South American countries in September 1968 had broken new
ground and demonstrated the fund of goodwill which exists
<pg67>
for India in that continent and the great potentialities for cooperation between the countries of the region and India.
Plans for stepping up relations however have had to contend
with difficulties inherent in making a fresh beginning with an
area geographically distant from India. Some progress however has been made. Our diplomatic representation in the
region was expanded by opening up two new Resident Missions
in Peru and Venezuela. The Government has been examining
the question of opening some other new Missions in Latin
America. We have negotiated cultural agreements with
Uruguay and Argentina and we have been considering similar
agreements with Venezuela and Chile. India and Brazil had
signed an agreement for cooperation in peaceful uses of
atomic energy.
The possibilities for economic exchanges have also received
some attention. In April-May 1969 this year an important
and high level economic and trade delegation from India visited
several countries of this region. They have submitted a report
which is under study by the Government of India. Quite apart
from these overall measures, the Indian Government is in
constant touch with our Missions in that region and with the
Missions of those countries in Delhi with a view to exploring
opportunities of increasing trade and other economic exchanges.
The important problem of transportation between India and
South America has also received some attention. Recently a
private Indian shipping company has opened a line to the
Caribbean region. It is hoped there will be further progress
in this direction.
USA
INDIA VIETNAM PAKISTAN CANADA CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC PERU VENEZUELA
ARGENTINA URUGUAY BRAZIL CHILE
Oct 04, 1969

UNITED NATIONS AND INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCES
CHAPTER IX
UNITED NATIONS AND INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCES
India was appointed as a member of the Committee of 25
Nations set up by the U.N. to coordinate plans for the celebration of the 25th anniversary of the U.N. in 1970. It has
been the view of India that this-important anniversary should
be marked not merely by celebrations but by enunciating
practical programmes for the consolidation of peace and progress in such vital matters like disarmament and the development decade. For this purpose we have been working in cooperation with the world body and with like-minded nations
in the U.N. to make the anniversary year the beginning of an
era of peace and cooperation. This was one of the main
questions considered at the meeting of Heads of Delegation of
Non-Aligned nations which met in New York during the
General Assembly Session. To mark the anniversary the
Commemoration Session of the General Assembly in 1970. is
expected to adopt the draft of international development
strategy for the Second Unlted Nations Development Decade.
The Assembly also endorsed the call of the Secretary-General
to proclaim a Disarmament Decade coinciding with the Second
Development Decade. India has associated itself with all these
preliminary moves and is a member of the 25-Nations
Committee which has been appointed to coordinate the plans
for the anniversary.
The Minister for External Affairs, Shri Dinesh Singh led
the Indian Delegation at the 24th General Assembly. Speaking
in the Assembly he referred to the birth centenary of Mahatma
Gandhi and pointed out that elimination of discriminationracial, social and religious-freedom from colonial subjugation,
liquidation of poverty and ignorance, the three causes for
<pg68>
<pg69>
which Mahatma Gandhi struggled non-violently throughout his
life, were also the main concerns of the Charter of the United
Nations. The External Affairs Minister also suggested that the
25th anniversary of the U.N. should re-affirm the principle of
peaceful co-existence and the noble ideals of the Charter and
make a credible declaration for the renunciation of force in the

settlement of disputes.
The Indian delegation to the United Nations took active
interest in the deliberations of the Main Committees of the
Assembly, particularly on major issues like decolonization,
Southern Rhodesia, South-West Africa, Territories under
Portuguese administration, on disarmament and development.
The General Assembly of the U.N. in its XXIVth session took
note of the deplorable conditions prevailing in South Africa,
Southern Rhodesia, Nambia (South-West Africa) and Portuguese colonies in Africa and reaffirmed its support to the
struggle against apartheid, racial discrimination and colonialism in these countries. The General Assembly also severely
criticised the Governments of Portugal, Southern Rhodesia and
South Africa for the cruel and inhuman policies followed by
these countries in the treatment of political prisoners, freedom
fighters and other detenues. The Third Committee of the
General Assembly passed a resolution regretting that certain
member-countries of the U.N. had not fulfilled the obligations
under the U.N. resolutions to terminate diplomatic, commercial,
military and cultural relations with the Government of South
Africa and the illegal regime in Southern Rhodesia and urged
the member-States to abide by the resolutions of the U.N. Consistent with its anti-colonial and anti-racialist policy India voted
in favour of all these resolutions.
India took active interest in the work connected with the
United Nations Second Development Decade. India is a
member of the Economic Committee of E.C.O.S.O.C. which has
<pg70>
been charged with preparatory work for the Second Development Decade. A member of the Indian Delegation is Rapporteur
to this Committee. The task of this Committee is to draft a
programme of international development strategy for the 70's.
in spite of the earnestness with which the Committee undertook
the tasks it has not been possible to make much progress
because of the reservations entertained by the advanced countries of the West in regard to developmental activity, the lack
of agreement on the part of developing countries themselves
and the refusal of the Socialist countries to participate in the
preparatory work on account of the inclusion of Federal
Republic of Germany in the Committee. The Minister of
External Affairs of India in his address to the U.N. General
Assembly expressed the concern of India about the slow progress of development and said that it was a growing tendency
on the part of developed countries to detract from the importance of the basic objectives of development and to put
emphasis on the palliatives. He, however, added that "the
primary responsibility for the developing countries rests on
themselves". India's approach to the programme of development is that while the advanced countries have a clear responsi-

bility, the less developed countries also have the responsibility
of contributing to the maximum possible limit from their own
resources for their economic development. In India an InterMinisterial Committee has been set up to prepare a detailed
statement of objectives and programmes for the Second
Development Decade.
The XXIV session of the General Assembly adopted "a
Declaration on Social Progress and Development" urging all
member-States to take joint and separate action to promote
higher standards of living, full employment and conditions of
economic and social progress. The Trade and Development
Board of the U.N.C.T.A.D. and the United Nations Industrial
Development Organisation have also been engaged in drawing
<pg71>
up programmes of economic development for the developing
countries. Indian delegations were active in all these forums
during 1969. In the Trade and Development Board India
advocated international trade policies advantageous to developing countries stressing the need for diversifying and increasing
exports to the advanced countries. It also advocated, along
with other Afro-Asian and Latin American countries, reduction
of tariffs on non-reciprocal basis, the granting of special trade
preferences and the creation of suitable conditions in advanced
countries for exports emanating from the less developed
countries. India pleaded for increase in the resources and
activities of U.N.I.D.O. and supported a resolution by the
U.N.I.D.O. in the summer of 1969 requesting the U.N. General
Assembly to consider the convening of a high-level conference
to strengthen and widen the mandate of the U.N.I.D.O.
Another economic development of international importance in 1969 was the conversion of the International Union of
Official Travel Organizations into an Inter-Governmental
organization with financial and organizational connections
with the U.N. and the U.N.D.P. India played an important
part in piloting the proposal through the E.C.O.S.O.C. and in
finally getting it accepted in the U.N. General Assembly.
Two important studies in the sphere of U.N. developmental
work were undertaken in 1969. One was the Report of the
Commission on International Development under the Chairmanship of Mr. Lester Pearson, the other was the Capacity
Study of the U.N. Development System undertaken by Sir
Robert Jackson. These two studies taken together have made
recommendations of far-reaching nature concerning reorganization and reform of the U.N. Development System. One of
the important task in 1970 would be the examination and
implementation of these recommendations. The Government
of India are making a study of these two reports.

<pg72>
Last year India pledged 3.5 million dollars in non-convertible rupees to U.N.D.P. for the year 1970. India has also contributed Rs. 50,000 to the U.N.I.D.O. as a voluntary contribution and Rs. 35,000 in non-convertible currency to the International Atomic Energy Agency. We increased our contribution
to the office of the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees from
Rs. 10,000 to Rs. 75,000 for the year 1969. It may be mentioned that the U.N.H.C.R. had allocated $340,000 for relief
work among the Tibetan Refugees in India in 1969.
DISARMAMENT
The principal issues in the field of disarmament remain
unresolved. General and complete disarmament under
effective international control, an objective shared by the
international community in principle, was hardly even discussed
at the Geneva Disarmament Committee. Progress on an
agreement to ban underground nuclear-weapon tests continues
to be hampered by differences between the U.S.A. and the
U.S.S.R. regarding verification procedures. The U.S.A.
continued to insist on some on-site inspections to ensure that
no clandestine tests take place; the Soviet Union, on the other
hand, is strongly opposed to the idea of on-site inspections.
India has suggested, along with some other countries, that the
nuclear powers should suspend nuclear-weapon tests in all
environments pending an agreement on the subject.
Another collateral measure, to which we attach great
importance, is relating to the cut-off in the production of
fissionable material for weapons purposes. The Indian
delegation continued to press for an early agreement on the
cut-off.
The subject of chemical and bacteriological (biological)
weapons was discussed at considerable length in the Geneva
Committee. The group of experts appointed by the Secretary
General in terms of Resolution 2454 (xxiii)-A, submitted its
<pg73>
report on the chemical and bacteriological biological) weapons
on Jul 01, 1969. Dr. Bhagawantam, Scientific Adviser to the
Defence Minister, was a member of the group. The report,
together with the Secretary-General's foreword to it, was the
subject of extensive debate in Geneva as well as at the XXIV
Session of the General Assembly. Proposals on the subject
were submitted by several delegations. The British Delegation
tabled in Geneva a draft convention banning the production,
development and stockpiling of biological weapons. This
was opposed by several delegations mainly on the ground that
the two types of weapons should be dealt with simultaneously.

At the General Assembly Session, the Socialist countries tabled
a draft convention on the production etc., of chemical and
bacteriological (biological) weapons. The General Assembly
has decided to transmit both the draft conventions to the
Geneva Committee for further examination. The Indian
Delegation took an active part in the deliberations on the
question. We are in favour of a total ban on the production
etc., of such weapons. We would also prefer the two types
of weapons to be dealt with simultaneously. India is a party
to the Geneva Protocol of 1925 which bans the use of these
weapons in war.
The question of the de-militarisation of the sea-bed and
the ocean floor received serious consideration. The two super
powers were very keen to reach early agreement on the subject.
The Soviet Union took the initiative by tabling a draft treaty
in Geneva in March 1969. The U.S.A. followed suit two
months later. The Soviet proposal was for a complete demilitarisation of the sea-bed and ocean floor beyond a limit of
12 miles from the coast. The U.S.A. on the other hand,
proposed that the sea-bed and the ocean floor beyond a limit
of three miles should not be used for emplanting or emplacing
nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction.
Eventually, agreement was reached between the super powers
<pg74>
who presented a joint draft to the Geneva Committee on
October 30, 1969. The joint draft proposes de-nuclearisation,
as distinguished from de-militarisation, of the sea bed and
ocean floor beyond a limit of 12 miles. India generally
supported the principles of the joint U.S. - U.S.S.R. draft
treaty except that we would have liked the scope of the
prohibition to be wider. We find the provisions regarding
verification particularly unsatisfactory. The General Assembly
has decided to transmit the draft treaty back to the Geneva
Disarmament Committee for further examination in the light
of the comments made on it during the session.
The Disarmament Committee at Geneva, of which India
has been a member since its formation in 1961, was expended
by the addition of 8 members, namely, Argentina, Hungary,
Japan, Mongolia, Morocco, Netherlands, Pakistan and
Yugoslavia. The Committee, thus, has 26 members now and
is called "The Conference of the Committee on Disarmament"
(C.C.D.).
The Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, which was opened
for signature on 1.7.1968, has so far received over 90 signatures
and about 24 ratifications. The Treaty will enter into force
upon ratification by 43 countries, including U.S.A., U.S.S.R.
and U.K., which are the depository Governments. These
three countries have ratified the Treaty. Federal Republic of

Germany and Japan have also signed the Treaty. The Treaty
may be expected to become operative in a few months time.
India has not signed the Treaty because of our fundamental
objections to it, which have been repeatedly stated in the
Parliament, and in various international forums.
INTERNATIONAL LAW
In the field of International law two important developments took place during the year. The first related to the
preparation of a Convention on the Law of Treaties, the second
<pg75>
to the starting of substantive work by the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law (U.N.C.I.T.R.A.L.).
The Convention on the Law of Treaties was prepared by a Conference of Plenipotentiaries held in Vienna in 1968 and in
1969 under the auspices of the United Nations. It deals with
matters relating to the conclusion of treaties, procedure to be
followed, revision and amendment of treaties, reservations,
validity and termination of treaties, registration of treaties
and settlement of disputes. Some questions relating to the
effect of war on treaties, succession to treaties, and treaties
concluded between states and international organisations or
among international organisation inter se have not been dealt
with in the Convention. These subjects may be the subjectmatter of further study. The Convention on the Law of
Treaties codifies and develops International Law and State
Practice on the subject and will provide the framework law
for the conclusion of treaties. India participated in the U.N.
Plenipotantiaries' Conference. One of the controversial points
was how treaty disputes relating to the validity and termination of treaties should be settled, namely, whether by compulsory references to arbitration or adjudication, or by such
modes of settlement as are freely chosen by the parties.
Ultimately, a compromise was arrived at by which such treaty
disputes, if they are not settled by negotiations; should be
referred to a Conciliation Commission to be established by the
United Nations.
The matter whether India should become a party to this
Convention is under consideration of the Government of
India.
As regards U.N.C.I.T.R.A.L., India played a significant
role in its deliberations as a forum for unification and harmonisation of International Trade Law, taking into account the
special needs and requirements of the developing countries in
the promotion and development of international trade. The
<pg76>

Commission was established by Resolution 2205 (XXI) in
1966. India is a member of the Commission for six years.
The Commission has. given priority for consideration to the
following topics :
1. International Sale of Goods.
2. International Payments.
3. International Commercial Arbitration; and
4. International Shipping Legislation.
The subject of International Shipping Legislation was accorded
priority at the Second Session of U.N.C.I.T.R.A.L. at the
initiative of India, Ghana and Chile. The resolution on the
subject was adopted unanimously. The Leader of the Indian
Delegation, Dr. Nagendra Singh, was elected Chairman of the
Committee on International Sale of Goods of U.N.C.I.T.R.A.L.
Of the three Working Groups set up by U.N.C.I.T.R.A.L. at the
second session, India is a member of two, one relating to
International Sale of Goods, the other relating to International
Shipping Legislation. India has suggested that the subjects
under consideration of U.N.C.I.T.R.A.L. should also be studied
by the Asian-African Legal Consultative Committee so as to
harmonise the viewpoints of the Asian-African countries on
these subjects.
In addition to the above, India also attended the 1969
Session of the U.N. Committee on Friendly Relations, which
met in New York in August-September 1969. The Committee
is preparing formulations on the principles of International
law which will promote friendly relations and cooperation
among States. The 1969 Session devoted itself to the study of
the principles of non-use of force and of equal rights and selfdetermination of peoples. The Committee was established by
General Assembly Resolution 1815 (XVII) of December 18,
1962, and has been functioning since 1964. It is expected to
finalize its work in 1970. It has so far completed its work on
<pg77>
the principles of sovereign equality of States, peaceful settlement of disputes, good faith, duty of all States to cooperate
with one another, and non-intervention. It is expected that
the General Assembly at its 1970 session will adopt a declaration on the subject, as a fitting tribute to the commemoration
of the 25th anniversary of the establishment of the United
Nations. India has played an active role in the work of this
Committee since 1964.
INDIA
USA SOUTH AFRICA PORTUGAL GERMANY SWITZERLAND ARGENTINA HUNGARY JAPAN
MONGOLIA MOROCCO PAKISTAN YUGOSLAVIA UNITED KINGDOM AUSTRIA CHILE GHANA

Jul 01, 1969

TECHNICAL & ECONOMIC COOPERATION
CHAPTER X
TECHNICAL & ECONOMIC COOPERATION
In the conduct of India's foreign policy, the Ministry has
been putting increasing emphasis on India's economic, technical
and commercial relations with other countries. With the agricultural and industrial development of India to a significant
stage, it has now become possible to give greater economic content to our foreign policy. Exploring ways and means of expanding India's exports to foreign countries has become one of
the important tasks of the Indian Missions abroad. Another
task is to explore prospects of economic and technical cooperation with other countries so as to utilise surplus capacities
and talents to mutual advantage. India has by new gathered
considerable experience in plant development and a degree of
sophistication in certain sectors of economy and we are in a
position to share this experience and expertise with other
developing countries. When the Economic Division in the
Ministry was set up in 1961, it was originally intended to play
mainly an advisory role to the Ministry on economic matters
and also to advise the other Ministries of the Government of
India on foreign policy implications on various economic
matters handled by them. Subsequently, the Economic Division was entrusted with implementing a programme of technical
and economic cooperation with other countries, particularly in
Asia and Africa known as the Indian Technical and Economic
Cooperation (I.T.E.C.). This programme was introduced in
addition to the programmes operated by the Ministry of Finance
under the Colombo Plan and the Special Commonwealth
African Assistance Plan (S.C.A.A.P.). During the year under
review, the Economic Division was strengthened to cope with
the increasing economic work of the Ministry. Indian Missions
<pg78>
<pg79>
abroad have been given special instructions to take active
interest in economic and trade work under the personal
direction of the Head of the Mission himself. In the two
Conferences of Heads of Missions held in New Delhi in 1969
considerable time was given to discussion on India's economic

and technical relations with foreign countries.
The major activities of the Ministry in the economic field'
during 1969-70 may be surveyed under three heads:
1. Technical assistance;
2. Promotion of economic collaboration ; and
3. Analytical and advisory functions and matters relating
to aid, trade etc.
In the technical sphere, India has been making available
the services of Indian experts in various fields to developing countries which sought our assistance. Under the modest
but significant Indian Technical and Economic Cooperation
Programme a total number of 65 Indian experts were deputed
abroad during 1969-70. India has also been providing training
facilities in various civil and defence fields to nationals of
developing countries. A total number of 208 persons from
different parts of the world are being trained in India under the
I.T.E.C. programme. It is hoped that we will be able to expand
this programme of cooperation in the future.
Another important form of technical cooperation undertaken under the I.T.E.C. programme was the, carrying out of
techno-economic surveys in developing countries. The National
Industrial Development Corporation carried out such a survey
in the People's Republic of South Yemen, particularly from
the point of view of establishing industries. Similar surveys
were also undertaken in Afghanistan, Fiji, Iran and Mauritius
for the development of small-scale, industries in these countries.
Assistance has also been provided to Ghana, Nigeria, Zambia,
<pg80>
Tanzania and Uganda in regard to Indian technicians for
employment in government departments. An expenditure of
Rs. 17,29,000 was incurred under the I.T.E.C. programme for
the first six months in 1969.
A concerted attempt was made to widen, and deepen the
basis of economic collaboration between India and some
countries by setting up Joint Committees/Commissions for
exploitation of national resources for mutual benefit. Such
Commissions have been functioning during the year in respect
of Ceylon, Iran, Czechoslovakia and Afghanistan. Periodic
bilateral discussions on economic matters were also held with
official delegations from Australia, France, Japan, U.K., U.S.A.
and U.S.S.R.
One important field where India's economic and political
interests converge is that of international and regional cooperation. India has attached great importance to the elaboration
of an international strategy for development and has been

undertaking preparatory work within the Government of India
in respect of the Second Development Decade. The Economic
Division of the Ministry has been invested with the responsibility of coordinating the views of various Government
Departments in this matter. An inter-ministerial committee of
experts has also been set up by the Government of India
to consider matters relating to the preparatory work.
India has also taken a leading part in the work of the
Asian Council of Ministers set up under the auspices of
E.C.A.F.E. for the economic development of Asia. The Ministry
took part in working out an integrated strategy for regional
economic development and extended assistance to the task force
in the E.C.A.F.E. Secretariat by preparing country profiles,
commodity profiles and a series of studies on the possibilities,
of increased interregional trade among the developing countries
of the E.C.A.F.E. region.
<pg81>
Referring to this aspect of India's foreign policy, Shri,
Dinesh Singh, India's Minister of External Affairs, in his
address before the U.N. General Assembly said
"In Asia, we are attempting to evolve a strategy for integrated development of regional economic cooperation
which represents a well coordinated attack on the manifold
problems and deficiencies in Asia. The move has been
made to provide an Asian answer to Asian problems which
requires to be integrated and strengthened".
INDIA
USA SRI LANKA CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC YEMEN AFGHANISTAN FIJI IRAN MAURITIUS
GHANA NIGER NIGERIA ZAMBIA TANZANIA UGANDA NORWAY SLOVAKIA AUSTRALIA
FRANCE JAPAN UNITED KINGDOM
Jul 01, 1969

EXTERNAL PUBLICITY
CHAPTER XI
EXTERNAL PUBLICITY
The objectives of External Publicity are to publicise and
explain India's foreign policy-attitudes and developments-

abroad and at home, and to provide information about developments in India so as to project a correct image of India
abroad.
In directing and sustaining the efforts of the Indian
Missions abroad and publicity on Press relations, and in explaining Government's policies, the Division works in close
coordination with various Divisions of the Ministry and with
other concerned Ministries in the Government of India. Close
coordination is maintained in particular with the All India
Radio, more especially its External Services Division, and
with the P.I.O. and P.I.B.
The Division maintains a teleprinter link with 58 Indian
Missions abroad for transmittal of news and documentary
material on India. These bulletins are broadcast twice a day
(at 2 p.m. and 8 p.m. I.S.T). On the basis of these transmissions our Publicity Posts abroad issue daily and periodical
news bulletins in English and other local languages. Two more
Missions are expected to be brought on the teleprinter link
shortly.
The Production Unit of the Division maintains a continuous flow of material for our Missions abroad. 25 feature
articles were prepared, 22 pamphlets produced, and 95 newspapers and journals supplied to our Missions abroad. The
regular publications of the Division, Foreign Affairs Record
(Monthly), Indian Foreign Review (Fortnightly), and its
<pg82>
<pg83>
French version "Courrier de l'Inde" (Fortnightly) were continued. Foreign language versions of 6 pamphlets were produced,
by our Missions abroad for local distribution. Approximately
2,200 copies of books on varying subjects were supplied to the
libraries of the Indian Missions abroad, and at Headquarters.
During 1969-70, approximately 1,400 prints of various documentary films were supplied by us to our Missions abroad.
This figure is almost 100% above that for the previous year.
30 new documentary films were previewed and approved for
supply to our Missions. 6 more films are under production.
Eight documentaries and one feature film were presented
to institutions in Cambodia, Denmark, Ethiopia and Mauritius.
Twentyone documentary films were supplied to TV organisations in Tripoli, Oslo, Tokyo and Manila for telecasting.
The general question of making arrangements for telecasting of
Indian documentary films by foreign TV organisations free of
royalty charges is separately under discussion.
The following audio-visual equipment was supplied to the

Indian Missions abroad; one film projector each to the Missions
in Seoul, Santiago, Jeddah and Washington, a record player
and a tape recorder to the Mission in Cairo and a tape recorder
to the Mission in Ottawa. Cinema vans were supplied to the
Missions in Port Louis and Bangkok. Approximately 140 gramophone records of Indian music were supplied to the Missions
abroad. Tapes of Indian music were supplied, through the All
India Radio, to foreign broadcasting organizations in Yugoslavia,
Rumania, Hungary, West Germany, Argentina, Venezuela, Peru,
U.S.S.R., Uruguay, Norway, France, Czechoslovakia, Brazil,
Chile and Poland. An exhibition of 119 photographs, entitled
"Our India Exhibition" depicting various aspects of India's industrial, social, cultural and economic life was shown, during.
the year, in Australia, New Zealand, Federal Republic of
Germany, U.S.S.R., Italy, Switzerland, U.A.R., Burma and
<pg84>
Uganda. The exhibition is continuing and we hope to cover
more countries.
During the year under report, the Division supplied material for participating in 8 painting exhibitions in London,
Cairo, Tokyo, Belgrade, New York, Addis Ababa, Cairo, and
London and 3 book fairs in Baghdad, Cairo and Beirut.
During the year the Division promoted special publicity
abroad in the context of Gandhi Centenary, Ghalib Centenary
and Guru Nanak Quincentenary. In the case of the Gandhi
Centenary, the Division handled the work of the Sub-Committee
for Gandhi Centenary Celebrations abroad, of which the External Affairs Minister has been the Chairman. The Gandhi Centenary celebrations were held in 93 countries with the help of
local committees. The main features of these celebrations were
publication of Gandhiji's work in foreign languages, Radio and
TV programmes, seminars, exhibitions, film shows, issue of
commemorative stamps, and the naming of streets after
Gandhiji. An essay competition on "Gandhi and the Emancipation of Man" in English, French, Spanish and Arabic
languages was also held. The publicity effort to back up these
celebrations as well as resulting from these celebrations was
handled by the Division. Fourteen prints in 16 mm of the
full length film (Mahatma) were supplied to our Missions in
Paris, Belgrade, Moscow, Bonn, Washington, Cairo, Colombo,
Nairobi, Ottawa, Port Louis, Kuala Lumpur, Manila, San
Francisco and Gangtok. One 35 mm print, Hindi, of this
was supplied to the Mission in Kathmandu. Selected parts of
the film were supplied to other Missions.
In connection with the Ghalib Centenary a documentary
film "Mirza Ghalib" was supplied to our Missions abroad.
An Indian News Review covering the international seminar on
the life and teachings of Guru Nanak was supplied to Baghdad,

Nairobi, Kampala and Suva, on the occasion of Guru Nanak's
<pg85>
Quincentenary. Feature articles and photographs for publicity
were supplied by the Division during these celebrations. The
celebrations of the Nanak Quincentenary abroad resulted in
considerable amount of publicity both at home and in foreign
countries.
In order to maintain close liaison with foreign correspondents and looking after representatives of foreign Press, Radio
and TV with India, the Division continued to extend appropriate facilities and assistance to members of the foreign Press
corps and TV representatives.
During the year approximately 500 press releases were
issued in Delhi. As before, they were distributed directly as
well as through the assistance of the P.I.B.
Forty foreign journalists visited India as guests of the
Government during this year. They came from Afghanistan,
Australia, Canada, Ceylon, G.D.R., Hungary, Iraq, Nepal, the
Netherlands, the Philippines, Turkey, the U.A.R., the U.K.,
U.S.S.R., and the U.S.A. Normally the programmes of these
guests included visits to various developmental projects of India
and interviews and meetings with leading personalities in
India.
The Division continued to fulfil the function of providing
the necessary coordination for cultural exchanges and contacts
with various foreign countries with whom we have cultural
agreements.
INDIA
USA CAMBODIA DENMARK ETHIOPIA MAURITIUS JAPAN LIBYA NORWAY PHILIPPINES
CHILE KOREA SAUDI ARABIA EGYPT CANADA YUGOSLAVIA ARGENTINA GERMANY
HUNGARY PERU VENEZUELA BRAZIL FRANCE SLOVAKIA URUGUAY POLAND AUSTRALIA
NEW ZEALAND BURMA ITALY SWITZERLAND UGANDA UNITED KINGDOM IRAQ LEBANON
RUSSIA SRI LANKA KENYA MALAYSIA NEPAL FIJI AFGHANISTAN TURKEY
Jul 01, 1969

PASSPORT AND CONSULAR SERVICES
CHAPTER XII

PASSPORT AND CONSULAR SERVICES
The Passport and Visa Division is responsible for the
implementation of the passport and emigration policy of the
the Government of India and control of the Central Passport
and Emigration Organisation and the Regional Passport and
Emigration offices in Bombay, Calcutta, Delhi, Lucknow,
Madras, Chandigarh and Ahmedabad. The offices at Chandigarh and Ahmedabad started functioning with effect from
Oct 03, 1969 and November 21, 1969, respectively. These
two new offices have been opened to meet the demands of
the States of Punjab and Gujarat as the existing five Regional
Passport Offices in the country were not considered sufficient
to cater to the needs of the travelling public.
During the year 1969, the percentage of rejected applications was a little more than .001% of the total number of
applications received. The number of applications received
in the six Regional Passport Offices, Goa, Daman and Diu
Administration and Chief Commissioner, Andaman and Nicobar Islands, including those brought forward from previous
year was 1,65,033. Out of this 1,44,908 passports were
issued.
At the Headquarters 2,818 official passports, 530 diplomatic passports and 2,618 visas to foreigners were issued.
REGIONAL PASSPORT OFFICERS' CONFERENCE
A Conference of Regional Passport Officers was held in
New Delhi on July 25 and 26 to consider the problems arising
out of the implementation of the Passports Act and Rules, 1967
and the procedures connected with the issue of passports and
<pg86>
<pg87>
other travel documents. Decisions were taken for the improvement of procedures and processing of passport applications
and prompt issue of passports and these are being implemented.
The Passports Rules are also being revised in the light of
decisions taken in the Conference.
ABOLITION OF SHORT-TERM VISAS
Agreements were signed with the Governments of Norway,
Sweden, Denmark and Finland for the abolition of short-term
visas for the nationals of these countries coming to India and
the Indian nationals going to these countries. The Agreements came into effect from July 1, 1969. According to the
agreements, nationals of India and the nationals of these four

countries holding valid passports shall be free to enter India
and these countries at any authorised border-crossing place
for a stay up to 90 days. This period of 90 days shall include
any period of stay during the preceding six months in India
or in all the four countries together. This waiver of visa,
however, does not exempt nationals of the four Nordic countries visiting India and the Indians visiting these countries from
the necessity of complying with, the laws and regulations in
force in India and in these countries regarding entry into
movement within and residence temporary or permanent.
They are not allowed to take up any employment, set up
business or exercise any profession; paid or unpaid. The
authorities of each country also reserve the right to refuse
permission to enter or stay in the country to persons considered
undesirable.
The nationals of the Federal Republic of Germany have
also been exempted from the requirements of a visa to enter
India on the same conditions.
EMIGRATION To BRITAIN
According to the statistics published by the British Government, Indian visitors to Britain. during 1968 numbered
<pg88>
65,665, as against 57,496 during 1967. The net inflow of
Indian nationals into Britain after deducting the number of
those who. left Britain during 1968 worked out to 28,340. The
corresponding figures in earlier years were 22,638 in 1967,
18,402 in 1966, 18,815 in 1965 and 15,513 in 1964. For the
calender year 1969 (up to 30.11.1969) 3,509 employment vouchers were issued by the British Government to Indian nationals
for employment in Britain as against 3,656 during 1968 and
4,126 during 1967.
During the year 1969 (up to 30.9.1969) 898 Indian nationals
had to return after reaching Britain as they were refused
admission into that country by the British Immigration authorities, mostly on the ground that they were seeking employment in Britain without employment vouchers. This matter
has been taken up with the U.K. High Commission in India
and the British Government in London.
EMIGRATION TO COUNTRIES OTHER THAN BRITAIN
Applications for passport facilities for countries other
than Britain, especially for African and Persian Gulf countries,
continued to be received from applicants who hed secured
employment as teachers, technicians, nurses etc., in these
countries. Passports were also issued to various groups or
artists/musicians touring abroad for cultural purposes.

The Protector of Emigrants at air or sea ports, registered
under the Emigration Act 1922, the departure of 1,793 skilled
workers, most of whom went to the Persian Gulf and East
African countries.
DEPORTATION
494 Indian nationals were deported from Ceylon on charges
of illicit immigration.
<pg89>
REPATRIATION
476 repatriates arrived in India from Malaysia in the year
1969.
REVENUE RECEIPTS
The Regional Passport Offices earned a revenue of Rs.
25,55,614 during the year 1969.
INDIA
USA NORWAY DENMARK FINLAND SWEDEN GERMANY UNITED KINGDOM MALAYSIA
Oct 03, 1969

ADMINISTRATION & ORGANIZATION
CHAPTER XIII
ADMINISTRATION & ORGANIZATION
ADMINISTRATION
During the year, there has been no change at the level of
Ministers and Secretaries.
Shri P. R. S. Mani, Additional Secretary (Foreign Service
Inspector), relinquished charge in December, 1969, prior to
his proceeding to Stockholm as Ambassador of India to
Sweden and has been replaced by Shri P.N. Menon.
MISSIONS
Three new Missions at the Embassy level, but for the

time being in the charge of a First Secretary/Charge d'Affaires
each, were established during the year at Sofia (Bulgaria),
Caracas (Vanezuela) and Lima (Peru). India has now 100
Resident Missions abroad (exclusive of Trade Missions under
the administrative and budgetary control of the Ministry of
Foreign Trade and two Special Offices in Bhutan and Sikkim)
with a total strength of 551 officers and 2812 staff members
(including locally recruited employees). These Missions,
together with concurrent accreditations held by some of them
carry Indian representation to 168 capitals and important
cities. A list of the Indian Missions/Posts abroad is given at
Appendix VIII.
HEADQUARTERS ORGANISATION
With the growing economic content of our external relations, the work-load on the Economic Division has been on
the increase. This Division was strengthened during the year
by the addition of one Joint Secretary with the minimum
supporting staff, by means of internal re-adjustmets.
<pg90>
<pg91>
Similarly, to meet the Liaison needs of the Ministry with
its increasingly wide range of activities, a new Coordination
Unit under the charge of a Director was established in November 1969.
Experience during the year showed a shortage of staff at
Headquarters to cope with the pressing requirements of
efficient administration of our Missions abroad, partly owing
to unavoidable shortfalls in recruitment in past Years. Action
has been initiated to meet the deficiencies as far as possible.
In implementation of Government's decision on the I.F.S.
Committee's recommendation, 14 officers of the Indian Information Service were inducted into the I.F.S. (A). 18 officers of
Grade I of the I.F.S. (B) were also promoted to the I.F.S. (A).
These in turn resulted in some enlargement of promotion
opportunities for officers at lower grades in the IFS (B).
FOREIGN SERVICE INSPECTIONS
Our Missions in Afghanistan, Pakistan (Dacca), Ceylon,
Iran, Lebanon, Libya, Indonesia, Canada, Guyana, Mexico,
Venezuela, Spain, Trinidad, U.A.R., U.S.A. and the U.K. were
inspected during the year. The Recommendations of the
Inspectors, which include those for reorganisation of work and
rationalisation of staff, are under implementation.
With the rising cost of living all over the world, there has

been the contingency of increasing expenditure on the Missions,
but the requirements were kept under continuous review and
expenditure was decreased wherever possible by reduction in
staff, and other economy measures. It is estimated that by
this process, additional expenditure to the extent of approximately Rs. 35 lakhs which would otherwise have been necessary
during the year, has been avoided and the net increase, in spite
of more Missions and Posts, kept down at Rs. 13.90 lakhs.
<pg92>
DELEGATIONS
30 Delegations were sponsored as a continuing attempt
to improve international relations and to foster goodwill.
Four of these represented visits by the Prime Minister and
seven by the Ministers of this Ministry. These visits played an
important part in improving India's relations with other
countries.
LANGUAGE TRAINING
The need for developing an expanded cadre of officials
who can serve as foreign language Interpreters to meet the
needs of the Ministry's growing activities, has been keenly felt.
It is proposed to meet the demand within a reasonable period
by utilising to the maximum extent the facilities which are
expected to be provided by the Institute of Foreign Languages,
proposed to be set up in Delhi.
EXPENDITURE
The expenditure of this Ministry in 1969-70 is estimated to
be Rs. 4,530.32 lakhs, as follows
(a) External Affairs
Headquarters
Missions/Posts

(Rs. in lakhs)
279.63
1151.89

Other Items
Contributions to the
United Nations and
Commonwealth Sectt. etc.
272.83
Demarcation of Boundaries
87.18
Central Passport and Emigration
Organization
39.32
Other Miscellaneous items
440.56
------------2271.41
------------<pg93>

(b) Other Revenue Expenditure
Subsidies and Aid
Subsidy to Sikkim

269.44

Subsidy to Bhutan
674.50
Aid to Nepal
1201.00
Aid to other developing
countries in Asia and Africa
45.00
Other Items
E.A. Hostel
2.18
I.C.M. Directorate
15.28
Grants-in-aid, Contribution, etc.
51.76
-------------2259.16
-------------Grand Total
4530.57
-------------Details by sub-heads of the expenditure at Headquarters,
Missions abroad and on External Publicity are given in
Appendix VIII.
The expenditure of Rs. 115.89 lakhs specifically of Indian
Missions abroad, works out to 0.4% of the Government's total
disbursements from Revenue. Considering India's important
role in international affairs, wide representation is necessary.
Even so, our Missions have, generally speaking, a minimum
complement of staff and are run at a low cost compared to
most other diplomatic services.
INDIA
SWEDEN BULGARIA CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC PERU VENEZUELA USA BHUTAN
AFGHANISTAN PAKISTAN CANADA GUYANA INDONESIA IRAN LEBANON LIBYA MEXICO
SPAIN UNITED KINGDOM NEPAL
Oct 03, 1969

Appendix I International Conferences, Congresses,
Seminars,
APPENDIX I

International Conferences, Congresses, Seminars, etc., in which Win
participated in 1969
ABROAD
1.

ECAFE-4th Session of the Asian Industrial Council, Bangkok,
Feb 12, 1969 to 18 February, 1969.

2.

ECAFE-17th Session of the Transport and Communications Committee, Bangkok, 3 to 11 February, 1969.

3.

ECAFE-21st Session of the Committee on industry and National
Resources, Bangkok, 19 to 26 February, 1969.

4.

ECAFE-12th Session of the Committee on Trade, Bangkok, 6 to
15 January, 1969.

5.

ECAFE-1st Session of the Telecommunications Sub-Committee
Bangkok, 22 to 29 January, 1969.

6.

UN Commission on Human Rights, 25th Session, Geneva, 17 February to 21 March, 1969.

7.

UN Commission on Human Rights-Seminar on the Special Problems relating to Human Rights in Developing Countries, Nicosia
(Cyprus), 26 June to 9 July, 1969.

8.

ECAFE-Workshop on Statistics of Children and Youth through
Sample Surveys, Bangkok, 4 to 10 February, 1969.

9.

ECAFE-Workshop on Annual Planning Techniques, Bangkok.

10. ECAFE-Joint ECAFE/ILO/FAO Regional Seminar-Implementation of Land Reform, Manila, June, 1969.
11. ECAFE-25th Session, Singapore, 15 to 28 April, 1969.
12. ECAFE-Conference of Asian Statisticians, 9th Session, Bangkok,
2 to 13 June, 1969.
13. ECAFE-Working Party on Small Scale Industries, 9th Session,
Bangkok, 17 to 23 June, 1969.
14. ECAFE-Working Party on Customs Administration, 5th Session,
Bangkok, 4 to 11 August 1969.
<pg95>
<pg96>
15. ECAFE-Advisory Committee of the Regional Housing Centres
(6th meeting), Bangkok, 30 June to 1 July, 1969.
Sub-Committee on Housing, Building and Planning (9th Session),
Bangkok, 2 to 9 July, 1969.
16. ECAFE-Preparatory meeting for establishing a coordinating body
for offshore prospecting in countries bordering the Indian Ocean,
Bangkok, 28 to 30 May, 1969.
17. ECAFE-Seminar on Experience of Major Administrative Reforms

for Development, Bangkok, 24 June to 1 July, 1969.
18. ECAFE-Meeting of Representatives of National Units for Regional
Economic Cooperation, Bangkok, 26 and 27 August, 1969.
19. ECAFE-Seminar on Mining Legislation and Administration, Manila,
16 to 23 October, 1969.
20. ECAFE-Seminar on Statistics for Planning, Moscow, 22 September
to 12 October, 1969.
21. ECAFE-4th Symposium on the Development of the Petroleum
Resources of Asia and the Far East, Canberra, 27 October to 10
November, 1969.
22. ECAFE-Inaugural Session of the Asian Coconut Community,
Colombo, 2 to 8 September, 1969.
23. ECAFE-2nd Symposium on Development of Deltaic Areas, Tokyo,
4 to 13 November, 1969.
24. ECAFE-5th Working Group of Experts on National Accounts:
Household Sector Accounts, Bangkok, 1 to 8 December, 1969.
25. ECAFE-Inter-regional Trade Promotion Talks, Tehran, 1 to 10
October, 1969.
26. ECAFE-Seminar on Evaluation of Family Planning Programmes,
Bangkok, 24 November to 12 December, 1969.
27. ECAFE-8th Session of the Highways and Highway Transport
Committee, Bangkok, 16 to 23 December, 1969.
28. 3rd Session of the Preparatory Committee for 2nd Development
Decade, Geneva, 30 June to 11 July, 1969.
29. 6th Session of the Committee on Housing, Building and Planning,
New York, 2 to 12 September, 1969.
<pg97>
30. XXIV Session of UN General Assembly, New York, 16 September
to 17 December, 1969.
31. 6th Session of the IMCO Assembly, London, 15 to 30 October, 1969.
32. International Conference on Marine Pollution Damage, Brussels,
10 to 28 November, 1969.
33. UNCTAD Working Group Conference on International Shipping
Legislation, Geneva, 1 to 12 December, 1969.
34. 46th Session of ECOSOC, New York, 12 May to 6 June, 1969.
35. 47th Session of ECOSOC, Geneva, 14 July to 8 August, 1969.
36. Meetings of Committee for Programme and Co-ordination and
Administrative Committee on Co-ordination, Geneva, July, 1969.
37. 4th Session of the Preparatory Committee for the 2nd Development

Decade, New York, 29 September to 9 October, 1969.
38. Resumed 47th Session of ECOSOC, New York, October-November,
1969.
39. 8th Session of the Governing Council of the UNDP, New York.
40. Pledging Conference on UNDP, New York.
41. UN Pledging Conference on UN Capital Development Fund, New
York.
42. 9th Session of the Trade and Development Board, Geneva, 26 August
to 12 September, 1969.
43. 22nd Session of WHO Regional Committee for South East Asia,
Kathmandu, 29 September to 5 October, 1969.
44. 22nd World Health Assembly, Boston, July, 1969.
45. 174th Session of the Governing Body of ILO, Geneva, FebruaryMarch, 1969.
46. 53rd Session of the ILO Conference, Geneva, 4 to 26 June, 1969.
47. 175th Session of the Governing Body of ILO, Geneva, 26 to 31 May
and 27 June, 1969.
48. Preparatory Technical Maritime Conference of ILO, Geneva, 15
to 26 September, 1969.
49. ILO Tripartite Technical Meeting for Leather and Footwear Industry, Geneva, 13 to 24 October, 1969.
<pg98>
50.

8th Session of the Iron and Steel Committee of the ILO, Geneva,
29 September to 10 October, 1969.

51.

177th Session of the Governing Council of ILO, Geneva, November,
1969.

52.

13th Session of the FAO Study Group on Rice, Manila, 20 to 27
March, 1969.

53.

Meeting of the FAO Ad-hoc Committee on Forestry, Rome, 25 to
31 March, 1969.

54.

2nd Session of the Committee on Statistics, Panama City, 14 and 15
April, 1969.

55.

3rd Session of the FAO Study Group on Bananas, Panama City, 16
to 22 April, 1969.

56.

FAO/IAEA Study Group meeting on the use of Isotopes and Radiation in Investigations of Fertiliser and Water use efficiency, Bangkok,
21 to 25 April, 1969.

57.

8th Session of the Asia Pacific Forestry Commission and related study

tour in Japan and Korea, 28 April to 10 May, 1969.
58.

4th Session of FAO Committee on Fisheries, Rome, 17 to 23 April,
1969.

59.

FAO/ILO Danish Inter-regional Seminar on Cooperative Distribution of Farm Supplies, Denmark, 24 July to 23 August, 1969.

60.

1st Session of the Ad-hoc Working Party on International Arrangement for Stabilisation of Tea Prices, Rome, 5 to 16 May, 1969.

61.

FAO Seminar on Communications and Farm Broadcasting, Indonesia, 17 June to 1 July, 1969.

62.

1st Session of the FAO Working Group on Sub-Committee on Surplus Disposals Functions, Rome, 24 to 28 February, 1969.

63.

7th Session of the Plant Protection Committee for the South East
Asia and the meeting of Standing Technical Sub-Committee, Noumea
(New Caledonia), 13 to 23 July, 1969.

64.

12th Session of the FAO Study Group on Grains, Rome, 21 to 28
May, 1969.

65.

Symposium on the Nature, Induction and Utilisation of Mutations
in Plant, Pullman, Washington, 14 to 18 July, 1969.
<pg99>

66.

Meeting of the FAO/IAEA Coordinated Programme on the Production and use of induced Mutations in Plant Breedings, Washington,
19 July, 1969.

67.

FAO Training Centre on Forest Free, Improvement, Raleigh, North
Carolina (USA), 30 June to 25 July, 1969.

68.

Meeting of the Representatives of Tea Exporting Countries, Mauritius, 23 July to 1 August, 1969.

69.

2nd World Consultation on Forest Free Breeding, Washington,
7 to 16 August, 1969 and the related pre-conference tours, 30 July
to 6 August, 1969.

70.

FAO Technical Conference on Fish Inspection and Quality Control,
Halifax (Canada), 15 to 25 July, 1969.

71.

O.I.E./FAO Regional Conference on Epizootics, Canberra, 20 to
28 October, 1969.

72.

FAO/ILO Seminar on Forest Working Technique and Training of
Forest Workers for the Asian Region, Tokyo (Japan), 13 August to
6 September, 1969.

73.

8th Session of the Consultative Committee of the FAO Study Group
on Jute, Kenaf, and allied Fibres, Rome, 15 to 18 September, 1969.

74.

FAO/SIDA Seminar on Forestry Public Relations, Nicosia (Cyprus),
29 September to 18 October, 1969.

75.

Meeting of the FAO Statistical Advisory Committee, Rome, 15

to 23 September, 1969.
76.

Special Session of the FAO Study Group on Oil Seeds, Oils and Fats,
London, December, 1969.

77.

FAO Symposium on Resistance of Agricultural Pests and Pesticides,
Rome, 22 to 26 September, 1969.

78.

2nd Session of the FAO Committee on Forest Development in the
Tropics, Italy, 21 to 24 October, 1969.

79.

FAO/ECAFE Conference of Government Experts on Implementation of Incentive Measures to Developing countries (Far East),
Bangkok, 4 to 11 October, 1969.

80.

1st Session of the Consultative Committee on Tea, Rome, 1 to 5
December, 1969.
<pg100>

81.

Meeting of Tea Exporting Countries to finalise Mauritius Agreement
for 1970, Rome, 28 and 29 November, 1969.

82.

FAO Workshop on the Appraisal and Evaluation of Agricultural
Projects, Rome, 11 to 17 December, 1969.

83.

FAO Meeting on Long term Projections, Rome, 15 to 19 December,
1969.

84.

Indian Ocean Fisheries Commission/Indo-Pacific Fisheries Council
Working Party on Fisheries Statistics, Bangkok, 1 to 5 December,
1969.

85.

Regional Seminar on the Marketing of Fruit and Vegetables in Asia
and the Far East, Manila, 10 to 20 December, 1969.

86.

15th Session of the Inter-Government Committee of the World Food
Programme, Rome, 5 to 13 May, 1969.

87.

16th Session of the Inter-Governmental Committee of the World
Food Programme, Rome, 13 to 18 October, 1969.

88.

52nd Session of the FAO Council, Rome, 9 to 20 June, 1969.

89.

53rd Session of the FAO Council, Rome, 3 to 6 November, 1969.

90.

54th Session of the FAO Council, Rome, November, 1969.

91.

15th FAO General Conference, Rome, 8 to 27 November, 1969.

92.

Consultation on Desert Locust Field Research, Beirut, 25 to 27
March, 1969.

93.

5th Session of the Commission for Controlling the Desert Locust
in the Eastern Region of South West Asia and the 4th Session of
the Executive Committee of the Commission, Karachi (Pakistan),
5 to 13 March, 1969.

94.

13th Session of the FAO Desert Locust Control Committee, Rome,
6 to 10 October, 1969.

95.

44th Session of FAO Committee on Commodity Problems, Rome,
29 September to 8 October, 1969.

96.

24th Session of the Administrative Council of the I.T.U., Geneva,
3 to 24 May, 1969.

97.

Meeting of C.C.I.R. International Working Party of Re-organisation of C.C.I.R., Geneva, 27 May to 7 June, 1969.
<pg101>

98.

16th Congress of the Universal Postal Union (UPU), Tokyo, 1 to
14 November, 1969.

99.

Final Meetings of the Study Groups of the International Radio
Consultative Committee (C.C.I.R.), Geneva, 3 September to 15
October, 1969.

100.

Meeting of the Experts Committee to consider a Model Law for
Developing Countries on Industrial Designs held under the auspices
of BIRPI, Geneva, 27 to 31 October, 1969.

101.

Meeting of the Permanent Committee of UNIDROIT (International
Institute for the Unification of Private Law), Rome, 16 July, 1969.

102.

Inter-Parliamentary Union's Spring Meetings, Vienna, April, 1969.

103.

21st General Assembly of the International Union of Official Travel
Organisation, Dublin, 28 October to 5 November, 1969.

104.

World Conference on World Peace through Law and World Assembly of Judges, Bangkok, 7 to 12 September, 1969.

105.

7th Ordinary Session of the Inter-Union Coordination Committee
of BIRPI, Geneva, 22 to 26 September, 1969.

106.

Meeting of the Executive Council (and of Sub-committees) of the
U.P.U., Berne, 3 to 22 March, 1969.

107.

U.P.U. Seminar, Denmark, June, 1969.

108.

Asian Oceanic Regional Postal Seminar, Bangkok, 5 to 19 June, 1969.

109.

Informal Meeting of the Postal Officials of the Commonwealth
Countries, Hong Kong, 23 to 25 September, 1969.

110.

International Governmental Conference on Tourism, Sofia, 15 to 28
May, 1969.

111.

1st Session of the International Copyright Joint Study Group,
Washington, 29 September to 3 October, 1969.

112.

1st Meeting of the Working Group on the Functions of the Consultative Sub-Committee on Surplus Disposals (CSD), Rome, 24 to
28 February, 1969,

113,

3rd Meeting of the FAO Ad-hoc Consultations on Tea, Kampala
(Uganda), 6 to 14 January, 1969.

114.

7th International Congress of Irrigation and Drainage, Mexico City,
12 to 23 April. 1969.
<pg102>

115.

6th Session of the International Association of Ports and Harbours.
Melbourne (Australia), 2 to 9 March, 1969.

116.

Travel Research Seminar under the auspices of P.A.T.A. (Pacific Area
Travel Association), Hong Kong, 20 to 22 October, 1969.

117.

2nd Technical Conference on Tin held under the auspices of International Tin Council, Bangkok, 17 to 29 November, 1969.

118.

28th Plenary Meeting of the International Cotton Advisory Committee and the Annual Meeting of the General Assembly of the
International Institute of Cotton, Kampala (Uganda), 30 May to
11 June, 1969.

119.

18th Annual Conference of the Pacific Area Travel Association and
the 8th Workshop, Bangkok and Chiangmai (Thailand), 23 to 31
January, 1969.

120.

14th Session of the Permanent Committee of the Berne Union, Paris,
15 to 19 December, 1969.

121.

13th International Congress of the International Association for
Hydraulic Research, Kyoto (Japan), 31 August to 5 September,
1969, followed by Study Tour, 6 to 11 September, 1969.

122.

Meeting of the Joint Committee of the Inter-Governmental Copyright Committee of the Universal Copyright Convention 1952 and the
Permanent Committee set up under the Berne Union, Paris, 3 to 7
February, 1969.

123.

10th Session of the Asian African Consultative Committee (Law of
International Rivers), Karachi, 21 to 31 January, 1969.

124.

9th Session of the ECA, Addis Ababa, February, 1969.

125.

2nd International Conference in support of the Arab People, Cairo,
25 January, 1969.

126.

Asian Symposium
November, 1969.

127.

International Conference on Tropical and Sub-tropical Fruits, London,

of National Parent Teachers Association, Iran,

15 to 19 September, 1969.
128.

International Congress of Military Medicine and Pharmacy, Dublin
29 September to 2 October, 1969.
<pg103>

129.

Meeting of the General Assembly of the International Centre for the
Study of the Preservation and Restoration of Cultural Property,
Venice, 14 to 17 April, 1969.

130.

International Symposium on future role of Coal in the national and

world economics, France, 15 to 22 September, 1969.
131.

International Criminal Police Organisation, Mexico City, 13 to 18
October, 1969.

132.

37th General Conference of the O.I.E., Paris, 19 to 24 May, 1969.

133.

International Marine and Shipping Conference, 1969 and Domestic
Conference, London, 11 to 20 June, 1969.

134.

International Congress of Crystallography, USA, 6 to 27 August,
1969.

135.

Annual Meeting of the International Dairy Federation, Moscow,
10 to 19 June, 1969.

136.

International Seminar on Modern Railway Operation and Traction,
Berlin, 28 August to 19 September, 1969.

137.

Meeting of the Permanent Committee of the IUFRO, Oslo, 27 August
to 2 September, 1969.

138.

Inter-Regional Seminar on the Application of Demographic Data
and Studies to Development Planning, Kiev, (U.S.S.R.) 15 to 26
September, 1969.

139.

Inter-Regional Seminar on Flood Damage Prevention Measures and
Management, USSR, 25 September to 20 October, 1969.

140.

2nd International Symposium on Traffic Education, Naples, 13 to
15 June, 1969.

141.

International Course for Civil Defence Instructors being conducted
by I.C.D.O., Geneva, 4 to 30 August, 1969.

142.

20th Conference of the International Union against Tuberculosis,
New York, August/September, 1969.

143.

Conference of the International Society for Soil Mechanics and
Foundation Engineering, Mexico City, 22 August to 2 September,
1969.

144.

Speakers Conference, Canada, 5 to 7 September, 1969.
<pg104>

145.

International Homoeopathic Congress, Athens, 21 to 28 September,
1969.

146.

5th Conference on the Repression of Falsification of Currency, Mexico
City, 7 to 10 October, 1969.

147.

76th Annual Conference of Military Surgeons of the USA, Washington, 16 to 19 November, 1969.

148.

3rd Session of Industrial Development Board, Vienna, 24 April to
15 May, 1969.

149.

UNIDO-Inter-Regional Seminar on Incentive Policies for Industrial Development, Vienna, 10 to 20 March, 1969.

150.

UNIDO-Organisation of an In-Plant Training Programme in the
field of Shoe Industry at Prague and Gottwaldon-Standardisation
on Steel Qualities and Products, Chile, 8 September to 28 November,
1969.

151.

Standardisation on Steel Qualities and Products under Special Industrial Services Programme of the UN, Chile, 1 November to 1 December, 1969.

152.

International Seminar on Industrial Financing of Public Manufacturing Enterprises, Rome, December, 1969.

153.

Meeting for Promotion of Fertilizers and Pesticides, Tehran, 9 to 11
October, 1969.

154.

Workshop on the use of Consultants, Tokyo, 1 to 13 December, 1969.

155.

Fibro-Cement Composites, Vienna, 20 to 24 October, 1969.

156.

International Symposium on Chemical Industries in Developing
Countries, New York, September, 1969.

157.

UNITAR-Regional Seminar in International Law in Asia, New
York, February, 1969.

158.

UNITAR-Regional Seminar in techniques of technical assistance,
Bangkok, 10 to 28 March, 1969.

159.

UN training and refresher course in International Law, Quezon
(Philippines), 11 to 29 August, 1969.

160.

Symposium on large Permanent Underground Openings organised by
the Norwegian National Group-International Society of Rocks
Mechanics, Oslo, 23 to 25 September, 1969.
<pg105>

161.

13th Session of the International Lead and Zinc Study Group, Geneva
6 to 14 October, 1969.

162.

OECD Meeting of Donors and Recipients of International Assistance in the field of population, Paris, 19 to 20 November, 1969.

163.

Meetings of the Executive Committee and Planning Committee of
the International Organisation of Standardisation, Geneva, 24 to 26
September, 1969.

164.

Meeting of I.S.O. Hot Rolled and Cold Reduced Steel Sheet Strip
and Coil, Dusseldorf (West Germany), 8 to 12 September, 1969.

165.

Meeting of I.S.O. Petroleum Products, Berlin, 22 to 24 September,
1969.

166.

21st Session of the Executive Committee of W.M.O., Geneva, 29
May to 13 June, 1969.

167.

UNESCO-Meeting on Population and Family, Paris, 22 to 24
September, 1969.

168.

UNESCO-Asian Regional Institute for School Building Research,
Ceylon, 3 to 12 October, 1969.

169.

UNESCO-Workshop on Mathematics teaching of first level education in Asia, Tokyo, 18 October to 7 November, 1969.

170.

2nd Session of the Council of International Bureau of Education,
Geneva, 8 to 12 December, 1969.

171.

International Conference on the Practical and Scientific results of the
International Hydrological decade and on International Cooperation in Hydrology, Paris, 8 to 16 December, 1969.
IN INDIA

1.

FAO Regional Seminar on Induced Breeding of Cultivated Fishes,
Cuttack and Bombay, 15 July to 18 August, 1969.

2.

5th FAO/IAEA Research Coordination Meeting on the use of Induced
Mutations in Rice Breeding, New Delhi, 22 to 25 September, 1969.

3.

57th Inter-parliamentary Union Conference, New Delhi, 30 October
to 7 November, 1969.

4.

International Cooperative Seminar, under the auspices of the International Cooperative Alliance, New Delhi, 2 to 13 February, 1969.
<pg106>

5.

Meeting of the International Committee of the International Council
of Museums, New Delhi, 2 November, 1969; Calcutta, 3 November,
1969 and Bangalore, 6 to 14 November, 1969.

6.

10th General Assembly of the International Union of Conservation
of Nature and Natural Resources, New Delhi, 24 November to 7
December, 1969.

7.

Symposium on Mango & Mango Culture, New Delhi, July, 1969.

8.

Asian Tourist Conference, New Delhi, 13 to 15 March, 1969.

9.

ECAFE-5th Meeting, Asian High-way Co-ordinating Committee,
New Delhi, 10 to 12 November, 1969.

10.

ECAFE-10th Session of the Railway Sub-Committee, New Delhi,
13 to 21 November, 1969.

11.

International Sessional Sub-Committee on the Laws of International
Rivers of the Asian African Legal Consultative Committee, New Delhi,
15 to 20 December, 1969.

12.

Society for International Development Conference, New Delhi, 14
to 17 November, 1969.

13.

Seminar on Education of Adults in the Changing Pattern of Society,
22 to 30 May, 1969.

14.

11th Conference of the Society for International Development, 14
to 17 November, 1969.

15.

Seminar on Problems of Modernisation under the Department of
Sociology of University of Bombay, November, 1969.

USA
SWITZERLAND CYPRUS PHILIPPINES REPUBLIC OF SINGAPORE INDIA RUSSIA
AUSTRALIA SRI LANKA JAPAN IRAN UNITED KINGDOM BELGIUM NEPAL ITALY
PANAMA KOREA DENMARK CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC CANADA MAURITIUS LEBANON
PAKISTAN AUSTRIA IRELAND HONG KONG BULGARIA UGANDA LATVIA MEXICO
THAILAND FRANCE ETHIOPIA EGYPT GERMANY NORWAY UKRAINE GREECE CZECH
REPUBLIC CHILE
Feb 12, 1969

Appendix II International Organisations of which India is a Member

APPENDIX II
International Organisations of which India is a Member
United Nations and its Specialised Agencies
1.

General Assembly.

2.

Committees and Commissions of the General Assembly:
(a)

Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space.

(b)

Committee on Agreements for a Conference for the Purpose
of Reviewing the Charter.

(c)

Special Committee of 24 on the situation with regard to the
implementation of the Declaration on the granting of independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples:
(i) Its Working Group.
(ii) Sub-Committee on Petitions.
(iii) Sub-Committee (Pacific Territories).

(d)

Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation

(e)

Peace Observation Commission.

(f)

Disarmament Commission,

(g)

International Law Commission.

(h)

Administrative Tribunal.

(i)

Committee on Disarmament.

(j)

Investment Committee.

(k)

Working group of 21 to examine Administrative and Budge-

tary Procedures of the United Nations.
(l)

UN Committee for International Cooperation Year.

(m)

Scientific Advisory Committee.

(n)

Special Committee on Peace-Keeping Operations.

(o)

Special Committee on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation among States.

(p)

Committee on Conferences.
<pg107>
<pg108>

(q) UN Council for Namibia.
(r) UN Commission on International Trade Law.
3.

Economic and Social Council.

4.

Functional Commissions and Committees of ECOSOC:
(a) Commission of Human Rights.

5.

(b)

Commission on Narcotic Drugs.

(c)

Statistical Commission.

(d)

Population Commission.

(e)

Commission for Social Development.

(f)

Regional Commission of the Economic and Social Council;
Economic Commission for Asia and the Far East (ECAFE).

(g)

Advisory Committee of Experts on the prevention of crime
and treatment of offenders.

(h)

Preparatory Committee for the UN Conference on Human
Environment.

(i)

Preparatory Committee for the Second Development Decade.

Other Subsidiary Bodies of the Economic and Social Council:
(a)

Executive Board of UN Children's Fund (UNICEF).

(b)

UN/FAO Inter-Governmental Committee on the World Food
Programme.

(c)

Advisory Committee on the Application of Science and Technology and Development.

(d)

Committee for Programme and Coordination.

(e)

Committee on non-governmental Organisations.

(f)

Committee for Development Planning.

(g)

Ad Hoc Working Group on the question of a Declaration on
International Economic Cooperation.

(h)

Programme Committee of UNICEF.

(i)

FAO/UNICEF Joint Policy Committee.
<pg109>

6.

UN Conference on Trade and Development (The Trade and
Development Board) :
(a)

Committee on Commodities.

(b)

Permanent Sub-Committee on Commodities.

(c)

Committee on Manufactures.

(d)

Committee on Invisibles and Financing related to Trade.

(e)

Inter-governmental Group on Supplementary Financing.

(f)

Committee on Shipping.

7.

United Nations Industrial Development Organisation-(UNIDO)
-Industrial Development Board.

8.

United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)-Governing
Council.

9.

UN

Specialised Agencies:

(a)

Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO).

(b)

International Bank of Reconstruction and Development
(IBRD).

(c)

International Finance Corporation (IFC).

(d)

International Monetary Fund (IMF).

(e)

International Development Association (IDA).

(f)

International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO).

(g)

International Telecommunication Union (ITU).

(h)

World Meteorological Organisation (WMO).

(i)

Universal Postal Union (UPU).

(j)

International Labour Organisation (ILO).

(k)

UN Educational Scientific and Cultural Organisation
(UNESCO).

(l)

World Health Organisation (WHO).

(m) Inter-Governmental Maritime Consultative Organisation
(IMCO).
10.

International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA).

11.

International Agricultural Aviation Centre, The Hague.

12.

International Union for Conservation of Nature & Natural Resources Switzerland.

13.

International Narcotics Control Board
<pg110>
Other Inter-governmental Organisations

1.

Afro-Asian Rural Reconstruction Organisation,

New Delhi

2.

Asian African Lega Consultative Committee, New Delhi.

3.

Asian Development Bank.

4.

Asian Productivity Organisation, Tokyo.

5.

Commonwealth Advisory Aeronautical Research Council, London.

6.

Commonwealth Air Transport Council (CATC),

7.

Commonwealth Agriculture Bureau, London.

8.

Commonwealth Telecommunication Board, London.

9.

General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.

10.

Indo-Pacific Fisheries Council, Bangkok.

11.

International Bureau of Education, Geneva.

12.

International Centre for the Study of Preservation and Restoration of Cultural Property, Rome.

13.

International Committee of Military Medicine and Pharmacy
(Belgium).

14.

International Institute

of Refrigeration, Paris.

15.

International Institute

for the Unification of Private Law.

16.

International

Lead and Zinc Study Group, New York.

17.

International

Office of Epizootics, Paris.

18.

International

Sugar Council, London.

19.

International

Tin Council, London.

20.

International

Wheat Council, London.

21.

Asian Statisticians Conference.

22.

Commonwealth Statisticians Conference.
Non-Governmental Organisations

1.

Advisory Committee of Marine Resources Research.

2.

Asian Broadcasting Conference, Tokyo.

3.

American Society of Travel Agents, New York.
<pg111>

4.

Association of Secretaries General of Parliaments.

5.

British Electrical and Allied Institutes Research Association.

6.

British Institute of International and Comparative Law.

7.

Committee on Space Research (COSPAR), of the International
Council of Scientific Union.

8.

Commonwealth Forestry Institute.

9.

Commonwealth Broadcasting Conference.

10.

Commonwealth Defence Science Organization.

11.

Commonwealth Parliamentary Association, London.

12.

Commonwealth Joint Services Committee on Clothing and General
Stores.

13.

Commonwealth Sugar Agreement.

14.

Commonwealth War Graves Commission.

15.

Conference International des Grandes Resaux Electriques, Paris.

16.

Universal Federation of Travel Agents Association (UFTAA).

17.

International Air Transport Association, Montreal.

18.

International Association for Bridges and Structural Engineering,
Zurich.

19.

International Association of Hydraulic Research, Delft.

20.

International Association for the Exchange of Students for Technical Experience, Stockholm.

21.

International Association of Cereal Chemistry, Vienna.

22.

International

Association of Light House Authorities, Paris.

23.

International

Association of Ports and Harbours, Tokyo.

24.

International

Coffee Council.

25.

International Commission on Irrigation and Drainage, New Delhi.

26.

International Commission on Large Dams, Paris.

27.

International Council of Archives, Paris.

28.

International Council of Building Research Studies and Documen
tation, Rotterdam.
<pg112>

29.

International Council for Bird Preservation, London.

30.

International Council for Monuments and Sites.

31.

International Criminal Police Commission, Paris.

32.

International Customs Tariff Bureau, Brussels.

33.

International Dairy Federation, Brussels.

34.

International Federation of Film Archives, Paris.

35.

International
Paris.

Liaison Centre of Cinema and Television Schools,

36.

International

Mathematical Union, Zurich.

37.

International

Union for Pure and Applied Biophysics.

38.

International

Railway Congress Association, Brussels.

39.

International

Seed Testing Association, Wageningan.

40.

International

Social Security Association.

41.

International Society of Soil Mechanics and Foundation Engineering, London.

42.

International

Society for Horticutural Science, The Hague.

43.

International

Secretariat for Voluntary Service, Washington.

44.

International Statistical Institute, The Hague.

45.

International Union of Geodesy and Geophysics, Paris.

46.

International Union of Official Travel Organisations, Geneva.

47.

International Union of Astronomy, Greenwich.

48.

International Union Against Venereal Diseases and Treponemetoses, Paris.

49.

International Union of Geological Sciences, Copenhagen.

50.

International Union of Railways, Paris,

51.

Inter-Parliamentary Union, Geneva.

52.

Pacific Area Travel Association, San Francisco.

53.

Permanent International Association of Navigation Congress,
Brussels.
<pg113>

54.

Permanent International Association of Road Congress Paris.

55.

World Power Conference, Paris.

56.

World Poultry Science Association, London.

57.

World Petroleum Congress.

58.

Asian Electronic Union.

59.

International Council of Scientific Unions.

60.

International

Astronomical Union.

61.

International

Union of Pure & Applied Chemistry.

62.

International

Scientific Radio Union.

63.

International

Union of Pure & Applied Physics.

64.

International

Union of Biological Sciences.

65.

International Geographical Union.

66.

International

Union of Crystallography.

67.

International

Union of Theoretical

68.

International

Union of the History & Philosophy of Science.

69.

International Mathematical Union.

70.

International

Union of Physiological Sciences.

71.

International

Union of Biochemistry.

72.

International

Union of Geological Sciences.

73.

International

Union for Pure & Applied Biophysics.

INDIA
USA NAMIBIA RUSSIA SWITZERLAND JAPAN
FRANCE SWEDEN AUSTRIA LATVIA DENMARK

and Applied Mechanics.

UNITED KINGDOM

Feb 12, 1969

Appendix III India's Membership of the Governing Bodies

ITALY

BELGIUM

APPENDIX III
India's Membership of the Governing Bodies of the Specialised
Agencies and other Agencies of the United Nations
S. No.

Name of Agency

Governing body on which
India is represented

1.

International Labour Organisation(ILO)

Governing Body

2.

Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO)

Council

3.

United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organisation (UNESCO)

Executive Board

4.

World Meteorological Organisation (WMO)

Executive Committee

5.

International Civil Aviation Organisation
(ICAO)

Executive Council

6.

Intergovernmental Maritime Consultative
Organisation (IMCO)

Executive Board

7.

International Telecommunication Union
(ITU)

Administrative Council

8.

Universal Postal Union (UPU)

Executive Council

9.

International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)

Board of Governors

10. United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF)

Executive Board

11. United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development (UNCTAD)

Trade and Development
Board

12. United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP)

Governing Council

13. United Nations Institute for Training and
Research (UNITAR)

Board of Trustees

14. United Nations Industrial Development
Organisation (UNIDO)

Industrial Development
Board

15. World Food Programme (WFP)

Intergovernmental, Committee

In addition to the above, India is represented by an Executive Director
n each of the following Organisations:
1.
2.
3.
4.

International
International
International
International

Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD).
Monetary Fund (IMF).
Finance Corporation (IFC).
Development Association (IDA).
<pg114>

INDIA
USA
Feb 12, 1969

Appendix IV Foreign Diplomatic Missions in India

APPENDIX IV
Foreign Diplomatic Missions in India
(I)

Embassies

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.

Afghanistan
Algeria
Argentina
Austria
Belgium
Brazil
Bulgaria
Burma
Cambodia
Chile
China
Colombia
Congo (Democratic Republic)
Cuba
Czechoslovakia
Denmark
Ethiopia
Finland
France
Germany (Federal Republic)
Greece
Holy See (Apostolic Nunciature)
Hungary
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Ireland
Italy
Japan

(II)

High Commissions

1.
2.
3.
4.

Australia
Britain
Canada
Ceylon
<pg115>
<pg116>

30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.
41.
42.
43.
44.
45.
46.
47.
48.
49.
50.
51.
52.
53.
54.
55.
56.
57.
58.

Jordan
Kuwait
Laos
Lebanon
Mexico
Mongolia
Morocco
Nepal,
Netherlands
Norway
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Rumania
Saudi Arabia
Spain
Sudan
Sweden
Switzerland
Syria
Thailand
Turkey
U.S.S.R.
U.A.R.
U.S.A.
Uruguay
Venezuela
Yemen
Yugoslavia

5.
6.
7.
8.

Ghana
Kenya
Malaysia
Mauritius

9.
10.
11.
12.

New Zealand
Nigeria
Pakistan
Singapore

(III)
1.

13. Tanzania
14. Trinidad and Tobago
15. Uganda

Legation

Albania (stationed at Baghdad)

(IV) Sub-offices of High Commission
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

Office
Office
Office
Office
Office
Office
Office

of
of
of
of
of
of
of

the
the
the
the
the
the
the

Deputy High Commissioner of Ceylon at Madras.
Assistant High Commissioner for Malaysia at Madras.
Deputy High Commissioner for Pakistan at Calcutta.
Deputy High Commissioner for Australia at Bombay.
Deputy High Commissioner for Britain at Bombay.
Deputy High Commissioner for Britain at Calcutta.
Deputy High Commissioner for Britain at Madras.

INDIA
AFGHANISTAN JORDAN ALGERIA KUWAIT ARGENTINA LAOS AUSTRIA LEBANON USA
BELGIUM MEXICO BRAZIL MONGOLIA BULGARIA MOROCCO BURMA NEPAL CAMBODIA
CHILE NORWAY CHINA PERU COLOMBIA PHILIPPINES CONGO POLAND CUBA SAUDI
ARABIA SLOVAKIA DENMARK SPAIN ETHIOPIA SUDAN FINLAND SWEDEN FRANCE
SWITZERLAND GERMANY SYRIA GREECE THAILAND TURKEY HUNGARY INDONESIA
IRAN IRAQ URUGUAY IRELAND VENEZUELA ITALY YEMEN JAPAN YUGOSLAVIA
AUSTRALIA GHANA KENYA CANADA MALAYSIA MAURITIUS NEW ZEALAND TANZANIA
NIGER NIGERIA TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO PAKISTAN UGANDA REPUBLIC OF SINGAPORE
ALBANIA
Feb 12, 1969

Appendix V Foreign Consular Offices in India

APPENDIX V
Foreign Consular Offices in India
------------------------------------------------------------------------S. No. Country
Location
Status
------------------------------------------------------------------------1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.

Afghanistan
Austria
Austria
Austria
Belgium
Belgium
Belgium
Bolivia
Bolivia

Bombay
Bombay
Madras
Calcutta
Bombay
Calcutta
Madras
Bombay
Calcutta

Consulate General
Hon. Consulate General
Hon. Consulate
Hon. Consulate
Consulate General
Consulate General
Hon. Consulate
Hon. Consulate
Hon. Consulate General

10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.

Brazil
Brazil
Brazil
Burma
Burma
Colombia
Costa Rica
Costa Rica
Czechoslovakia
Czechoslovakia
Denmark
Denmark
Denmark
Denmark
Dominican Republic
Dominican Republic
Equador
El Salvador
Ethiopia
Ethiopia
Finland
Finland
Finland
France
France

Bombay
Calcutta
Madras
Calcutta
Madras
Bombay
Bombay
Madras
Bombay
Calcutta
Bombay
Calcutta
Cochin
Madras
Bombay
Calcutta
Calcutta
Calcutta
Bombay
Calcutta
Bombay
Calcutta
Madras
Bombay
Calcutta

Consulate
Hon. Consulate
Hon. Consulate
Consulate General
Vice Consulate
Hon. Consulate
Hon. Consulate General
Hon. Consulate General
Consulate General
Consulate General
Hon. Consulate General
Hon. Consulate
Hon. Consulate
Hon. Consulate
Hon. Consulate General
Hon. Consulate
Hon. Consulate
Hon. Consulate
Hon. Consulate General
Hon. Consulate General
Hon. Consulate
Hon. Consulate
Hon. Consulate
Consulate General
Consulate General

<pg117>
<pg118>
------------------------------------------------------------------------S. No. Country
Location
Status
------------------------------------------------------------------------35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.
41.
42.
43.
44.
45.
46.
47.
48.
49.
50.
51.
52.
53.
54.
55.
50.
57.
58.
59.
60.

France
France
France
Germany
Germany
Germany
Greece
Greece
Haiti
Haiti
Indonesia
Indonesia
Iran
Iran
Iraq
Israel
Italy
Italy
Italy
Japan
Japan
Japan
Jordan
Kuwait
Lebanon
Liberia

Cochin
Madras
Pondicherry
Calcutta
Madras
Bombay
Bombay
Calcutta
Calcutta
Bombay
Bombay
Calcutta
Bombay
Hyderabad
Bombay
Bombay
Bombay
Calcutta
Cochin
Calcutta
Bombay
Madras
Bombay
Bombay
Calcutta
Calcutta

Hon. Consular Agent
Consulate General
Consulate General
Consulate General
Consulate General
Consulate General
Hon. Consulate General
Hon. Consulate General
Hon. Consulate
Hon. Consulate
Consulate
Hon. Consulate
Consulate General
Consulate General
Consulate General
Consulate
Consulate General
Consulate General
Hon. Consular Agent
Consulate General
Consulate General
Consulate General
Hon. Consulate
Consulate General
Hon. Consulate
Hon. Consulate General

61.
62.
63.
64.
65.
66.
67.
68.
69.
70.
71.
72.
73.

Mauritius
Nepal
Netherlands
Netherlands
Netherlands
Nicaragua
Nicaragua
Norway
Norway
Norway
Norway
Panama
Panama

Bombay
Calcutta
Bombay
Calcutta
Madras
Bombay
Calcutta
Bombay
Calcutta
Cochin
Madras
Bombay
Calcutta

Hon. Consulate
Consulate General
Consulate General
Hon. Consulate General
Hon. Consulate
Hon. Consulate
Hon. Consulate
Consulate General
Hon. Consulate General
Consulate
Hon. Consulate
Consulate General
Consulate General

<pg119>
------------------------------------------------------------------------S.No. Country
Location
Status
------------------------------------------------------------------------74.
75.
76.
77.

Panama
Peru
Peru
Philippines

Madras
Bombay,
Calcutta
Bombay

Hon. Consulate
Hon. Consulate
Consulate General
Hon. Consulate General

78.

Philippines

Calcutta

Hon. Consulate General

79.

Philippines

Madras

Hon. Consulate General

80.
81.
82.
83.
84.
85.
86.
87.

Poland
Poland
Spain
Spain
Spain
Sudan
Sweden
Sweden

Bombay
Calcutta
Bombay
Calcutta
Madras
Bombay
Calcutta
Bombay

Consulate
Consulate
Hon. Vice Consulate
Hon Vice Consulate
Hon. Vice Consulate
Consulate General
Hon. Consulate
Hon. Consulate General

88.
89.
90.
91.
92.

Sweden
Switzerland
Switzerland
Syrian Arab
Thailand

Madras
Bombay
Cochin
Bombay
Bombay

Hon. Consulate
Consulate General
Hon. Consular Agent
Consulate General
Hon. Consulate General

93.
94.

Thailand
Turkey

Calcutta
Bombay

Consulate General
Hon. Consulate General

95.

Turkey

Calcutta

Hon. Consulate General

96.

Turkey

Madras

Hon. Consulate General

Bombay
Calcutta
Madras
Bombay
Calcutta
Bombay
Calcutta
Madras
Bombay

Consulate
Consulate
Consulate
Consulate
Consulate
Consulate
Consulate
Consulate
Consulate

Republic

97. U.S.S.R.
98. U.S.S.R.
99. U.S.S.R.
100. United Arab Republic
101. United Arab Republic
102. U.S.A.
103. U.S.A.
104. U.S.A.
105. Yugoslavia

General
General
General
General
General
General
General
General
General

106.
107.
108.
109.

Yugoslavia
Korea (D.P.R.)
Korea (Republic of)
Monaco

Calcutta
New Delhi
New Delhi
New Delhi

Consulate General
Consulate General
Consulate General
Hon. Consulate General

110.

San Marino

New Delhi

Hon. Consulate General

111.
112.

Viet Nam (D.P.R.)
Viet Nam (Republic of)

New Delhi
New Delhi

Consulate General
Consulate General

INDIA
USA AFGHANISTAN AUSTRIA BELGIUM BOLIVIA BRAZIL BURMA COLOMBIA
COSTA!!NORWAY SLOVAKIA DENMARK DOMINICA EL SALVADOR ETHIOPIA FINLAND
FRANCE GERMANY GREECE HAITI INDONESIA IRAN IRAQ ISRAEL ITALY JAPAN
JORDAN KUWAIT LEBANON LIBERIA MAURITIUS NEPAL CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC
NICARAGUA PANAMA PERU PHILIPPINES POLAND SPAIN SUDAN SWEDEN
SWITZERLAND SYRIA THAILAND TURKEY YUGOSLAVIA KOREA MONACO SAN MARINO
Feb 12, 1969

Appendix VI Distinguished-Visitors who visited India

APPENDIX VI
Distinguished-Visitors who visited India as State/Government Guests
during the period from Apr 01, 1969 to 31 December, 1969
HEADS OF STATE
S. No.

Name and Designation

1.
H. E. Mr. Richard M. Nixon, President of the
August,

2.

3.

4.

Period of visit
31 July to 1

United States of America, and Mrs. Nixon.

1969.

Their Majesties the King and the Queen of

7 to

Nepal.

1969.

H. E. Mr. Nicolae Ceausescu, President of the

13 to

State Council of Socialist Republic of Rumania,
and Madame Elena Ceausescu,
and
H. E. Mr. Ion Gheorghe Maurer, Chairman of
the Council of Ministers of the Socialist Republic of Rumania, and Madame Elena Maurer.

1969.

H. E. Mr. Pal Losonczi, President of the Pre-

11 to 16 November,

sidential Council of the Hungarian People's

1969.

12 October,

19 October

Republic, and Madame Losonczi.
HEADS OF GOVERNMENTS
1.

H. H. Prince Souvanna Phouma, Prime Minister
of Laos.

25 to 27 October
1969.

2.

H. E. Dr. The Hon'ble Sir S. Ramgoolam,

10 to 16 December,

Prime Minister of Mauritius.

1969.

OTHER DIGNITARIES
1.
H. E. Mr. B. Jargalsaikhan, First Deputy
April,
Foreign Minister of the People's Republic of
Mongolia,
2.
H. E. Kidug Lyonpo Tamji Jagar, Home
1969.

31 March to 5
1969.
4 to 11 April,

Minister of Bhutan.
3.
H. E. Mr. Impeng Suryadhay, Minister of
1969
.
Justice, Planning and Co-operation of Laos.

8 to. 17 April,

<pg120>
<pg121>
4.

H. E.

Mr. R. K. Kurbanov, Chairman of the

16 to 23 April .1969.

Council of Ministers of the Uzbek Soviet Socialist Republic of the USSR.
5.

H. E. Mr

Pheng Phong Savan, Minister of

20 to 29 April, 1969.

Interior and Social Welfare of Laos.
6.

H. E. Sir Henry Bolte, Premier of Victoria
(Australia).

27 April to 1 May,
1969.

7.

H. E. Mr. Gehendra Bahadur Rajbhandari,
Minister of External Affairs, Health, Information and Broadcasting of Nepal.

30 April to 7 May,
1969.

8.

H. E. Mr. W. C. Fife, Minister of Mines of New
South Wales, Australia, and Mrs. Fife.

12 to 14 May, 1969.

9.

H. E. Mr. C. B. Cutler, Deputy Premier of New
South Wales, Australia, and Mrs. Cutler.

12 to 15 May, 1969.

10. Lord Casey, former Governor-General of

14 to 17 May, 1969.

Australia and Lady Casey.
11. H.

E. Mr. William P. Rogers, Secretary of State

23 and 24 May,

12

of the United States of America, and Mrs.
Rogers.

1969.

H. E. U. Nu, former Prime Minister of Burma.

4 June to 6 August,

1969.
13. H. E. Mr. Habib Bourguiba Jr., Foreign

20 to 24 June, 1969.

Minister of Tunisia.
14. H. E. Mr. Gwon Hi. Gyung, Vice-Foreign

16 to 21 July, 1969.

Minister and Special Envoy of the Prime
Minister of the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea.
15. H. E. Dr. Ralph Bunche, Under SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations.

29 July to 4 August,
1969.

16. H. E. Dr. Carlos P. Romulo, Minister of
Foreign Affairs of the Philippines.

4 to 8 September,
1969.

17. H. E. Ambassador Ibrahima Boye, Permanent
Representative of Senegal to the United Nations.

2 to 5 September,
1969.

<pg122>
18.

H. E. Mr. Youg Nyuk Lin, Minister of Com-

14 to 28 September,

munications of Singapore.

1969.

H. E. Mr. Kamal El Din Rifaat, Minister of

17 to 20 September,

Labour of the UAR.

1969.

20.

Their Royal Highnesses the Royal Mothers of
Bhutan (Two).

8 to 18 October,
1969.

21.

H. E. Mr. G. Duval, Minister of External

16 to 23 December,

Affairs, Tourism and Emigration of Mauritius.

1969.

19.

INDIA
USA NEPAL LAOS MAURITIUS MONGOLIA BHUTAN MALAYSIA SEYCHELLES
AUSTRALIA BURMA TUNISIA KOREA CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC PHILIPPINES
SENEGAL UNITED KINGDOM REPUBLIC OF SINGAPORE
Apr 01, 1969

Appendix VII Foreign Dignitaries who visited India

APPENDIX VII
Foreign Dignitaries who visited India in connection with. the
Funeral of the Late President Dr. Zakir Husain
------------------------------------------------------------------------S. No. Country represented
Name and Designation
------------------------------------------------------------------------1.

Afghanistan

H. E. Mr. Nour Ahmed Etemadi, Prime
Minister of Afghanistan.
H. E. Mr. Ali Mohammad, Minister of
the Royal Court.
Dr. Rawan Farhadi, Director-General,
Political Affairs.
Dr. Mohammad Yusuf Meherdil, DirectorGeneral in Foreign Office.

2.

Australia

Honourable I. McC. Sinclair, M. P.,
Minister of Shipping and Transport,
Government of the Commonwealth of
Australia.
H. E. Sir Arthur Tange, High Commissioner for Australia in India.
Mr. Norwood, P. S. to the Minister.

3.

Britain

H. R. H. The Duke of Kent.
Rt. Hon'ble George Thomson, M.P.,
Minister without Portfolio.
H. E. Rt. Hon'ble Sir Morrice James,
High Commissioner for Britain in India.
Lt. Gen. Sir Walter Walker, General Officer
Commanding, Northern Command.
Commander P. R. Buckley, R, N. Equerry
to H.R.H. The Duke of Kent.

4.

Bhutan

H. E. Lompo Chogyal, Finance Minister
of Bhutan.
Dr. Tobgyal.
<pg123>
<pg124>

------------------------------------------------------------------------S. No.
Country represented
Name and Designation
------------------------------------------------------------------------5.

Burma

H. E. U Thi Han, Minister for Foreign

Affairs.
H. E. U Hla Maw, Ambassador of the
Union of Burma in India.
U Ohn Khin, Executive Secretary, Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
U Tin Tun, Personal Assistant to the
Minister.
6.

Ceylon

H. E. Mr. W. Gopallawa, Governor-General of Ceylon.
Mr. Elkaduwa, Secretary to the GovernorGeneral.

7.

Federal Republic of
Germany.

H. E. Mr. Walter Scheel, Deputy Speaker
of the German Parliament.
Dr. h. c. Adalbert Seifriz, Minister of
State and President of the Indo-German
Society.
H. E. Baron Dietrich Von Mirbach, Ambassador of the Federal Republic of
Germany in India.

8.

Japan

H. E. Mr. Shiro Nasegawa, Minister for
Agriculture and Forestry, Japan.
H. E. Mr. Shinsaku Hogen, Ambassador
of Japan in India.
Mr. Yoshihide Uchimura, Director of
International Affairs Division, Ministry of
Agriculture and Forestry.
Mr. Tomoji Muto, South Western Asian
Section, Asian Affairs Bureau, Ministry of
Foreign Affairs, Japan.
<pg125>

------------------------------------------------------------------------S.No. Country represented
Name and Designation
------------------------------------------------------------------------9.

Malaysia

Dato C. M. Yusuf bin Sheikh Ab dul
Rehman, Speaker of the House of. Representatives, Malaysian Parliament.

10.

Morocco

H. E. Mr. Hedj Ahmed Bargach, Minister
of Habous and Islamic Affairs.

11.

Mauritius

H. E. Mr. K. Jagat Singh, Minister of
Health.

12.

Iran

H. E. Mr. Jaffar Shariff Emami, President
of the Senate of Iran.

H. E. Mr. M. M. Manouchehr Partew,
Minister of Justice.
H. E. Mr. Freydoun Diba, Director-General of Political Affairs, Iran.
H. E. Mr. Hormoz Gharib, Grand Master
of Ceremonies of His Imperial Majesty the
Shahanshah Aryamehr.
13.

Iraq

H. E. Dr. Izzat Mustafa, Minister of
Health.
H. E. Mr. Nimah Al-Nimah, Permanent
Secretary, Ministry of Foreign Affairs.

14.

Nepal

Rt. Hon. Shri Kirti Nidhi Bista, Prime
Minister of Nepal.
Hon'ble Shri Gehendra Bahadur Rajbhandari, Foreign Minister.
H. E. Sardar Bhim Bahadur Pande, Ambassador Designate of Nepal to India.
Mr. Yadu Nath Kanal, Foreign Secretary.

15.

Pakistan

Air Marshal Nur Khan, Commander-inChief of Pakistan Air Force and Member,
Council of Administration.
Mr. Enayet Karim, Pakistan Foreign
Office.
<pg126>

------------------------------------------------------------------------S. No.
Country represented
Name and
Designation
------------------------------------------------------------------------16.

Sikkim

H. H. The Chogyal of Sikkim.
Mr. J. P. Densapa, Secretary to the
Chogyal.
Mr. M. M. Rasaily, Secretary, Supplies.

17.

Singapore

H. E. Mr. Punch Coomeraswamy, Speaker
of Singapore Parliament.

18.

Turkey

H. E. Mr. Hamit Batu, Turkish Ambassador in Kabul.
Mrs. Batu.

19.

U.A.R.

H. E. Dr. Mohd. Labib Shoqair, Speaker
of the National Assembly and Member
of the High Executive of the Arab Socialist
Committee.

Brig. Genl. Salah Shuhaib, A.D.C. to the
President of U.A.R.
Mr. M. A. Murad, Chamberlain to the
President.
20.

U.S.S.R.

H. E. Mr. Alexie Kosygin, Chairman of
the Council of Ministers of the U.S.S.R.
H. E. Mr. M. P. Georgadize, Secretary of
the Supreme Soviet of the U.S.S.R.
H.E. Mr. N. P. Firyubin, Deputy Minister
of External Affairs.
H. E. Mr. Nikolai M. Pegov, Ambassador
of the U.S.S.R. in India.

21.

U.S.A.

The Hon'ble George W. Romney, Secretary of Housing and Urban Development.
Mrs. Romney.
The Hon'ble Kenneth B. Keating, Ambassador Designate to India.
Mr. Clement E. Conger, Deputy Chief of
Protocol.
<pg127>

------------------------------------------------------------------------S. No.
Country represented
Name and Designation
------------------------------------------------------------------------Mr. Christopher Van Hollen, Deputy
Assistant Secretary Designate, Department
of State.
Mr. Richard J. Higgins, Department of
State.
22

Yugoslavia

INDIA
USA AFGHANISTAN
MALAYSIA MOROCCO
SINGAPORE TURKEY
Apr 01, 1969

H. E. Mr. Mika Spiljak, Prime Minister
H. E. Dr. Slavko Komar, Ambassador of
the
Socialist Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia in India.

AUSTRALIA UNITED KINGDOM BHUTAN BURMA GERMANY JAPAN
MAURITIUS IRAN IRAQ NEPAL PAKISTAN REPUBLIC OF
YUGOSLAVIA

Appendix VIII Indian Missions/Posts abroad

APPENDIX VIII
Indian Missions/Posts abroad
------------------------------------------------------------------------S. No.
Country
Location
Remarks
------------------------------------------------------------------------Embassies-(a) Resident
1.

Afghanistan

Kabul

2.

Algeria

Algiers

3.

Argentina

Buenos Aires

4.

Austria

Vienna

5.

Belgium

Brussels

Ambassador concurrently accredited to Paraguay & Uruguay as
Ambassador.

Ambassador concurrently accredited to Luxembourg as Ambassador. Additionally, the Ambassador is India's Special Representative for Economic, Financial and
Commercial Affairs and he is
also accredited to the European
Economic community and the
European Coal and Steel Community.

6. Brazil

Rio-de-Janeiro

Ambassador concurrently accredited to Venezuela & Bolivia as
Ambassador.

7. Bulgaria

Sofia

Incharge of a First Secretary/
C.D.A. Ambassador resident in
Bucharest.

8. Burma

Rangoon

9. Cambodia

Phnom Penh

10. Chile

Santiago

Ambassador concurrently accredited to Colombia and Peru as
Ambassador.

<pg128>
<pg129>
------------------------------------------------------------------------S. No. Country
Location
Remarks
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

11. China

Peking

Incharge of Minister/C.D.A.

12. Congo

Kinshasa

Ambassador concurrently accredited to Gabon & Congo (Brazzaville).

13. Cuba

Havana

Incharge of a First Secretary/
C.D.A. Ambassador resident in
Mexico.

14.

Czechoslovakia

Prague

15.

Denmark

Copenhagen

16.

Ethiopia

Addis Ababa

17.

Finland

Helsinki

18.

France

Paris

19.

Federal Republic
of Germany

Bonn

20.

Guinea

Conakry

21.

Hungary

Budapest

22.

Italy

Rome

23.

Indonesia

Djakarta

24.

Iran

Tehran

25.

Iraq

Baghdad

26.

Ireland

Dublin

27.

Japan

Tokyo

28.

Jordan

@Amman

Ambassador concurrently accredited to Mali as Ambassador.

Ambassador concurrently accredited as High Commissioner to
Malta and First Secretary concurrently accredited to the Republic
of Son Marino as Consul General.

*Incharge of First Secretary/C.D.A.
Ambassador resident in Beirut.

*On consultation duty at Hqrs.
@Under the control of Ministry of Foreign Trade.
<pg130>
------------------------------------------------------------------------S. No. Country
Location
Remarks
------------------------------------------------------------------------29. Kuwait

Kuwait

Ambassador's jurisdiction extends
to Gulf Sheikhdoms viz. Bahrein,
Dubai, Muscat.

30. Laos

Vientiane

31. Lebanon

Beirut

32. Libya

@Tripoli

Ambassador concurrently accredited as Ambassador to Jordan
and as High Commissioner in
Cyprus.
Incharge of First Secretary/C.D.A.
Ambassador resident in Cairo.

33. Madagascar

Tananarive

Ambassador exercises consular
jurisdiction in respect of Reunion
Island and Comores.

34. Mexico

Mexico city

Ambassador concurrently accredited to Cuba and Panama as
Ambassador.

35. Morocco

Rabat

*Ambassador concurrently accredited to Tunisia as Ambassador.

36.

Nepal

Kathmandu

37.

Netherlands

The Hague

38.

Norway

Oslo

39.

Peru

40.

Philippines

Manila

41.

People's Republic
of Southern
Yemen

Aden

42.

Poland

Warsaw

@Lima

Incharge of First Secretary/C.D.A.
Ambassador resident in Santiago.

@Under the control of Ministry of Foreign Trade.
*On consultation duty at Hqrs.
<pg131>
------------------------------------------------------------------------S. No. Country
Location
Remarks
------------------------------------------------------------------------43. Rumania

Bucharest

44. Saudi Arabia

Jeddah

45. Senegal

Dakar

Ambassador concurrently accredited to Bulgaria as Ambassador.

Ambassador concurrently accredited as Ambassador to Ivory
Coast and Upper Volta & Mauritania and High Commissioner to
Gambia.

46.

Somalia

Mogadishu

47.

Spain

Madrid

48.

Sudan

Khartoum

49.

Sweden

Stockholm

50.

Switzerland

Berne

51.

Syrian Arab
Republic

Damascus

52.

Thailand

Bangkok

53.

Tunisia

Tunis

54.

Turkey

Ankara

55.

United Arab
Republic

Cairo

56.

Union of Soviet
Moscow
Socialist Republics

57.

United States of
America

58.

Venezuela

59. Yugoslavia

Ambassador concurrently accredited to Vatican as Ambassador.

Incharge of a First Secretary/
C.D.A.

Ambassador concurrently accredited as Ambassador to Libya &
Yemen.
Ambassador concurrently accredited to Mongolia as Ambassador.

Washington
@Caracas

Incharge of First Secretary/C.D.A.
Ambassador resident in Rio-deJaneiro.

Belgrade

@Under the control of Ministry

Ambassador concurrently accredited to Greece as Ambassador.
of Foreign Trade.

<pg132>
------------------------------------------------------------------------S. No. Country
Location
Remarks
------------------------------------------------------------------------Embassies-(b) Non-resident
1.

Bolivia

Ambassador resident in Rio-de-Janeiro.

2.

Burundi

Ambassado resident in Kampala.

3.

Cameroon

Ambassador resident in Lagos.

4.

Columbia

Ambassador resident in Santiago (Chile).

5.

Congo
(Brazzaville)

Ambassador resident in Kinshasa.

6.

Costa Rica

Consul General, New York.

7.

Dahomey

Ambassador resident in Lagos.

8.

Gabon

Ambassador resident in Kinshasa.

9.

Greece

Ambassador resident in Belgrade.

10.

Ivory Coast

Ambassador resident in Dakar.

11.

Liberia

Ambassador resident in Accra.

12.

Luxembourg

Ambassador resident in Brussels.

13.

Maldive

Ambassador resident in Colombo.

14.

Mali

Ambassador resident in Conakry.

15.

Mauritania

Ambassador resident in Dakar.

16.

Mongolia

Ambassador resident in Moscow.

17.

Panama

Ambassador resident in Mexico city.

18.

Paraguay

Ambassador resident in Buenos Aires.

19.

Togo

Ambassador resident in Lagos.

20.

Ruanda

Ambassador resident in Kampala.

21.

Upper Volta

Ambassador resident in Dakar.

22.

Yemen

Ambassador resident in Cairo.

23.

Uruguay

Ambassador resident in Buenos Aires.

24.

Vatican

Ambassador resident in Berne.
High Commissions-(a) Resident

1.

Australia

Canberra

2.

Guyana

Georgetown

3.

Canada

Ottawa
<pg133>

------------------------------------------------------------------------S. No. Country
Location
Remarks
------------------------------------------------------------------------4. Ceylon

Colombo

High Commissioner accredited
to Maldives.

5.

Ghana

Accra

6.

Kenya

Nairobi

High Commissioner accredited
to Liberia as Ambassador and as
High Commissioner to Sierra
Leone.
-

7.

Malawi

Blantyre

-

8.

Malaysia

Kuala Lumpur

-

9.

Mauritius

Port Louis

-

10. New Zealand

Wellington

-

11. Nigeria

Lagos

High Commissioner concurrently
accredited to Togo, Dahomey and
Cameroon as Ambassador.

12.

Pakistan

Islamabad

13.

Singapore

Singapore

14.

Trinidad &
Tobago

Port of Spain

High Commissioner concurrently
accredited as High Commissioner
to Jamaica and Barbados; Commissioner to associated statesAntigua, Grenada, Dominica, St.
Kitts, St. Lucia, St. Vincent,
Montserrat, The Bahamas and
also Cayman Islands and as
Consul General to Surinam.

15.

Uganda

Kampala

High Commissioner concurrently
accredited as Ambassador to
Ruanda & Burundi.

16.

United Kingdom

London

17.

United Republic
of Tanzania

Dar-es-Salaam

18.

Zambia

Lusaka
High Commissions-(b) Non-resident

1.

Barbados

High Commissioner resident in Trinidad.

2.

Cyprus

High Commissioner resident in Beirut.
<pg134>

------------------------------------------------------------------------S. No. Country
Location
Remarks
------------------------------------------------------------------------3.
4.
5.
6.

Sierra Leone
Jamaica
Malta
Gambia
Deputy

1.
2.
3.

Ceylon
Pakistan
Pakistan

High
High
High
High

Commissioner
Commissioner
Commissioner
Commissioner

resident
resident
resident
resident

in
in
in
in

Accra.
Port of Spain.
Rome.
Dakar.

High Commissions/Assistant High Commissions-Resident
Kandy
Dacca
Karachi

Assistant High Commissioner.
Deputy High Commissioner.
Deputy High Commissioner.

4.
5.
6.

Australia
Kenya
U. K.

@Sydney
Mombassa
Birmingham
Commissions-(a)

1.
2.

Fiji
Hong Kong

Deputy High Commissioner.
Assistant High Commissioner.
Assistant High Commissioner.

Resident

Suva
Hong Kong

Commissions-(b) Non-resident
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.

Antigua
Dominica
Grenada
Montserrat
St. Kitts
St. Lucia
St. Vincent
The Bahamas
Cayman Islands

Commissioner resident in Port of Spain.
-do-do-do-do-do-do-do-do-

Consulates General-(a) Resident
1.
2.

Belgium
Denmark

Ghent
Copenhagen

Hon. Consul General.
Hon. Consul General (Function.
ing under the Ambassador).

@Under the control of Ministry of Foreign Trade.
<pg135>
------------------------------------------------------------------------S. No. Country
Location
Remarks
------------------------------------------------------------------------3.

Berlin

Ambassador resident in Bonn.

4.
5.
6.

Germany
(Federal Republic)
-do-do-do-

Frankfurt
Hamburg
Stuttgart

-do-doHon. Consul General.

7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.

Greece
Japan
Muscat
North Korea
South Korea
Switzerland

Athens
Kobe
Muscat
Pyongyang
Seoul
Geneva

Hon. Consul General.
Ambassador resident in Tokyo.

13.

United States of

New York

14.
15.
16.
17.
18.

ton.

-do-

U.S.S.R.
Vietnam (North)
Vietnam (South)
Germany (Federal
Republic)

San Francisco
Odessa
Hanoi
Saigon
Munich

Resident Consul General, also
Permanent Representative to the
U.N. Office at Geneva.
Ambassador resident in Washing
America
Resident Consul General. Ambassador resident in Washington.

Hon. Consul;
dent in Bonn.

Ambassador resi-

Consulates General-(b) Non-resident
1.
2.

Republic of San
Marino
Surinam

Consul General resident in Rome.
Consul General resident in Port of Spain.
Consulates-Resident

1.

Afghanistan

Jalalabad

2.

Afghanistan

Kandhar

3.

Burma

Mandalay

Consul. Ambassador resident in
Kabul.
Consul. Ambassador resident in
Kabul.
Consul. Ambassador resident in
Rangoon.

<pg136>
------------------------------------------------------------------------S. No. Country
Location
Remarks
------------------------------------------------------------------------4.
5.
6.
7.

Canary islands
French Somaliland
Iran
Italy

Las Palmas
Djibouti

Hon. Consul.
Hon. Consul.

Khorramshahr
Genoa

Ambassador resident in Tehran.
Hon. Consul. Ambassador resident in Rome.
Ambassador resident in Djakarta.
Ambassador resident in Baghdad.
Hon. Consul. Ambassador resident in Washington.
Hon. Consul. Ambassador resident in Washington.
Hon. Consul. Ambassador resident in Mexico city.
Hon. Consul. Ambassador resident in Madrid.
Hon. Consul. Ambassador resident in Buenos Aires.

8. Indonesia
9. Iraq
10. U.S.A.

Medan
Basra
Cleveland

II.

U.S.A.

Honolulu

12.

Panama

Panama

13.

Spain

Barcelona

14.

Uruguay

Montevideo

Vice Consulates-Resident
1. Iran
2. U.S.A.

Zahidan
Chicago

Ambassador resident in Tehran.
Director has the status of the vice
Consul.

Trade Commissions and Offices-Resident
1.

Canada

@Vancouver

2.
3.
4.

Bahrein
Dubai
Germany
(G.D.R.)

@Bahrein
Dubai
@East Berlin

High Commissioner resident in
Ottawa.
Incharge of a Trade Agent.
Incharge of a Trade Agent.
Incharge of a Trade Representative.

@Under the control of Ministry of Foreign Trade.
<pg137>

------------------------------------------------------------------------S. No. Country
Location
Remarks
------------------------------------------------------------------------Special Missions-(a) Resident
1.

Political Office,
Sikkim

2.

Special Office,
Thimpu (Bhutan)

3.

Permanent MisNew York
sion of India to
the United Nations

4.

-do-

Gangtok
Thimpu

Geneva

Political Officer.
Special Officer. Political Officer
resident in Gangtok.
Permanent Representative.

Permanent Representative. He
is also C.G.I. in Geneva.

SUMMARY
Category

Hon. C. G. 5

No.

Embassies-Resident

59

Embassies-Non-resident

24

High Commissions-Resident

18

High Commissions-Non-resident

6

Dy. High Commissions/Assistant High Commissions (Resident)

6

Commissions-Resident

2

Commissions-Non-resident

9

Consulates General-Resident

18

Consulates General-Non-resident
Hon. Con. 8

2

Consulates-Resident

14

Vice Consulates-Resident

2

Trade Commissions & Offices

4

Special Missions-Resident
Total

4
------------168
-------------

<pg138>
INDIA
AFGHANISTAN ALGERIA ARGENTINA PARAGUAY URUGUAY AUSTRIA USA BELGIUM
BRAZIL BOLIVIA VENEZUELA BULGARIA ROMANIA BURMA CAMBODIA CHILE
COLOMBIA PERU CHINA CONGO ZAIRE GABON CUBA MEXICO CZECH REPUBLIC

NORWAY SLOVAKIA DENMARK ETHIOPIA FINLAND FRANCE GERMANY GUINEA MALI
HUNGARY ITALY MALTA INDONESIA IRAN IRAQ IRELAND JAPAN JORDAN LEBANON
KUWAIT OMAN LAOS CYPRUS LIBYA EGYPT CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC MADAGASCAR
PANAMA MOROCCO TUNISIA NEPAL PHILIPPINES YEMEN POLAND SAUDI ARABIA
SENEGAL SOMALIA SPAIN SUDAN SWEDEN SWITZERLAND SYRIA THAILAND TURKEY
RUSSIA MONGOLIA YUGOSLAVIA GREECE BURUNDI UGANDA CAMEROON COSTA!!GHANA
LIBERIA SRI LANKA MAURITANIA AUSTRALIA GUYANA CANADA MALDIVES KENYA
MALAWI MALAYSIA MAURITIUS NEW ZEALAND NIGER NIGERIA PAKISTAN REPUBLIC
OF SINGAPORE JAMAICA DOMINICA GRENADA BAHAMAS MONTSERRAT CAYMAN ISLANDS
UNITED KINGDOM TANZANIA ZAMBIA SIERRA LEONE FIJI HONG KONG KOREA NORTH
KOREA VIETNAM DJIBOUTI BHUTAN
Apr 01, 1969

Appendix IX Treaties/Conventions/Agreements concluded

APPENDIX IX
Treaties/Conventions/Agreements concluded* or renewed by India
with other countries in 1969
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------S.
Title of Convention/
Remarks

Date of

No.

Signature

Treaty/Agreement

Date of

Date on

Ratificawhich enttion/Accep- ered into
tance
force
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
5
6
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------International Development Association
1.

Credit No. 138 IN
Development Credit
Agreement (Fifth Industrial Imports Projects) for
(one hundred twentyfive
million dollars)$ 125 million between India and International Development
Association.

2.

Credit No. 153 IN
Development Credit

Jan 22, 1969

18 June,

Agreement (Third TeleCommunications Project)
between India and International Development
Association for ($ 27,500,
000) twentyseven million
five hundred thousand
dollars.
3.

Credit No. 162 IN
Development Credit
Agreement (Tenth Railway Project) between
India and International
Development Association
for fiftyfive million dollars (S 55,000,000).

1969

24 September,
1969

*This list is not exhaustive.
<pg139>
<pg140>
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
5
6
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
4.

Loan Agreement No. 614 IN
Loan Agreement (Tarai
Seeds Project) between
India & International
Bank for Reconstruction
and Development for
thirteen million dollars
($ 13,000,000).

5.

Loan No. 614 IN
Project Agreement (Tarai
Seeds Project) between
International Bank for
Reconstruction and Development and Tarai Development Corporation
Limited.

6.

Loan No. 614 IN
Project Agreement (Tarai
Seeds Project) between
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development and State Bank of
India.

18 June,
1969

18 June,
1969

18 June,
1969

7.

Loan No. 615 IN
Loan Agreement (Third
Communications Project)
between India and International Bank for Reconstruction and Development for twentyseven million five hundred thousand
dollars ($ 27,500,000).

18 June,
1969

<pg141>
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
5
6
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------European Economic Community
8.

Agreement between the
European Economic Community and the Government of the Republic of
India for a gift of 80,000
tons of wheat other than
Durum as Food Aid to
India.

27 June,
1969

Australia
9.

Exchange of letters between the Government of
India and the Government
of Australia for 70,000
Metric tonnes of wheat on
grant basis (as part of
Australia's contribution
for 1969-70 under the
Food Aid Convention of
the International Grains
Arrangement).

17 November,
1969

Canada :
10.

Supplemental Agreement
dated 11 March, 1969 to
the Finance Agreement of
4 December, 1963 between
the President of India and
the Export Credits Insurance Corporation,
Canada (Regarding Locos
for Indian Railways).

11.

Supplemental Agreement
dated 11 March, 1969

11 March,
1969

11 March,
1969

17 November,
1969

to the Finance Agreement
of 2 July, 1964, between
the President of India and
Exports Credits Insurance
<pg142>
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
5
6
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------Corporation, Canada
(Regarding WIND TUNNEL).
12.

Supplemental Agreement
dated 9 July, 1969 to the
Finance Agreement of 18
February, 1965 between
the President of India and
Exports Credits Insurance
Corporation, Canada.

9 July,
1969

13.

Sub-Loan Agreement between the President of
India and the Government
of Canada acting through
the Canadian International Development
Agency.

30 July,
1969

14.

Canadian Development
Loan Agreement for C
$12 million for Fertilizers
and Fertilizer Materials
between the President of
India and the Government
of Canada acting through
the Canadian International Development
Agency.

6 August,
1969

15.

Canadian Development
Loan Agreement for C
$ 15 million for Industrial
Commodities between the
President of India and the
Government of Canada
acting through the Canadian International Development Agency.

6 August,
1969

<pg143>
------------------------------------------------------------------------------

1
2
3
4
5
6
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------16.

Canadian
Development
Loan Agreement for C $
40 million (Forty million
Canadian dollars) relating
to the purchase of telecommunication equipment for P & T.

30 September,
1969

17.

Memorandum of understanding between the
Governments of Canada
and India regarding feasibility study of Synthetic
Rubber Plant.

30 October,
1969

18.

Sub-Loan Agreement in
the amount of C $ 2 million between the President
of India and the Government of Canada, relating
to import of casing pipes
by ONGC from Canada.

1 November,
1969

Denmark :
19.

Exchange of letters between the Government of
India and the Government
of Denmark regarding
supply of wheat on grant
basis.

8 May,
1969

8 May,
1969

20.

Agreement between Denmark and India on Assistance to the All India Institute of Speech and
Hearing, Mysore.

30 September,
1969

30 September,
1969

France :
21.

Financial Protocol
(along with letters) between the Government of

3 January,
1969

3 January,
1969

<pg144>
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
5
6
------------------------------------------------------------------------------

the Republic of France for
economic development of
India.
22.

Convention dated 21
21 January,
January, 1969 between the
1969
Government of India and
the Credit National Ltd.,
Paris, relating to the financial assistance from
France.

23.

Convention dated 20
February, 1969 between
the Government of India
and Banque Nationale De
Paris and Banque Francaise du Commerce Exterieur relating to the
financial assistance from
France.

20 February,
1969

24.

Exchange of letters between the Government of
India and the Government
of France regarding 35,000
tons of wheat on grant
basis.

7 August,
1969

Federal Republic of Germany
25.

Exchange of letters regarding Indo-German
Agriculture Development
Projects, Kangra/Mandi,
for the supply of Fertilizers by the West German
Government.

29 January,
1969

26.

Agreement between the 4 July,
Government of India and 1969

29 January,
1969

4 July,
1969

<pg145>
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
5
6
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------the Federal Republic of
Germany regarding Food
Aid to India.
27.

Agreement between the
Government of India and
the Government of the
Federal Republic of Ger-

25 July,
1969

25 July,
1969

many concerning Financial Assistance of DM
250,000,000 for 1969-70.
28.

Agreement between the
Government of India and
the Government of the
Federal Republic of Germany relating to cooperation in the field of agriculture in Almora District of
U.P.

31 July,
1969

31 July,
1969

Netherlands
29.

Second Addendum to the
Loan Agreements for
debt relief with the Dutch
National Investment
Bank.

28 July,
1969

Pakistan
30.

Agreed Minutes regarding
the implementation of
the Award of the
Tribunal in the IndoPakistan Western Boundary Case (Kutch Award).
Philippines

6 July,
1969

31.

Exchange of letters bet.
ween the Atomic Energy
Commission of India and
Philippine Atomic Energy

16 June,
1969

16 June,
1969

<pg146>
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
5
6
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------Commission constituting
an agreement regarding
gift of the Neutron Crystal
Spectrometer and associated equipment to Philippines.
32.

Indo-Philippines Cultural
Agreement.

6 September,
1969

Sweden
33.

Exchange of letters constituting an
Agreement

3 June,
1969

3 June,
1969

between India and Sweden
regarding travel facilities
(abolition of Visas).
United Arab Republic
34.

Protocol between the
Government of India and
the Government of United
Arab Republic concerning
technical and scientific cooperation in the field of
agriculture.

19 March,
1969

United Kingdom
35.

Letters exchanged between
the Government of U.K.
and the Government of
India regarding grant of $
6,500,000 for purchase of
foodgrains.

6 March,
1969

36.

Exchange of letters bet2 July,
ween the Government of
1969
U.K. and the Government
of India regarding (pound) 7.5
million Loan- for Debt
Refinancing.

6 March,
1969

2 July,
1969

<pg147>
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
5
6
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
37.

Agreement between the
Government of India and
the Government of the
Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics for the work of
the Soviet Specialists in
the Kalawati Suran Children's Hospital (Lady
Hardinge Medical College
and Hospital, New Delhi).

30 January.
1969

United States of America
38.

PL 480 Loan Agreement
signed on 10 March, 1969
concerning the Loan
Funds arising tinder Supplement dated 23 Decem-

10 March,
1969

30 January.
1969

ber, 1968 to the Commodity Agreement of 20 February, 1967. (No. 386-G197).
39.

PL 480 Agreement
Fifth Supplementary
Agreement between the
Government of the United
States of America and the
Government of India for
sale of agricultural commodifies.

25 April,
1969

40.

Exchange of letters between the Government of the
United States of America
and the Government of
India amending the PL-480
Agreement of 25 April, 1969.

22 May,
1969

<pg148>
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------1
2
3
4
5
6
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------41.

Exchange of letters amend
ing the PL-480 Agreement
of 23 December, 1968
between the Government
of the united States of
America and the Government of India.

42.

PL 480 Agreement
Sixth Supplementary
Agreement between the
Government of the United
States of America and the
Government of India for
sales of Agricultural commodities.

43.

AID Loan No. 386-H-200
Loan Agreement between
the President of India and
the United States of
America (Private Sector
Capital Equipment Loan1970).

INDIA
USA AUSTRALIA CANADA DENMARK
ITALY SWEDEN UNITED KINGDOM

29 May,
1969.

13 October,
1969.

16 October,
1969.

FRANCE

GERMANY

PAKISTAN

PHILIPPINES

Jan 22, 1969

Appendix X Expenditure during 1969-70 on Headquarters and Missions/Posts

APPENDIX X
Expenditure during 1969-70 on Headquarters and Missions/Posts
abroad including that on External Publicity
The annual expenditure on Headquarters of this Ministry amounts
to Rs. 279.63 lakhs. A sum of Rs. 129.10 lakhs is spent on establishment
charges, a sum of Rs. 119.13 lakhs is spent on publicity, cables, dipomatic bag service, etc; a sum of Rs. 29.90 lakhs is spent on passages and
travell
ing expenses, and the balance of Rs. 1.50 lakhs is spent on the Foreign
Service
Inspectorate.
The annual expenditure of the Missions/Posts abroad amounts
to Rs. 1151.89 lakhs, out of which a sum of Rs. 642.52 lakhs is spent on
Establishment Charges, including foreign and other compensatory allowances,
a sum of Rs. 81.41 lakhs on passages and local tours, Rs. 32.62 lakhs on
publicity and Rs. 395.34 lakhs on official and residential accommodation,
This works out to Rs. 11.29 lakhs per Mission/Post.
The expenditure mentioned above (Rs. 1431.52 lakhs as per
attached statement) on Headquarters and Missions/Posts abroad includes
expenditure on External Publicity programmes/activities, the break-up of
which is as under:
(a)

(b)

Headquarters: Salaries
(Officers 23, staff 32)
Allowance
Publicity, contingent

Missions/Posts: Salaries
(Officers 56, staff 372)
Foreign Allowance, Compensatory
Allowance & passages
Publicity Contingencies
Other charges including rent for residential accommodation and other office
contingencies

Total External Publicity

Rs.

3.24

lakhs

Rs.
1.22
lakhs
Rs.
40.44
lakhs
---------------------Rs.
44.90
lakhs
---------------------Rs.

43.11

lakhs

Rs.
Rs.

34.67
32.62

lakhs
lakhs

Rs.
29.41
lakhs
---------------------Rs.
139.81
lakhs
---------------------Rs.
184.71
lakhs

<pg149>
<pg150>
This works out to 13%. of the expenditure on Headquarters and Missions/posts abroad.
Details of Expenditure on Headquarters and Missions Abroad
during 1969-70

Establishment Travelling
Charges
Expenses
I.

(in lakhs

of rupees)

Other
Charges

Total

Secretariat
(a) Headquarters
125.86
30.18
78.69
234.73
(b) External Publicity Division
3.24
1.22
40.44
44.90
---------------------------------------------------129.10
31.40
119.13
279.63
----------------------------------------------------

II. Overseas Establishments
(a)

Missions and
Posts abroad

(b)

Publicity
Wings

Grand Total

599.41

46.74

365.93

1012.08

43.11
34.67
62.03
139.81
---------------------------------------------------642.52
81.41
427.96
1151.89
---------------------------------------------------771.62
112.81
547.09
1431.52
---------------------------------------------------ADDENDA TO APPENDIX VI
HEADS OF STATE

S. No.

Name and Designation

Period of Visit

22.

H.E. General Ne Win, Chairman of the
Revolutionary Council of the Union of
Burma and Madame Ne Win.

15 to 22 January, 1970

23.

Their Majesties the King and the Queen
of the Belgians.

28 January to 5
Februry, 1970

24.

H.E. Mr. Walter Scheel, Vice-Chancellor
and Minister of External Affairs of the
Federal Republic of Germany.

13 to 16 February, 1970

25.

H.E. Mr. W. Gopallawa, Governor
General of Ceylon, and Mrs. Gopallawa.

23 to 25 February, 1970

26.

Their Majesties the King and the Queen
of Laos.

24 to 25 February, 1970

27.

H.H. Prince Norodom Phurissara,

25 to 26 February, 1970

Foreign Minister of Cambodia and H.H.
Princess Phurissara.
28.

Maj. Gen. Dr. Sjarif Thajeb, ViceChairman of D.P.R.G.R. of Indonesia.

25 to 27 February, 1970

29.

H.E. Mr. Arnold Smith, Secretary
General of Commonwealth.

28 February to 4
March, 1970

30.

H.H. Prince Norodom Phurissara,
Foreign Minister of Cambodia and H.H.
Princess Phurissara.

4 to 6 March, 1970

31.

H.E. Mr. Adam Malik, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Republic of Indonesia.

4 to 6 March, 1970

32.

H.E. Mr. W. Gopallawa, Governor
of Ceylon and Mrs. Gopallawa.

4 to 6 March, 1970

33.

Their Royal Highnesses the Crown Prince
and Princess of Afghanistan.

4 to 18 March, 1970

34.

H.R.H. Prince Bernhard
Netherlands.

5 to 11 March, 1970

of

the

<pg151>
ERRATA
It is regretted that owing to printer's error the numbering
of pages after 64 was omitted. Pages following are now
numbered as 64a and 64b.

BURMA
GERMANY
Jan 22, 1969

LAOS

CAMBODIA

INDONESIA

MALI

AFGHANISTAN


